NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASPIRATION ADAPTATION IN RESOURCE-CONSTRAINED ENVIRONMENTS
Sebastian Galiani
Paul J. Gertler
Raimundo Undurraga
Working Paper 24264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24264

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018, Revised October 2018

We thank Rajeev Dehejia, Eduardo Engel, Michael Gechter, Mariaflavia Harari, Daniel
Lederman and Martin Rotemberg for their valuable comments. We also thank seminar
participants at LACEA 2017 and 2018 NBER Summer Institute. The experiment over which this
paper is based on is registered at the AEA RCT Registry under the code AEARCTR-0002271.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, and Raimundo Undurraga. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Aspiration Adaptation in Resource-Constrained Environments
Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, and Raimundo Undurraga
NBER Working Paper No. 24264
January 2018, Revised October 2018
JEL No. O1
ABSTRACT
We use a multi-country field experiment that combines random variation at the treatment level
with exogenous variation in the length of exposure to treatment to test the effect of a slumhousing intervention on the evolution of housing aspirations of untreated co-resident neighbors
over time. Initially after treatment, we observe a huge control- treatment housing gap in favor of
treated units. As a result, non-treated households' aspirations to upgrade their dwelling are
significantly higher compared to the treatment group, suggesting that they aspire to “keep-up”
with the treated Joneses', as in standard models of peer effects. However, eight months later, no
effects are found on housing investments and the aspirational effect completely disappears.
Estimates based on a structural model of aspiration adaptation show that the decay rate is 38%
per month. Our evidence suggests that simply fostering higher aspirations may be insufficient to
encourage forward-looking behavior among the poor.
Sebastian Galiani
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
galiani@econ.umd.edu
Paul J. Gertler
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu

Raimundo Undurraga
Department of Industrial Engineering
and Center for Applied Economics
University of Chile
Beauchef 851, Santiago
Chile
raimundo.undurraga@dii.uchile.cl

I. Introduction
Internal constraints such as low self-esteem, stress, depression, and hopelessness can
frustrate aspirations and thus make the poor less willing to take forward-looking actions
to exit poverty (Appadurai (2004), Bertrand et al. (2004)). Material deprivation may
itself dampen aspirations and lead to lower levels of effort; which, in turn, may lower
material outcomes, creating a vicious downward cycle. Accordingly, policies oriented to
improve material deprivation are increasingly asked to include interventions that stimulate
aspirations, with the hope that this will enhance their effectiveness. Indeed, some authors
posit that policies that simply raise aspirations without relaxing material constraints could
be effective to encourage forward-looking behavior that enables the poor to exit poverty
(Dalton et al. (2016)).
However, in the presence of resource constraints that thwart people’s attempts to
achieve their aspirations, aspirations may have to be adjusted downward to relieve the
resulting frustration (Selten (1998, 2001) and Karandikar et al. (1998)). In essence, aspirations adapt to suit the circumstances. They remain constant if they can be fulfilled, but are
lowered when they are difficult to realize2 . The latter begs the question of whether higher
aspirations are sufficient to trigger forward-looking actions by the poor; or, aspirations
adjust downward over time as resource constraints frustrate aspirational achievement.
We examine this question in the context of a housing quality experiment for households
living in extreme deprivation in Latin America. Our study population consists of severely
poor households that have been “trapped” in urban and rural slums for many years and
thus have unusually low housing aspirations. Following standard models of peer effects,
we test how housing aspirations and housing investment of untreated units react over time
to positive exogenous shocks to the housing quality of some of their neighbors. We use
data generated by a large-scale multi-country randomized field experiment in El Salvador,
Mexico and Uruguay. The program is run by TECHO, an NGO that aims to improve
housing quality in poor slums in more than 20 countries. For identification, we exploit
experimentally generated variation in housing quality at the household level combined
with exogenous variation in the length of exposure to the treatment.
The experiment went as follows. A number of eligible slums were randomly sampled
within each country. Within each slum, a set of randomly chosen families received new
houses. We show that, due to the randomization, there was no gap in material circumstances nor in housing aspirations between the treatment and control groups at baseline.
Overall, aspirations were very low with around 10% of household heads aspiring to improve their housing conditions. The randomly introduced housing improvement serves as
an exogenous shock to the gap in material circumstances between treated and untreated
households.
Our first objective is to determine whether the control-treatment housing quality gap
2

Aspiration adaptation is a central idea in Herbert Simon’s early writings on bounded rationality. In his
view, an individual’s decision–making process is a sequence characterized by three key features: a search
for alternatives, satisficing, and aspiration adaptation (Simon (1957)).

1

generated by the experiment was followed by a control-treatment housing aspiration gap.
Put another way, we hope to determine if being exposed to larger housing gaps encourages
the control neighbors to increase their housing aspirations and housing investments relative
to their treatment counterparts. The question follows the tradition of Veblen (1899) and
Duesenberry (1949), namely whether the economic well-being of one household affects that
of another in terms of aspirations and actual spending, and thus contributes to a growing
literature studying the effects of relative performance on individual economic behavior,
most notably Azmat and Iriberri (2010), Blanes et al. (2011), Card et al. (2012), Bandiera
et al. (2013), Bursztyn et al. (2014), Bursztyn and Jensen (2015), Bursztyn et al. (2018),
and Bursztyn et al. (forthcoming).
After 16 months of treatment exposure, we find that the control group’s housing quality
is significantly lower than that of the treatment group, with no other noticeable material
differences between these groups. The program is effective at improving housing conditions, with no effects found on incomes, savings, assets, or labor supply. At the same
time, the probability of aspiring to upgrade housing conditions within the slum is 56%
higher among control units than in the treatment group3 . In other words, the housing
gap was internalized by control households, whose members now aspire to “keep-up with
their treatment Joneses’”.
Note, however, that even though control housing aspirations are higher, we do not
find effects on actual investment in housing in the control group. The development practitioner would argue that this is indeed the expected result after just 16 months of treatment
exposure (a relatively short period of time to observe significant effects on housing investment), being the higher housing aspirations observed in the control group a prelude of
housing investment. Under the assumption that housing aspirations are a good predictor
of housing investment, the results meet reasonably well with a standard model of housing
externalities where homeowners are likely to invest in housing renovation based upon the
decisions taken by their neighbors. But to what extent are housing aspirations a good
predictor of housing investment in resource-constrained environments?
Our experimental design includes exogenous variation in the length of exposure to the
treatment at the slum level. This allows us to compare the housing investment behavior
of those exposed to a longer period of treatment exposure (24 months, on average) with
that of those exposed to a shorter period (16 months, on average) and causally identify
(i) whether higher housing aspirations among control units actually translated into higher
housing investment over time; and (ii) whether the evolution of the control-treatment
aspiration gap observed in the short-run remains constant or adapts downward over time.
Indeed, after eight additional months of treatment exposure, on average, we observe no
additional housing investment and no adaptation in housing quality in either experimental
3

This effect cannot be interpreted as a causal spillover effect on control aspirations. For that we
would need to observe what would happen with the control units in the absence of treatment neighbors
−something that we lack in our experimental design. However, we do show that the treatment group’s
housing aspirations remained invariant between baseline and post-treatment round, suggesting that the
control-treatment aspiration gap was in fact mediated by a positive treatment-to-control peer effect.

2

group. Consequently, the control-treatment housing quality gap in favor of treated units
remains constant. However, the initial 56% control-treatment aspiration gap in favor of
untreated units totally disappears. This suggests that the experimentally induced higher
aspirations among control households went unfulfilled. Higher aspirations did not translate into forward-looking actions of housing investment, against the hypothesis that the
underlying mechanism of housing aspiration adaptation was their fulfillment. Importantly,
the adaptation effect is explained entirely by adaption in the control group, as the treatment group’s housing aspirations remain invariant over the entire period of analysis (from
baseline to 16 to 24 months of treatment exposure). Furthermore, we find that external
constraints such as low incomes, savings, assets, and labor supply remained constant over
time in both groups, indicating that the adaptation in controls’ housing aspirations cannot
be explained through non-housing, alternative material improvements.
Our evidence is consistent across the three country experiments, as well as for different
measures of housing aspirations, which lends credibility to the external and construct
validity of the results. Extrapolation achieved through estimation of a structural model of
aspiration adaptation suggests that the housing aspiration effects declined in proportion
to the number of months of indirect exposure to the treatment. In fact, we find that this
became indistinguishable from zero after 28 months, for a rate of aspiration adaptation
of 38% per month. Our paper differs from previous analyses on aspirations (see, for
example, Beaman et al. (2012), Glewwe et al. (2018), Macours and Vakis (2014), Bernard
et al. (2014), and Lybbert and Wydick (2016)) in that none of the earlier experiments is
based on the kind of data that would make it possible to test whether aspirational effects
change as a result of adaptation over time. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
paper to empirically examine aspiration adaptation by the poor; and the first that uses
exogenous variation for this purpose.
Overall, our aspiration adaptation result has three important implications. First, the
poor may be trapped in an aspiration failure equilibria not because they lack the capacity to aspire to higher living standards (Appadurai (2004)), but because they lack the
capacity to sustain higher aspirations, i.e., resource constraints make higher aspirations
unattainable causing downward adaptation over time. That is, in excessively resourceconstrained environments, encouraging aspirations that are not attainable may result in
a full reverse-adaptation of aspirations as opposed to sustained forward-looking behavior.
Since aspirations are not necessarily fixed over time, higher aspirations are not a sufficient condition for forward-looking behavior among the poor. Thus, policies designed to
stimulate future-oriented actions by raising the aspirations of poor persons without also
providing economic means required to satisfy those aspirations are likely doomed to fail.
Second, our evidence points to the importance of long-term follow-up to intervention
studies focusing on subjective outcomes such as aspirations or happiness. In particular, the
aspiration adaptation result warns against the claim of development responses based on
outcomes following a policy change but observed only in the very short-run. As suggested
by Jayaraman et al. (2016), “once the euphoria dies down, such effects may vanish” (p.
318). Consequently, testing for long- run effects becomes critical, for which it is necessary
to implement research designs that track responses over time as in Gneezy and List (2006),
Hossain and List. (2012), Allcott and Rogers (2014), Baird et al. (2016), Galiani et al.
3

(2018), and Celhay et al. (forthcoming).
Third, our paper contributes to the literature of how aspirations are formed. Ray
(1998, 2006) and Genicot and Ray (2017) posit that aspirations are socially dependent, i.e.,
individuals’ goals are determined by both personal characteristics and the characteristics of
their reference groups4,5 . In this setting, material aspirations are a non-monotonic function
of the social distance between an individual’s characteristics and the characteristics of her
reference group, or what Ray (1998, 2006) calls the “aspirations gap”. The relationship is
non-monotonic in the sense that the aspirations gap must be large enough to encourage
effort, but not so large as to induce frustration. If the gap is too large, the cost of the
investment required to satisfy those aspirations may be unrealistic, in which case the
individual will adjust her aspirations downward to more reasonable levels6 . Therefore, a
positive shock to the reference group’s material situation will prompt a positive change in
an individual’s aspirations only if the resulting material gap between her and her reference
group is perceived as “moderate” so that she foresees that she can close it by her own
efforts.
Interestingly, we find that the initial control-treatment aspiration gaps are mainly
observed among untreated urban slum dwellers. We find no gaps in the housing aspirations
of their rural counterparts, despite statistically comparable levels of housing aspirations to
urban counterparts at baseline. We hypothesize that this is attributable to the fact that
urban households enjoyed higher baseline incomes and better housing conditions than rural
slum dwellers. Since urban and rural treatment families received exactly the same type of
house, the control-treatment housing gap for the urban controls was significantly smaller
than the housing gap faced by their rural counterparts. The seemingly insurmountable
control-treatment housing gap confronted by untreated rural units did not allow them to
even aspire to emulate the new housing standard of their neighbors, unlike the moderate
and apparently actionable housing gap faced by their urban counterparts. This result is
consistent with the theoretical work of Ray (1998, 2006) and Genicot and Ray (2017) in
that the relationship between aspirations gaps and aspirations formation is non-monotonic
and depends on the size of the aspirations gap.
A complementary hypothesis is given by Glaeser (2011) who argues that urban slum
dwellers are willing to live in substandard housing and hostile geographical environments if
it enables them to escape subsistence-level rural poverty by taking advantage of the benefits
of agglomeration, economies of scale and networks offered by large cities. The income gains
derived from their increasing labor productivity would allow the slum dwellers to gradually
improve their living conditions and lead them to aspire to transform the slums into non4
Other models that are based on the principle that aspirations are socially dependent have been developed by Bogliacino and Ortoleva (2013) and Besley (2016).
5
The alternative approach is to assume that only personal experiences determine future goals, in which
case each individual could be analyzed as a self-contained unit. See, for example, Carroll and Weil (1994),
Gilboa and Schmeidler (1995), Karandikar et al. (1998), Overland and Weil (2000), De la Croix and Michel
(2001), Alonso-Carrera et al. (2007), and Dalton et al. (2016).
6
By the same token, a very small gap relative to the characteristics of the reference-group members
means that the aspirations are closely aligned with the individual’s current standard of living, which
produces little incentive for taking action to raise her standard.

4

slum neighborhoods or move to formal housing within the city. Accordingly, the observed
effects among untreated urban slum dwellers may also be due to a positive interaction
between better neighborhood housing quality and city level effects, i.e. it is the exposure
to cities that makes of the within-neighborhood housing gaps an inspirational device that
increases the housing aspirations of poorer urban slum dwellers.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the intervention
and the experimental design. In Sections III and IV, we discuss the construct validity of
our aspiration measures and introduce the identification strategy used to estimate causal
adaptation effects. In Section V, we present our empirical results, both reduced-form and
structural estimates. Section VI concludes.

II. The TECHO Experiment
The experiment was conducted in partnership with TECHO (Spanish for “roof”), a
Latin American NGO whose mission is to provide basic, pre-fabricated houses to slum
dwellers with the express goal of improving their housing conditions and well-being. As
is extensively described in Galiani et al. (2017) and Galiani et al. (2018), TECHO targets
the poorest slums and, within these slums, the families who live in the most extremely
substandard housing. TECHO offers an 18 square meter (6m × 3m) house made of insulated pinewood panels. The house costs less than US$1,000 and beneficiary families pay
only 10% of that cost under a scheme of flexible installment payments that allows the families to smooth out the expenditure. In El Salvador, US$100 is approximately equivalent
to 3.3 months’ per capita baseline earnings, while in Mexico and Uruguay, it is roughly
equivalent to 1.6 and 1.4 months, respectively7 .
Between 2007 and 2010, TECHO implemented the program in a number of urban and
rural slums in El Salvador, Mexico, and Uruguay. Beneficiaries were selected by a lottery
system that gave all eligible households within a slum an equal opportunity to receive
one of the units, so that treatment and control units are co-residents. By that time, the
objective of TECHO was to expand the presence of the program in as many slums as
possible, regardless of the proportion of treated residents in each selected slum. Hence,
households that agreed to participate in the lottery understood that lottery losers would
not receive the program benefits in the future. Hence, the behavior of control units should
not have been affected by the expectation of being treated in the next round8,9 .
Since TECHO did not have the financial capacity to build the houses in all the targeted
slums at the same time, the program was rolled out in two phases at the slum level so
that, in each country, Phase I slums were treated in the first year and Phase II slums
in the second year. Baseline surveys were conducted approximately one month before
the start of the construction work in each slum, which gave households time to acquire
the funds to make the 10% contribution required by the program. The follow-up surveys
7

For a full description of the program, see Appendix B.
Indeed, robust evidence supporting this claim is provided in Section V.
9
For a full description of the sampling procedure within each country experiment, see Appendix B.
8

5

were conducted simultaneously for all slums (Phase I and Phase II) in each country,
approximately one year after the construction of the last house in the Phase II slums. As
a result, Phase I slums had 24 months of exposure, on average, while Phase II slums had
an average of 16 months of exposure, for a difference of 8 months. Table A1 and Figure
A1 in Appendix A detail the sample and timeline of the study.
While the slums were not randomly allocated to phases, there is exogenous variation
in the amount of time that beneficiaries had occupied the TECHO house at the time of
the follow-up survey, since no discretionary criteria were used to select which slum was
assigned to which phase. Instead, the decision of which slums would be treated first or
second was based on the availability of census information about the eligible households in
each slum at the time of the assignment, which, as we show, was orthogonal to slums and
slum dwellers baseline characteristics. In order to collect census information, TECHO
volunteers were organized into subgroups and sent to each selected slum at the same
time. Census data collection included social and demographic characteristics of the slum
dwellers. Then, with that information in hand, a set of eligible households was to be
selected by volunteers. As soon as each volunteer team came back to the central office
with the list of eligible households in their assigned slum, TECHO officials immediately
asked the research team to implement the household-level randomization in that slum, a
process that typically took no more than one day. TECHO organized its internal resources
in order to build the houses for the assigned-to-treatment households in that slum as soon
as possible. That way, slums were allocated to phases on a “first come, first served” basis.
Once the resources required to treat the next slum in line were insufficient, TECHO decided
to allocate that slum and the remaining slums in line to the following round (Phase II),
which were treated once sufficient resources to build houses for all of them were obtained
(about a year after Phase I). TECHO followed the same implementation process in all the
selected slums in each country.
Importantly, while the census was conducted in all the selected slums within a country
at the same time, it is likely that the data collection process in some slums was more
efficient than in others, which would explain why some slums were treated first and the
remaining slums second. If differences in efficiency are fully explained by differences in the
capacity of the volunteers assigned to each slum, then we cannot rule out that the phase
rule is exogenous to slum characteristics. A valid concern, however, is that the timing of
the delivery of the list of eligible households from each slum to the TECHO office depended
on the distance to the office, the slum’s size or its level of poverty, since it presumably
takes longer to conduct a census of eligible households in farther, larger and/or poorer
slums than in closer, smaller and/or less poor ones. However, as shown in Galiani et al.
(2018) and replicated in the next section, we test whether Phase I and Phase II slums
were statistically comparable at the pre-treatment level in terms of distance to TECHO
office, slum size, mean income per capita, mean housing quality, and a battery of mean
satisfaction measures and find no statistically significant differences across them. These
results suggest that the populations in Phases I and II were statistically similar before
phase assignment, lending credibility to our assumption that the assignment of slums to

6

phases followed a process that had nothing to do with slum characteristics10 .
Our sample includes a total of 74 slums located in both urban and rural zones; 29 in
Phase I and 45 in Phase II. There were a total of 2, 373 eligible households in these slums.
Our baseline population of slum dwellers is composed of households whose members have
been living in the slum for 12 years, on average. Their monthly income per capita is,
on average, US$55, and most live in overcrowded houses made of very poor materials.
80% of the rooms have walls built of low-quality materials such as plastic and cardboard;
67% have low-quality roofs, and only half of the units have a bathroom of their own.
The number of rooms per capita is 0.7, compared to an average of 0.77 for non-slum
but poor households in each country (see Galiani et al. (2017)). Despite this, only 13%
of these households reported aspirations to upgrade the quality of their dwelling’s walls
and/or roofs, increase the number of rooms in the house, or improve the quality of indoor
materials such as flooring, doors, windows and/or kitchen equipment. Finally, nearly all
(97%) of the 13% of households reporting such aspirations said they cannot satisfy their
housing aspirations because of financial constraints that make them unable to afford the
desired housing improvements, rather than because of any lack of knowledge or time to
do so. Overall, our population of study is made up of poor households that have been
“trapped” in slums for many years and face severe resource constraints. We hypothesize
that these factors have discouraged them from aspiring to upgrade their housing conditions
within the slum.
Treatment was offered to 57% of the households, and over 85% of those households actually received a new house. The remaining 15% that were assigned to treatment could not
afford the required 10% co-payment under the flexible payment scheme offered by TECHO
officials and hence did not receive a house. The compliance rate with the treatment is balanced across phases (see Table A2 in Appendix A). Attrition rates between baseline and
follow-up rounds amounted to 6% of the households in the assigned-to-treatment group
and 7% of those in the control group, with most of the attriters being households whose
members moved out of the slum and could not be reached in their new location. The
difference in attrition rates between groups is not statistically significant at conventional
levels, and this is the case for: (i) the whole sample; and (ii) each phase sample (treatment
versus control in phase I sample; treatment versus control in phase II sample). Also, the
attrition rates are balanced between phase groups (Phase I versus Phase II). Finally, since
our sample considers slum dwellers residing in urban and rural zones, we replicated the
analysis for each zone and find that there is statistical balance in terms of compliance and
attrition rates within each zone as well.

III. Measurement
The possibility of constructing an aspiration metric is supported by research that
demonstrates that people have a common understanding of subjective perceptions and
10

In Section IV we also test the statistical balance across phases using household level characteristics
and, again, we find no differences at all which reinforces the validity of our claim.

7

that numerical measures of attitudinal indicators are effective in capturing those feelings.
However, as is extensively discussed in Bernard and Taffesse (2014), cardinality problems
related to anchoring, wording, or scale dependence can all affect inter-person comparability of responses when measuring aspirations. Moreover, respondents may understand
aspiration questions differently, e.g., they may interpret the same wording in their own
way when their attention is directed toward distinct aspects of their lives. A number
of recent studies have attempted to assess the reliability of aspirations-related measures
like subjective well-being and expectations (see, for example, Manski (2004), Krueger and
Schkade (2008), and Delavalande and Mckenzie (2011)). The general conclusion to be
drawn from this body of work is that, provided enough care is taken when designing the
instruments, the analysis derived from these data can usefully inform researchers about
individuals’ decision-making processes.
Our housing aspirations measure was designed based on multiple qualitative and quantitative pre-tests implemented in out-of-sample slums with similar characteristics to the
ones included in the evaluation sample. By contracting a highly respected survey firm in
each country, we survey roughly 40 household heads per country before the implementation of baseline surveys. The objective is two-fold. First, to “fine-tune” the questionnaire
and thus guarantee that the wording of the questions is properly understood by local population. Second, to design a battery of housing aspiration questions that encompasses the
housing “aspiration window” of slum dwellers (Ray (2006)). In order for our aspiration
measures to be comparable across individuals (and thus avoid problems of cardinality) we
need that individuals with different reference points be able to map their housing aspirations over the same metric scale, for which a closed set of aspiration options/levels is
required.
Our qualitative pre-test revealed that the housing aspirations of slum dwellers are
generally inseparable from location aspirations, i.e. individuals who aspire to improve
their housing conditions typically linked this attitude to either do it within-slum (stay
in the same location) or out-of-slum (upgrade housing in other neighborhood). Also, our
pre-tested household heads typically referred to housing upgrading as a ”yes/no” binary
decision. In contrast, location aspirations were associated to geographical categories at
slum, municipality or state levels, a desire that was typically related to getting closer to
household heads networks and/or get better job opportunities. In particular, individuals
who do aspire to improve their housing conditions usually refer to both improved housing
and owning land. On the other side, those who do not aspire to improve housing typically
did not offer an alternative at all and desired to continue living under the same conditions.
Finally, some pre-tested household heads declared that they did not have the aspirations
to improve their housing quality, but instead aspired to move to another slum.
Accordingly, we measure housing aspirations by using a closed set of aspirations that
combine location and housing prospects. The measures are based on responses to the
following question, each part of which highlights the specific aspiration to be evaluated:
“Right now, if you had to choose among the following alternatives of housing and location,
what would you choose?” The question offered seven housing and location options, in and
out of the slum, which were organized into four mutually exclusive categories of aspirations:

8

(i) Continue living in the same slum under the same conditions (i.e., “no-upgrade”);
(ii) Continue living in the same slum but get improved housing and own land (i.e.,
“within-slum-upgrade”);
(iii) Move to another slum; and
(iv) Move and get improved housing and own land outside of a slum, with four location
alternatives: in the same municipality, in another municipality, in another state, or
somewhere else (i.e., “out-of-slum-upgrade”).
There are four key features to highlight. First, these categories are all related to
future-oriented actions (Bandura et al. (2001)). Second, aspiration options are reasonably
achievable given the housing and location conditions of our sampled individuals, such
that they are all part of their “aspirations window” (Ray (2006)). The set offers the option of choosing to keep the actual housing and location conditions or choose between a
balanced set of feasible housing and location upgrades. From the perspective of a benevolent dictator that is interested in people’s housing conditions, “within-slum-upgrade”
and “out-of-slum-upgrade” dominate options “no-upgrade” and “move-to-another-slum”
since the first include housing improvements while the latter do not. The rank order
between “no-upgrade” and “within-slum-upgrade” (and between “move-to-another-slum”
and “out-of-slum-upgrade”) is not clear since location preferences are non-excludable —
slum dwellers may aspire to stay in the slum so they can keep their family networks or
move to another neighborhood such that they can optimize their geography of labor opportunities. The fact that we cannot rank locational aspirations should not threatens the
validity of our aspiration measure as far as the objective is to measure housing aspirations,
and the inclusion of locational alternatives plays mostly the role of making the aspiration
set more flexible and realistic. For housing aspirations, we therefore concentrate on first
testing whether being exposed to treated neighbors generates any increase in the probability of aspiring to “within-slum-upgrade” or “out-of-slum-upgrade”, to the detriment
of options “no-upgrade” or “move-to-another-slum”. Then, we use the battery of locational questions to study whether the exogenous shock on the neighbors’ housing quality
generate any divergence on the aspiration to upgrade housing conditions within- versus
out-of-slum.
Third, in regards to the time horizon, we ask the aspiration question in present tense
(“Right now...”). Hence, the question does not try to capture when people expect to
satisfy their housing aspirations, but whether or not they have any housing aspirations.
Fourth, note that our question takes aspirations as distinct from beliefs about what is
achievable, i.e. housing and location preferences are thought of as potentially affordable.
Participants are therefore encouraged to think about whether they would spend their own
money to change their current housing situation, and about what they would do. That is,
it is a hypothetical question but conditional on the individual’s actual situation. In fact,
in order to check the construct validity of our aspiration question, we replicated exactly
the same question (with the very same housing and locational alternatives) but instead
of pointing the question to “What would you choose?” we asked “What do you expect to
happen in the next 5 years?”. That is, we used a measure of “expectations” (beliefs) as a
related but nonequivalent variable to test the construct validity of our aspiration measure.
9

As we show in the robustness checks section, our aspiration measure does not capture
beliefs but mostly a wish for achievement or aspirations.
Quantitatively, we define each aspiration category ‘i’ as a dummy variable that equals
1 if the respondent reports that she aspires to option ‘i’ (instead of options ‘j 0 s 6= ‘i0 )
and 0 otherwise. One issue that arises with respect to measures based on multiple-choice
questions is that respondents may be prone to choose first alternatives instead of evaluating
the merit of all the listed options equally. The concern here is that different individuals
may have different likelihoods of choosing first alternatives. However, in randomized
experiments such as ours, this should not be a concern because if the treatment itself does
not affect an individual’s willingness to evaluate the merit of all the alternatives on an
equal basis, then the distribution of “first-choice” respondents would be the same across
experimental groups by virtue of random assignment11,12 .

IV. Empirical Strategy
We report estimates of non-intention-to-treat effects by time of exposure (phase) for
the following linear probability model:
Yij = α + γ1 Controlij + γ2 Controlij × P haseIj + βXij + µj + εij

(1)

where Yij is a dummy variable equal to 1 if head of household i living in slum j aspires
to a given housing upgrading category, and 0 otherwise; Controlij is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if household i in slum j was not offered a TECHO house and 0 otherwise;
P haseIj is a dummy variable equal to 1 if slum j was treated in Phase I and 0 otherwise;
Xij is a vector of household characteristics measured at baseline; µj is a vector of slum
11

There is always the risk that treatment units change their interpretation of aspirations because of
the treatment. Treatment individuals may now have a different sense of what a housing upgrade really
means, and that can affect the comparability of housing aspirations across treated and untreated units.
However, this is especially a problem for subjective questions that attempt to differentiate degrees of
actions within a unique category (e.g., choosing different degrees of housing upgrading, where the category
“not upgrading at all” is not permitted), which is not our case. Indeed, our aspiration measure is designed
to capture categorical options in a dichotomic “aspiration window” that do not make differences on the
degrees of housing quality upgrades. Individuals can only choose “to upgrade” or “not to upgrade”, and
do it “within-slum” or “out-of-slum”. The latter guarantees stability in the interpretation of the housing
aspiration question, which minimizes the comparability problems across experimental groups.
12
Control units could be more prone to declare that they aspire to improve their housing conditions if
that opinion increase their chances to obtain the TECHO house in the future. However, as mentioned in
the previous section, the households that agreed to participate in the lottery were told that lottery losers
would not receive the benefits provided by the program in the future, and they accepted this condition
before agreeing to participate in the study. Hence, the housing aspirations of control units should not have
been affected by the expectation of being treated in the next round.

10

fixed effects; and εij is the error term13,14 .
The slum fixed effects capture the average unobservable differences across slums (and
hence countries). This is important, since randomization was conducted within each slum.
Another important factor is that slum fixed effects also control for differences in the
reference points for housing aspirations, which may vary geographically. Finally, after
controlling for slum fixed effects, we assume that the error terms are independent and
thus report only robust standard errors15 .
The parameters γ1 and γ1 + γ2 are the non-intention-to-treat effect for Phase II (shortterm exposure) and Phase I (long-term exposure) households, respectively. Note that our
experimental design involves the randomization of the TECHO houses at the household
level within each slum, and the treatment households may therefore have changed their
aspirations over time owing to the experience of having a new house or the presence of
possible changes on the part of their treated peers. Hence, γ1 and γ1 + γ2 do not estimate
the treatment-to-control spillover effects on controls’ housing aspirations, but just identify
the “control-treatment housing aspiration gap” in the short- and long-run, respectively.
Nonetheless, as we show in the next section, the aspirations of people in the treated groups
to upgrade their housing conditions within the slum were not only statistically balanced
with respect to the controls’ aspirations, but also remained invariant between baseline and
follow-up round. This is the case for all the housing aspirations measures, which suggests
that our control-treatment housing aspiration gap estimates are unlikely to be influenced
by either the realization or frustration of treatment households’ aspirations but mostly to
changes in the aspirations of control units.
Finally, γ2 , our parameter of interest, is the degree of aspiration adaptation, i.e., the
difference in the control-treatment aspiration gap between long– and short–term treatment
exposure. Conditional on that treatment’s aspirations being invariant between phases I
and II, then a negative γ2 would be consistent with an at least partial aspiration adaptation
on the part of control units. If γ2 fully offsets γ1 , then we would have complete adaptation,
i.e., the probability of control individuals reporting that they aspire to the given option
returns to its reference level after an average of 8 additional months of indirect treatment
exposure.
Identification. Our identification strategy is two–fold. First, random assignment of
treatment status guarantees treatment exogeneity, both overall and within phases, and
13

As we explained in the last section, our aspiration measures take the form of binary outcomes (limited
dependent variable (LDV)). The problem posed by causal inference with LDVs is not fundamentally
different from the problem of causal inference with continuous outcomes. If there are no covariates or the
covariates are sparse and discrete, linear models are no less appropriate for LDVs than for other types
of dependent variables. This is certainly the case in a randomized control trial where baseline covariates
are included only in order to improve efficiency, but their omission would not bias the estimates of the
parameters of interest.
14
Since the phase design of the intervention is given at the slum level, there is no within-slum variation
in phase.
15
The statistical inference of our results is robust to clustering the standard errors at the slum level since
rejection decisions of the null hypothesis remain the same at conventional levels of statistical significance.
These results are available upon request.

11

thus provides the identification for both γ1 and γ2 . Galiani et al. (2017) demonstrate that
the overall sample was balanced over a large number of characteristics. We extend this
analysis by testing the balance across experimental groups within each phase and also
across phase samples. As Tables A3, A4, and A5 in Appendix A show, the experimental
groups are balanced within phases, and this is the case for the full sample as well as for
urban and rural sub-samples.
Second, a negative and significant γ2 can be interpreted as evidence of aspiration
adaptation on the part of control units only if (i) the samples in both phases were balanced
in terms of their characteristics (naturally also starting from the same level of housing
aspirations), and (ii) treatment aspirations do not vary over time. If the allocation of
slums to phases in each country were orthogonal to their baseline characteristics, then
condition (i) would be complied. Indeed, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no
differences for a variety of baseline covariates between Phase I and Phase II households,
including housing aspirations, economic and demographic indicators, housing quality and
satisfaction measures, all of which are likely to be predictors of slum dwellers’ aspirations.
Moreover, we test whether Phase I and Phase II slums are statistically comparable in terms
of the number of eligible households per slum (slum size), Euclidean distance to TECHO
office, mean income per capita, mean housing quality, and a set of mean aspirations and
satisfaction measures for the residents. We find no statistically significant differences
across them at all (see Table A6). These results show that populations from Phases I
and II were statistically comparable before treatment, thereby lending credibility to our
interpretation of γ2 as a measure of aspiration adaptation.
In regards to condition (ii), our experimental design involves the randomization of the
TECHO houses at the household level within each slum, and the treatment households
may therefore have been subject to both direct and spillover effects. This may have
changed their aspirations over time owing to the experience of having a new house or the
presence of possible changes on the part of their treated peers. Nonetheless, as we show
in the next section, the aspirations of people in the treatment groups to upgrade their
housing conditions within the slum did not decrease after treatment, and post-treatment
housing aspirations remained invariant across phases. This was the case of all the housing
aspirations measures, which suggests that our aspiration adaptation estimates are not
influenced by either the realization or frustration of treatment households’ aspirations
and only obey to changes in the aspirations of control units over time.
Finally, two main econometric concerns may arise in regard to the treatment group
as a valid counterfactual of the control groups’ behavior over time, and thus the internal
validity of our causal estimates. First, the control-treatment housing aspiration gap is
hypothetically induced by the observed higher housing quality enjoyed by the treated
neighbors. Thus, if the wear and tear on the TECHO houses reduces the level of housing
quality over time, then the adaptation effects might not be attributable to the aspiration
mechanism, but instead could be transmitted through endogenous changes in the quality
of the TECHO house based on the length of time of exposure to the treatment. However,
we provide robust evidence that the housing quality did not deteriorate over the period
corresponding to the time of exposure, and our results are robust to controlling for housing
quality at the post-treatment level (see next section). This concern is also applicable to
12

any other change in the material circumstances of treated units. However, as shown by
Galiani et al. (2017), receipt of the TECHO house only produced effects dealing with the
quality of floors, walls, and roofs, and no other noticeable changes were observed in terms
of material enhancements such as income, assets, non-durable goods, or housing services
(water, electricity, and sanitation). Indeed, we find no differences across experimental
groups over time in any of these dimensions, which rules out the presence of alternative
mechanisms related to changes in material standards through which control-treatment
aspiration gap may have been reduced over time (see Section V).

V. Results
V.1. Reduced-Form Estimates
Control-treatment housing aspiration gap. We report the results of estimating
equation (1) for two different specifications —one with and one without a set of control
variables. We first estimate the model for urban and rural samples separately and then
combined16 ,17 . Table 1 presents estimates of γ1 and γ2 on control-treatment aspiration
gaps. Our dependent variable corresponds to each of the four dummy indicators for
housing aspirations. The specific control variables included in the second specification are
listed in the notes to Table 1. In each model, we also report the p-value for an F-test of
the null hypothesis of full adaptation (H0 : γ1 + γ2 = 0).
First, in urban slums, the probability of aspiring to upgrade housing conditions within
the slum in Phase II (short exposure) is substantially higher among control units than
among treatment units, as indicated by the positive and significant estimate of γ1 . Indeed,
this difference amounts to 56% with respect to the treatment mean, and it is robust
across the two models. At the same time, on average, the probability that a control-group
household aspires to upgrade its housing conditions outside of a slum is 23% lower than
in the treatment group18 .
The latter does not identify a causal spillover effect as treatment aspirations might
also have changed as a result of the treatment and/or the presence of their treated peers
(treatment-to-treatment spillovers). Indeed, one might argue that the control-treatment
aspiration gap is not due to an increase in the controls’ housing aspirations (the keepingup with the Joneses’ story) but to a decrease in the housing aspirations of treated units.
Note, however, that baseline aspirations were already very low (13% of treated urban
units aspired to upgrade the materials used in their existing houses) and are almost the
same than the aspiration to upgrade housing conditions within the slum at follow-up
16

Table A15 in Appendix A provides a detailed definition and sample size for each variable considered
in this study.
17
Our results are robust to using a Probit model as the order of magnitude of the effects remains the same
and rejection decisions of the null hypothesis do not change at conventional levels of statistical significance.
These results are available upon request.
18
We observe no differences at all across experimental groups in terms of the aspiration to either remain
in the same conditions in the slum of residence or move to another slum, however.

13

(16%). This suggests that, if having access to a better house and being exposed to treated
neighbors had any effect on aspirations to upgrade housing conditions within the slum,
this was close to zero, indicating that the housing program “neutralized” the “withinslum-upgrade” aspirations of treated units (who actually were quite satisfied with their
housing conditions after the program, as is shown by Galiani et al. (2018))19 .
Second, while secular trends might play a role on the increased housing aspirations
of untreated units, it is unlikely that a 56% increase (a huge effect) is fully explained by
them. Indeed, as we show in the following sections, the size of the effects is comparable
across the three country experiments. Therefore, if there was any secular trend operating,
then that trend would have to operate in a similar way across the three countries, which
is not obvious at all. Finally, the positive housing aspiration result is in contrast to the
null effects on housing expectations. Consequently, the potential secular trend would have
to be extremely selective in order to be valid, one that affect housing aspirations but not
housing expectations.
Overall, the latter suggests that the control-treatment aspiration gap is likely explained
by a positive treatment-to-control peer effect, i.e. the housing gap was internalized by untreated households, whose members now aspire to “keep-up with their treatment Joneses’”.
Testing non-monotonicity of housing aspirations. Interestingly, the aspirational effects are observed only among urban households, with no effects found in the
rural sample. We hypothesize that this is due to differences in the treated-untreated
post-program housing gaps confronted by control units in each zone. Urban and rural
households have statistically similar levels of housing aspirations at baseline (see Table A7
in Appendix A). However, urban households are richer than their rural counterparts at
baseline, and they are better-off in regards to housing conditions –although less satisfied
with them. Since the TECHO houses provided to urban and rural program beneficiaries
are the same, then the post-program control-treatment housing gap in urban slums is
smaller relative to the gap in rural slums. Indeed, as is shown in Table A8 in Appendix
A, the order of magnitude of housing treatment effects is generally larger in rural slums,
especially in terms of the quality of walls and the percentage of rooms with windows.
Moreover, while the effects on housing satisfaction indicators are positive and significant
in both urban and rural samples, the effects are systematically larger in rural slums20 .
Ray (1998, 2006) point out that large living-standard gaps with respect to reference
groups can exacerbate frustration among the very poor. Indeed, the discrepant results
across urban and rural slums are consistent with Genicot and Ray (2017)’s hypothesis that
the relationship between the aspirations gap and aspirations formation is non-monotonic
19

While our baseline measure captures the aspiration to upgrade housing-specific materials in slum
dwellers’ existing houses (e.g., the quality of walls, roofs, flooring, and indoor equipment), our follow-up
measure mainly captures the general aspiration to upgrade housing quality within the slum. Although the
two measures are not exactly the same, both are indicators of aspirations to upgrade housing conditions
within the slum and we believe they are fairly comparable over this particular dimension.
20
In order to interpret these results more accurately, it is important to note that, for all the satisfaction
and housing quality variables considered in this study, there was no instance in which the average outcome
for the control group decreased between the baseline and follow-up measures.

14

and depends on the size of the aspirations gap. We hypothesize that the “seemingly
insurmountable” control-treatment housing gap confronted by untreated rural households
frustrated their housing aspirations. In contrast, the “moderate” housing gap faced by
their non-beneficiary counterparts in urban slums encouraged them to “keep-up” with the
housing conditions of the treatment Joneses’ (which is why they increased their “withinslum-upgrade” aspirations).
A complementary hypothesis is given by Glaeser (2011) who argues that urban slum
dwellers are willing to live in substandard housing and hostile geographical environments if
it enables them to escape subsistence-level rural poverty by taking advantage of the benefits
of agglomeration, economies of scale and networks offered by large cities. The income gains
derived from their increasing labor productivity would allow the slum dwellers to gradually
improve their living conditions and lead them to aspire to transform the slums into nonslum neighborhoods or move to formal housing within the city. Accordingly, the observed
effects among untreated urban slum dwellers may also be due to a positive interaction
between better neighborhood housing quality and city level effects, i.e. it is the exposure
to cities that makes of the within-neighborhood housing gaps an inspirational device that
increases the housing aspirations of poorer urban slum dwellers.
Testing Aspiration Adaptation. The control-treatment housing aspiration gap in
urban slums does not appear to be fully sustained after eight months of additional treatment exposure, as indicated by the negative estimates of γ2 . Indeed, this is 69% lower
in Phase I than in Phase II and we cannot reject the null hypothesis of full adaptation
(see Table 1). Moreover, both the “within-slum-upgrade” and “out-of-slum-upgrade” aspirations of untreated units were not higher than the treatment group’s reference level,
indicating that aspirations to upgrade in and out of the slum are, to some degree, partial
substitutes and thus react inversely with respect to each other. Figure A2 in Appendix
A illustrates these results.
As long as the treatment group aspirations remain constant between month 16 and
month 24 (and thus do not change over time as a result of the treatment and/or the presence of changes in the living conditions of their treated peers), then γ2 can be interpreted
as an adaptation of controls’ aspirations. In contrast, if treatment aspiration levels differ across phases, then the observed adaptation effects may not be causally attributable
to controls’ downward movements. We test this by evaluating whether the distributions
of slum fixed effects significantly differ across phase samples21 . In particular, using the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of equality of distributions
for all aspiration variables, indicating that the treatment groups for Phases I and II do not
differ significantly in their post-treatment housing aspirations22,23 . Overall, this suggests
21

In the full regression, we could infer this from the coefficient for a Phase I dummy variable, but since
this does not vary within slums, and since slum fixed effects (the strata units within which household-level
randomization is due) must be included, this cannot be estimated in the main specification.
22
Note that, as is shown by Figure A2, the treatment means never differ between phases, which is the
case for both the “within-slum-upgrade” aspirations and “out-of-slum-upgrade” aspirations, as well as for
the full sample and urban and rural sub-samples.
23
Note also that, as shown in the last three columns of Table A4, treatment groups are well balanced

15

that the treatment group’s housing aspirations remain invariant across phases, and our
aspiration adaptation estimates are consequently not influenced by the ups or downs in
treated neighbors’ aspirations. The latter lends credibility to our claim that γ2 is a causal
estimate of the aspiration adaptation effect on untreated units.
External Constraints and Forward-Looking Behavior . Resource constraints
may discourage effort, which in turn can lead to the adaptation of housing aspirations.
Hence, a potential condition in order for the untreated slum dwellers to sustain their new
housing aspirations is to have access to credit markets, incomes or savings so that they
actually have the financial means to invest in housing upgrades. In particular, we hypothesize that untreated individuals adapted their housing aspirations downward because they
realized that their baseline material means were insufficient to close the control-treatment
housing gap.
We test for this possibility by estimating the equation 1 for various measures of material
well-being, including assets, income, savings, and labor supply. The results are reported
in Table 2, which shows no differences between treatment and control groups in Phase II
(γ1 ) and no adaptation across phases (γ2 ), with the untreated households being equally
poor over time. Second, we asked the heads of household whether they had invested in
a series of potential housing upgrades, such as housing materials, and access to water,
sanitation, and/or electricity, and, if so, how much they had invested. These indicators
work as a proxy for the level of effort exerted to satisfy housing aspirations. As shown
in Table 3, we find no effect on whether the investment effort was made or on the level
of investment. Furthermore, we also test whether the treatment generated any change in
the extent of access to housing services. We again find no effect.
We examine the role of material means on aspiration adaptation in more detail by
testing for heterogeneous adaptation effects across subgroups of relatively high- and lowincome urban slum dwellers. One would expect that adaptation effects are, if anything,
smaller in less poor groups. As Table A9 in Appendix A shows, while the housing
conditions and housing satisfaction do not differ much between above- and below-themedian baseline income subgroups, above-the-median individuals earn on average US$110
per capita per month, which is more than 5 times higher than what is earned by their
below-the-median counterparts; and being richer can influence the course and sustainability of housing aspirations. Indeed, Table 4 shows that while above-the-median households
display moderate adaptation effects in terms of “within-slum-upgrade” aspirations, the
adaptation effect exhibited by their poorer counterparts is 3.4 times greater24,25 . In
fact, on average, the below-the-median untreated units end up having a significantly
across phases at baseline. Therefore, potential pre-treatment differences across treated individuals are less
of a concern here.
24
This is calculated as the quotient of the adaptation rates between below-the-median and above-themedian baseline income groups. Taking Model 2 estimates, we have (−0.15/0.06)/(−0.08/0.11) = −2.5/ −
0.72 = 3.44.
25
The same exercise was performed for the rural sample and we find no differences in the adaptation
effects between below-the-median and above-the-median baseline income subgroups. See Table A10 in
Appendix A.

16

lower level of “within-slum-upgrade” aspirations than their treatment-group counterparts
(H0 : γ1 + γ2 = 0 is rejected). Then, when looking at the “out-of-slum-upgrade” aspirations, we observe the opposite trend, i.e., an upward adaptation, which is again larger
among poorer households.
The above findings indicate that higher housing aspirations are not a sufficient condition for higher levels of housing investments and that material means play a key role in
the aspiration adaptation process of resource-constrained individuals26 .
V.2. Robustness Checks
Multiple-Hypothesis Testing . In studies with multiple outcomes, a few statistically significant effects may emerge simply by chance. The larger the number of tests,
the greater the likelihood of a type I error. We reduce the risk of false positives deriving from an examination of large numbers of individual outcomes by using Holm (1979)
Family-Wise Error Rates (FWER) to adjust the p-values of the individual tests as a function of the number of aspiration variables. We have 4 aspiration indicators and thus 4
associated null hypotheses. The marginal p-values are ordered from smallest to largest:
p̂n,(1) ≤ p̂n,(2) ≤ p̂n,(3) ≤ p̂n,(4) with their corresponding null hypotheses labeled accordα
ingly: H(1), H(2), H(3), H(4). Then, H(s) is rejected if and only if p̂n,(j) ≤ S−j+1
for
j = 1, .., 4. In other words, the method starts with testing the most significant hypothesis
by comparing its p-value to α/S, just as the Bonferroni method. If the hypothesis is rejected, then the method moves on to the second most significant hypothesis by comparing
its p-value to α/(S − 1), and so on, until the procedure comes to a stop. We compute
Holmes FWER corrections at the 10% level of statistical significance. That is, for our
most significant hypothesis (“out-of-slum-upgrade” aspirations), the corrected p-value is
0.1/4 = 0.025; for the second most significant hypothesis (“within-slum-upgrade” aspirations), the corrected p-value is 0.1/3 = 0.0333; and so on. The statistical inference of our
results reported in Table 1 is robust to this stringent test, since rejection decisions of the
null hypothesis remain the same for each of the four aspiration indicators.
Country-Specific Estimates and External Validity . Table A11 in Appendix
A reports the estimates separately by country. The estimated magnitudes of the shortrun effect on aspirations to upgrade either within-slum or out-of-slum, γ1 , are of about
the same magnitudes for all countries, but statistically significant mostly for the case
26

We further test whether the TECHO program had any effect on residential mobility and use this as
a proxy indicator of forward-looking behavior related to “out-of-slum-upgrade” aspirations. We recorded
whether households moved out of the slum between the baseline and the follow-up surveys. Among those
that moved out of the slum (6% of the sample), those that could be located and surveyed are referred to
here as “movers”, while those that could not be located are referred to as attriters (less than 5% of this
latter group corresponds to households that were located but refused to be surveyed). The proportions
of attriters and movers are very low in the sample as a whole (roughly 10% combined); the differences
are insignificant across experimental groups within each phase. The results remain constant between
phases and are robust across urban and rural zones. While we are unable to determine the post-treatment
characteristics of attriters (they could have migrated either to a better environment and obtained formal
housing or to a poorer place and be worse off), our evidence at least suggests that “out-of-slum-upgrade”
aspirations did not translate into higher migration rates. These results are available upon request.

17

of Uruguay. The aspiration adaptation effect, γ2 , is consistent across countries as well,
but, again, chiefly significant for the case of Uruguay, most likely owing to the fact that
the sample size in that country is much larger. The magnitudes of the estimates for
the γ2 parameters relative to the estimated γ1 parameters are comparable in all three
countries, which is consistent with the finding that the degree of aspiration adaptation
is similar across countries. In addition, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the
estimated coefficients are jointly equal for all countries (see the p-value for the F-Test for
the pooling of countries), and this is robust across models, all of which lends credibility
to the external validity of the results.
Housing Quality . One concern regarding our interpretation of the results is that the
wear and tear on the house may have resulted in a deterioration in housing quality over
time. If this is the case, then γ2 could represent a decline in housing aspirations due to
reduced housing quality rather than aspiration adaptation. We examine this possibility by
testing whether the effects on housing quality diminish across phases or not. In general,
the results reported in Table A12 point to a large and significant gap in housing quality
across beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of the TECHO program (γ1 ), but no statistically
significant differences in the housing gap between Phase I and Phase II households (γ2 ).
Figure A3 in Appendix A illustrates these results.
A second robustness check in this regard consists of testing whether the adaptation
effects on housing aspirations reported in Table 1 are robust to controlling for follow-up
housing quality measures in our main regression. As is shown in Table A13 in Appendix
A, the order of magnitude and significance of γ2 remain the same for all the aspiration
indicators, which confirms that any wear and tear on the house had little or no effect
on the treated individuals’ levels of aspiration adaptation. Interestingly, we observe that
γ1 is somewhat lower than it is for the same estimates in Table 1 (when not controlling
for housing quality measures). This should not be surprising, as the ex-post housing
quality measures are positively correlated with both the control dummy and the aspiration
measures, and their inclusion will therefore generate a downward bias in the estimation of
the non-intention-to-treat effect27 .
Aspirations and Expectations. Expectations and aspirations are two distinct concepts. An accurate aspiration measure distinguishes what people desire for the future
from their beliefs about what will happen in the future. In order to check the construct
validity of our aspiration measures, we replicated the question that we had asked about
people’s aspirations but in terms of “expectations”; in other words, we used the concept
of expectations as a nonequivalent variable. Thus, we asked the heads of household the
27
As argued by Sen (2002), self-reported measures of aspirations or subjective well-being may diverge
from objective indicators, since individuals may not necessarily care about the objective housing quality
when evaluating their housing aspirations, but instead about their perception of housing quality, which may
or may not be correlated with actual housing quality. Given that the latter depends on each individual’s
structure of preferences, we do not believe that this should be a concern here, since, even though part of
the effect is explained by adaptations in the perception of housing quality over time, it seems implausible
that the large and significant adaptation effects that we have observed could be fully explained by this
factor.

18

following question: “Over the next 5 years, you expect you will...” and then offered the
very same set of options used to build the aspiration measures:
(i) Continue living in the same slum under the same conditions (i.e., “no-upgrade”);
(ii) Continue living in the same slum but get improved housing and own land (i.e.,
“within-slum-upgrade”);
(iii) Move to another slum; and
(iv) Move and get improved housing and own land outside of a slum, with four location
alternatives: in the same municipality, in another municipality, in another state, or
somewhere else (i.e., “out-of-slum-upgrade”).
As is shown in Table A14 in Appendix A, we do not observe significant differences
across treated and untreated units at any point in time, and this is consistent across the
four expectation indicators as well as across models.
This evidence is helpful for three reasons. First, the effects on housing aspirations and
housing expectations are asymmetric, which lends credibility to the construct validity of
our aspiration measures. Second, it rules out potential validity threats associated with
untreated units having expectations of receiving a TECHO house in the near future. If that
were the case, then the aspiration adaptation might not be due to aspiration mechanisms
but to changes in the expectations of being treated in the following round. Indeed, the
null effect on housing expectations suggests that the aspirations of the members of the
control group are likely to be unaffected by behavioral biases associated with selective
perception (Dearborn and Simon (1958)).
Lastly, the null effect on housing expectations may have influenced the decay of housing aspirations. As rational expectation theory suggests, individuals can anticipate what
is achievable and what is not. Thus, if untreated individuals did not believe that their
higher housing aspirations were going to be met, this could have led them to adopt a
self-fulfilling equilibrium of low expectations and, in turn, low aspirations and low housing
quality. This raises the possibility that aspirations and expectations may be complementary internal resources, such that, in order for higher aspirations to be sustainable over
time, expectations would need to be aligned with aspirations. We examine this hypothesis
by testing whether untreated individuals whose housing aspirations were aligned with their
housing expectations also adapted over time. We found that this was precisely the case.
This suggests that expectations played no role in the aspiration adaptation process28,29 .
Happiness Adaptation and Aspirations. Aspirations may also be determined
28

In particular, we built a dummy variable that equals 1 if individual housing aspirations were equal to
(aligned with) housing expectations and 0 if not, and we did this for each of our four aspiration indicators.
Then, we estimated the equation 1 for each one of these four indicators as dependent variables. Our results
are consistent with the results shown in Table 1. These results are available upon request.
29
A related hypothesis is that aspiration adaptation occurs because poor people are reluctant to think
about the future, adopting an avoidance strategy that will shield them against discouragement and inaction.
This hypothesis seems to be consistent with the null effects on housing expectations. However, we do not
think that this is a plausible explanation since, if that were the case, then untreated units would not have
even raised their aspirations, which are, by definition, future-oriented attitudes.

19

by subjective well-being (SWB). We will first present a brief summary of the happiness
adaptation literature and will then discuss a series of robustness tests that we used to
determine to what extent SWB is affecting the evolution of aspirations in our experimental
setting.
People’s levels of SWB may adapt to higher levels of consumption over time due to the
factors described in any one of the three traditional hypotheses presented in the economic
and psychological literature on happiness adaptation. The first of these hypotheses deals
with the diminishing marginal utility of consumption. According to this line of reasoning,
there is a satiation point before which SWB increases with income and after which additional income buys little, if any, extra happiness (the “basic needs hypothesis”, Veenhoven
(1991)). According to a second hypothesis, SWB levels may adapt because of relative status effects (Clark et al. (2008), Haushofer et al. (2015), among others), that is, individuals
evaluate their level of life satisfaction by comparing their level of wealth with the wealth
level of some reference individual or group. In line with this view, increases in income
will produce increases in SWB only if the social distance between the individual and the
reference group is shortened. A third hypothesis posits that SWB levels may be adapted
by hedonic mechanisms (Frederick and Loewenstein (1999)), i.e., SWB may not improve
in step with increases in consumption due to a psychological process that attenuates the
long-term emotional impact of a favorable or unfavorable change in circumstances; as a
result, people’s degree of SWB eventually returns to a stable reference point. While there
is a large body of evidence that suggests that people’s degree of SWB actually adapts
over time to increases in income and consumption (Easterlin (1974, 2005, 2006), Di Tella
et al. (2010), among many others), there is surprisingly little evidence that can be used to
determine which of these three mechanisms is the most influential and whether they are
consistent across rich and poor groups.
Interestingly, in a previous study (Galiani et al. (2018)), we found that TECHO beneficiaries’ level of satisfaction with their housing quality and their quality of life had improved
substantially after 16 months of treatment exposure but that, after on average 8 additional
months, 60% of that gain had dissipated, suggesting at least a partial adaptation in the
SWB of TECHO beneficiaries. Since our study population is extremely poor and clearly
has not yet satisfied its members’ basic housing needs, there were only two plausible hypotheses that could explain this adaptation in SWB: relative status effects or hedonic
adaptation. We ran numerous robustness checks in order to test whether the adaptation
effects differed across different income subgroups within the slum population and found
no differences at all, which would seem to indicate that, at least for the case of housing
improvements for slum dwellers, the mechanism through which the subjective well-being
adaptation effects are produced is mostly hedonic rather than being related to relative
position effects.
Nevertheless, there could be situations in which life satisfaction levels adapt downward
as a result of adjustments in aspiration levels rather than because of factors associated
with hedonic adaptation; this has been described by Kahneman (1999) as a “satisfaction
treadmill”. The initial rise in SWB derived from increases in wealth (in the form of better
housing, in this case) may be offset by a rise in housing aspirations that are not met over
time. If such a treadmill exists, Kahneman (1999) suggests that “at any level of objective
20

happiness, people with a higher aspiration level will report themselves less happy and less
satisfied than others whose aspirations are lower. [In contrast], if the results for both
groups fall on the same regression line, then there is no satisfaction treadmill” (p.16). In
essence, then, the question is whether the observed adaptation in the SWB of TECHO
beneficiaries is due to the workings of a satisfaction treadmill (in which case TECHO
beneficiaries would have adapted their SWB in response to increases in their material
aspirations) or if it is a result of a hedonic process (no correlation between SWB and
aspiration paths).
There are two empirical facts that appear to rule out the satisfaction treadmill hypothesis. First, the correlation between satisfaction with quality of life (SQL) and our four
aspiration measures is generally low, with the greatest correlation being between SQL and
“No-upgrade” aspiration (0.145) and the least correlation being between SQL and “Outof-slum-upgrade” aspiration (−0.003). More importantly, as we have previously shown
the housing aspirations of treated units remain unchanged over time, and this is consistent across the four aspiration measures. This suggests that the adaptation of the level of
subjective well-being has nothing to do with mechanisms associated with the hypothesized
satisfaction treadmill.
Aspiration Adaptation and Happiness. Even though the satisfaction treadmill
hypothesis seems to have been ruled out (aspirations do not influence hedonic adaptation), it might still be the case that the causal chain runs in the opposite direction, i.e.,
while higher aspirations do not reduce happiness, higher levels of happiness could make
aspirations more sustainable over time, such that unhappier people (i.e., controls) would
be less able (with fewer internal resources) to sustain their aspirations over time30 . If that
were the case, then the mechanism behind aspiration adaptation would not be a lack of
the “external” means to attain higher housing standards (such as higher incomes or better
access to financial services), but a lack of “internal” resources (such as life satisfaction).
However, in addition to the low correlation between aspirations and SWB discussed in
the previous subsection, there is the fact that the SWB of control units remains invariant
over the entire period of analysis, and this is consistent across multiple subjective wellbeing measures. In particular, using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, we cannot reject the
null hypothesis of equality of distributions for 4 out of 5 satisfaction variables (life satisfaction, and satisfaction with quality of floors, walls, roofs, and protection against water when
it rain); in fact, the null hypothesis can be rejected only in the case of “Satisfaction with
protection against water when it rains”, indicating that, in general, the control groups for
Phases I and II do not differ significantly in their pre- and post-treatment SWB levels31 .
This suggests that aspiration adaptation is unrelated to changes in internal resources such
as subjective well-being.
30
Indeed, as shown by Seligman and Nolen-Hoeksema. (1987), depression and unhappiness can affect
how individuals approach the future, as it may encourage the development of what the authors call a
“pessimistic explanatory style” that leads such persons to make negative predictions about the future,
which in turn give rise to resignation and indifference.
31
These results are available upon request.

21

V.3. Structural Estimation
As in Kimball et al. (2015) and Galiani et al. (2018), in this section we present a parsimonious model of aspiration adaptation that allows life events to have both transitory
and permanent effects on aspirations. The model assumes that the impulse response of
aspirations to an event is indicative of the importance of that event in terms of lifetime
aspirations. In particular, we theorize that the rate of aspiration adaptation of untreated
units depends on the particular type of event, which in our case corresponds to their exposure to TECHO-beneficiary neighbors. Thus, we estimate the event-specific rate at which
the housing aspirational effects derived from indirect exposure to the TECHO program
decay over time. Our analysis is restricted to the urban sample, and we consider just two
housing aspiration measures: “Within-slum-upgrade” and “Out-of-slum-upgrade”32 . We
then test whether housing aspirations return to their baseline level and, if so, after what
length of treatment exposure.
We model aspiration adaptation by exponential decay, where the decay rate is estimated simultaneously with the intensity of the initial response of aspirations to the exogenous shock, thus generating three structural parameters in the model: the permanent
effect, the transitory effect, and the rate of decay of the shock. Following that structure,
our empirical model is given by:
Yij = α + Controlij × [βP + βT e−δ(ti −t0 ) ] + βXij + cj + ij

(2)

where Yij is the aspiration dummy (a binary outcome), Controlij the control dummy,
ti the individual’s months of exposure to the program, t0 the minimum treatment exposure
observed in the sample (13 months for urban households), Xij a set of baseline covariates,
and cj the country fixed effects33 . A positive βT , the transitory effect, suggests that, at
least partially, the non-intention-to-treat effect increased soon after the implementation of
the TECHO program. Conditional on a positive and significant βT , if βP , the permanent
effect, is non-distinguishable from zero, then the transitory effect totally disappeared over
time and the treatment therefore did not generate a permanent gain in the individual’s
housing aspirations. Conversely, a non-zero βP would be indicative of a partial adaptation
in housing aspirations. Finally, the aspiration adaptation rate, δ, indicates the rate at
which the transitory effect weakens over time, expressed as a monthly rate.
Our empirical strategy to estimate the structural parameters of the model is simple.
32

The results derived from reduced-form analysis indicate that being indirectly exposed to the TECHO
program had no impact at all on the aspirations to ”No-upgrade” and ”Move-to-another-slum”, so we
discarded these outcomes from the structural analysis.
33
Since the number of months of exposure to the treatment, ti , does not vary within slums, controlling
for slum fixed effects would impede the identification of δ. Hence, we control for country fixed effects,
which incorporate a sufficient variation in time of treatment exposure and thus allows us to capture the
average unobservable differences across countries.

22

We use a non-linear least squares (NLS) estimator given by:

θ̂ = argmin(θ)

N
X

[yi − f (xi ; θ)]2

(3)

i=1

, where f (xi ; θ) is the nonlinear model, yi is the endogenous variable, N is the number
of observations, and θ the parameter vector. Columns 3 to 5 in Table 6 report the results
of estimating equation 2 through MLE, which presents estimates of βP , βT , and δ for the
two housing aspirations described above.
First, in the case of “within-slum-upgrade” aspirations, we observe a large positive
transitory effect. The likelihood of reporting upgrading housing conditions within the
slum increased by 30 percentage points, as is indicated by the positive (although nonsignificant) βT . The effect is somewhat greater than the one observed in the reduced-form
regressions (Table 1), and this is in part because βT captures the immediate effect after 13
months of treatment exposure, while γ1 in Table 1 represents the non-intention-to-treat
effect in Phase II, i.e., households that have been untreated for an average of 16 months −a
sufficient amount of time for some degree of adaptation in the aspiration gains to appear.
Second, the permanent effect is almost zero, which suggests that the adaptation was
total. Indeed, we find a positive rate of aspiration adaptation, δ, of about 38% per month.
If we linearly project the survival rate of the transitory effect at this rate of depreciation, we
find that, after the 28th month of exposure, the effect should be close to zero. Exposure in
the sample ranges from 13 to 30 months. Therefore, at this rate of aspiration adaptation, it
is not surprising to observe a null permanent effect for the period under analysis. Note that
the analysis follows the inverted trend for the case of “out-of-slum-upgrade” aspirations,
which exhibits a 10% reduction after 13 months of treatment exposure, an effect that is
transitory and is fully adapted at a 16% monthly rate over the following 17 months.
The adaptation sequence is illustrated in Figure A4, which maps the likelihood of
reporting each type of housing aspiration for the months of exposure to the treatment. We
do this separately for treatment and control households. Both graphs show a reduction in
the distance between the treatment and control groups as treatment exposure increases,
with this difference narrowing to almost zero by the 28th month. While the structural
estimate of the adaptation effect is not statistically significant, we hypothesize that, if
we had had access to a larger window of time of treatment exposure, including months 1
to 12, we would probably have observed a larger decay in housing aspirations, with the
greater decline being explained primarily by a greater non-intention-to-treat effect in the
period immediately after the treatment. A natural explanation for why the aspiration to
upgrade within the slum shows a stronger adaptation than the aspiration to upgrade out
of a slum is that “out-of-slum-upgrade” aspirations are not the only substitute of “withinslum-upgrade” aspirations. Indeed, not all individuals that have abandoned “within-slumupgrade” aspirations are now aspiring to upgrade housing out of a slum. Some of them
have felt frustrated and no longer aspire to improve their housing conditions or just aspire
to move to another slum.
Finally, Figure A5 replicates the same exercise but divides the corresponding pop23

ulation into income subgroups. Consistent with the reduced-form analysis described in
the previous section, we observe that the “within-slum-upgrade” aspirations of abovethe-median untreated households (those with a lower level of resource constraints) are
adapted much less than those of their poorer counterparts. Interestingly, until the 18th
month of exposure, the richer neighbors adapted their aspirations much faster than the
poorer ones. However, it seems that from the 18th month onward, the richer untreated
units were able to moderate the decay in aspirations, which remained above the treatment mean during the entire period of analysis. In contrast, the “within-slum-upgrade”
aspirations of low-income untreated households continued to decrease and, after the 22nd
month, their aspirations fell to a lower level than the aspirations of the low-income treated
households. All in all, this illustrates the significant role that resource constraints may
play in determining the sustainability of aspirations over time.
Cumulative Impact. We consider the cumulative impact of an event (“the area
under the curve” associated with the aspiration response to an event) and measure the
specific proportions of that area that can be attributed to permanent and transitory
effects, respectively. In particular, for an individual with an annual mortality risk d and
an interest rate r, the total gains, i.e. the total “area under the curve” can be calculated
as:

Z

t

βcumm. =

(βP e−(d+r)(s−t0 ) + βT e−(d+r+δ)(s−t0 ) )∂s =

t0

βP
βT
+
d+r d+r+δ

(4)

The advantage of this formulation is that it gives a single statistic that can be used to
compare events in terms of their aspirational importance. This statistic also allows these
results to be compared with static estimates in the existing literature, given that both are
measures of a cumulative aspiration effect.
Table 6 presents these estimates for our experiment. Columns under the heading
“Aspiration Gains Area” show the areas corresponding to permanent, transitory, and
total gains, respectively. The last column shows the pooled estimate of the non-intentionto-treat effect, i.e., the raw effect using ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates. Our
estimation of d is based on the actuarial mortality rates by age, gender, and country
published by the World Health Organization (WHO) for the years in which the follow-up
survey was conducted, which are 0.04 in El Salvador, 0.01 in Uruguay, and 0.02 in Mexico.
For r, we assume a conventional 5% interest rate.
Consistent with our estimates of βP , βT , and δ, the permanent gains are not significant
for our indicator of “within-slum-upgrade” aspirations, with the positive and significant
total gains mostly explained by the transitory effect. Second, the OLS pooled coefficient is
positive and highly significant, a result that contradicts the almost null and insignificant
permanent effect found in our NLS estimation. Analogously, while “out-of-slum-upgrade”
aspirations show insignificant permanent, transitory, and total gains, the pooled OLS
coefficient is negative at the 10% level of significance. These results suggest that studying
adaptation of aspirations over time is crucial for a rigorous interpretation of life-event
effects on aspiration outcomes in the long run.
24

VI. Conclusion
Hope operates as a capability in Sen’s sense of the term, as it can fuel the aspirations of
the poor, which in turn can encourage a future-oriented behavior that fosters development
outcomes. However, psychology and economics are still very far from having an evidence
base for all the possible implications of hope in terms of economic development and more
research should be done to understand this link. In fact, little is known about the extent
to which poor populations can sustain higher aspirations over time, or about whether
aspirations alone are sufficient to mobilize forward-looking actions that allow the poor to
exit poverty.
In this paper, we rely on a large-scale, multi-country field experiment to test the
effect that a major in situ housing intervention for slum dwellers in El Salvador, Mexico,
and Uruguay has on the housing aspirations and housing investments of non-beneficiary
neighbors who have not yet improved their housing conditions. By exploiting plausible
exogenous variation in the length of exposure to the treatment, our experimental design
allows us to determine if any significant degree of adaptation in non-beneficiaries’ housing
aspirations takes place over time. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper
to examine aspiration adaptation on the part of poor populations and the first to use
exogenous sources of variation for this purpose.
After 16 months of indirect treatment exposure, we find that the control group’s housing quality is significantly lower than that of the treatment group, and no other noticeable
material gaps across groups are observed. The program is effective at improving housing
conditions, with no effects found on incomes, savings, assets, or labor supply. At the same
time, aspirations to upgrade housing conditions within the slum are significantly higher
among control units than they are in the treatment group, suggesting that non-beneficiary
households internalized the control-treatment housing gap and thus now aspire to “keepup” with the treatment Joneses’. However, after 8 additional months the aspirational
difference totally disappeared, and this effect is completely explained by the adaption of
the control groups aspirations, as the treatment group’s housing aspirations remain unchanged over the same period of analysis. This evidence is consistent across the three
country experiments as well as for different measures of aspirations, which lends credibility to the external and construct validity of the results. The aspiration adaptation result
suggests that if the poor are trapped in an aspiration failure equilibrium, this may not
be because they lack the capacity to aspire to higher living standards (Appadurai (2004),
Dalton et al. (2016)) but because they are unable to sustain higher aspirations, which
tend to quickly adapt downward over time.
The results are consistent with an aspiration adaptation model that follows the basic
structure proposed by Kimball et al. (2015) for studying the hedonic treadmill. Using an
NLS estimator we find that the housing aspirations effects observed for untreated units
declined in proportion to the number of months of indirect exposure to the treatment,
and became indistinguishable from zero after 28 months, corresponding to a rate of aspiration adaptation of 38% per month. This is large compared to structural estimates of
the hedonic adaptation rate experienced by comparable individuals in relation to housing
improvements such as those provided by the TECHO program, which has been found to
25

be roughly 20% per month by Galiani et al. (2018). This suggests that the dynamics of
the aspirations of poor individuals who seek to improve their material conditions but are
unable to do so may fluctuate more sharply than the fluctuations in subjective well-being
experienced by those whose basic needs have been partially satisfied. Importantly, this
may be the case even though aspirations and subjective well-being are generated through
independent processes. Indeed, we show that the observed adaptation in the aspirations of
untreated households had nothing to do with hedonic mechanisms, as the levels of subjective well-being of untreated units remain constant over the period of analysis. Analogously,
the hedonic adaptation observed in the treatment group by Galiani et al. (2018) cannot
be explained by the satisfaction treadmill mechanisms suggested by Kahneman (1999),
since the treatment group’s housing aspirations did not undergo any change at all during
the very same period of analysis.
However, our results are valid only for non-treated urban slum dwellers, who are confronted with moderate housing gaps with respect to their treated neighbors. In contrast,
the housing aspirations of untreated rural slum dwellers, whose economic status and housing conditions differ more from those of their treated neighbors, did not change at all. We
conclude that the moderate control-treatment housing gap confronted by urban controls
encouraged them to aspire to replicate the housing conditions of their treatment-group
neighbors, while the seemingly insurmountable housing gap faced by rural households
thwarted their housing aspirations. This result is consistent with the theoretical work of
Ray (1998, 2006) and Genicot and Ray (2017) and reinforces the hypothesis that aspiration
formation processes behave non-convexly over aspiration gaps.
Finally, and consistent with the aspiration adaptation result, we find that differences
in housing quality across experimental groups remain unchanged over time, and no effects
are found either on housing investment efforts or on external constraints such as income,
savings, asset values, or labor supply. Overall, we conclude that in excessively resourceconstrained environments such as those found in informal slums, significant changes in
the material conditions experienced by reference-group neighbors can encourage the poor
to aspire to material conditions that they are not capable of attaining and that, in these
circumstances, aspiration gains may quickly adapt downward. Since aspirations are not
necessarily fixed over time, we argue that higher aspirations are not a sufficient condition
for prompting forward-looking behavior among poor populations.
Our evidence may be relevant for policymakers in situations marked by sharp inequalities, where aspiration gaps will naturally be larger and consequently costlier to narrow or
close. In such contexts, policies designed to stimulate forward-looking behavior simply by
raising the aspirations of poor persons without helping to provide them with the external
or internal means required to satisfy those aspirations are likely doomed to fail. As long
as material gains do not structurally alter the relative position of poor individuals with
respect to their reference groups, aspiration gaps are likely to continue to appear to be insurmountable. As Genicot and Ray (2017) argue, from a general equilibrium perspective,
tackling poverty traps will not only require improvements in the internal capacities of poor
populations, but must also promote those improvements by generating a proportionally
higher growth rate relative to richer groups. Following this logic, household-level social
programs that potentially generate large unintended inequalities among neighbors should
26

attempt to guarantee that non-treated neighbors are not being negatively affected by such
gaps in terms of their aspirations and forward-looking behavior. If so, then neighborhoodlevel interventions seem to be a suitable substitute as benefits would be equally distributed
across neighbors and thus potential effects on within-neighborhood inequality are neutralized.
In this respect, what is needed in order to tackle behavioral poverty traps is not to
find means of indiscriminately raising the aspirations of poor populations, but rather to
find means of fostering the setting of achievable goals for poor populations, thus averting
aspiration adaptation and frustration. This is consistent with recent literature, which
argues that lowering the aspirations of low-income students to more reachable levels will
reduce the likelihood of their dropping out of school in France (see Goux et al. (2014)).
Furthermore, reducing the costs of risk-taking promises to be an effective policy for breaking down aspirational poverty traps. A good example is provided by Bryan et al. (2014),
who randomly assigned a US$8.50 incentive to households in rural Bangladesh to prompt
them to temporarily out-migrate during the pre-harvest lean season. The authors find
that the incentive induced 22% of the households to send out a seasonal migrant; consequently, their consumption level rose significantly, and treated households were around
10 percentage points more likely to re-migrate between 1 and 3 years after the incentive
was removed. Their results suggest that very poor individuals require individual-specific
learning opportunities in order to take risky, poverty-escaping action. This is an experience that has generally been very rare among poor populations because risk-taking that
results in failure can be extremely costly given their situation. Hence, small subsidies that
compensate for the potential costs of risk-taking by the poor may encourage them to acquire valuable learning experiences (with the attendant wins and losses) that will reduce
those risks in the long run and thus enable them, over time, to aspire to progressively
higher living standards.
References
Allcott, H., Rogers, T., 2014. The short-run and long-run effects of behavioral interventions: Experimental evidence from energy conservation. American Economic Review
104 (10), 1003–37.
Alonso-Carrera, J., Caball, J., Raurich, X., 2007. Aspirations, habit formation, and bequest motive. Economic Journal 117 (520), 813176.
Appadurai, A., 2004. The capacity to aspire: Culture and the terms of recognition. In
Rao, V. and Walton, M., (eds.) Culture and Public Action, Stanford University Press,
Palo Alto, California, 59–84.
Azmat, G., Iriberri, N., 2010. The importance of relative performance feedback information: Evidence from a natural experiment using high school students. Journal of Public
Economics 94, 435–452.
Baird, S., Hicks, J. H., Kremer, M., Miguel, E., 2016. Worms at work: Long-run impacts
of a child health investment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1637–1680.
27

Bandiera, O., Barankay, I., Rasul, I., 2013. Team incentives: evidence from a firm level.
Journal of the European Economic Association 11, 1079C1114.
Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G., Pastorelli, C., 2001. Self-efficacy beliefs as
shapers of children’s aspirations and career trajectories. Child Development 72, 187–
206.
Beaman, L., Duflo, E., Pande, R., Topalova, P., 2012. Female leadership raises aspirations
and educational attainment for girls: A policy experiment in india. Science 335 (6068),
582–586.
Bernard, T., Dercon, S., Orkin, K., Taffesse, A. S., et al., 2014. The future in mind:
Aspirations and forward-looking behaviour in rural ethiopia. Centre for the Study of
African Economies. Working Paper 25.
Bernard, T., Taffesse, A. S., 2014. Aspirations: An approach to measurement with validation using ethiopian data. Journal of African Economies 23 (2), 189174.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., 2004. A behavioral-economics view of poverty.
American Economic Review 94, 419–423.
Besley, T., 2016. Aspirations and the political economy of inequality. Oxford Economic
Papers 69, 117.
Blanes, I., Vidal, J., Nossol, M., 2011. Tournaments without prizes: Evidence from personnel records. Management Science 57, 1721C1736.
Bogliacino, F., Ortoleva, P., 2013. The behavior of others as a reference point. Columbia
Business School Research Paper (13-55).
Bryan, G., Chowdhury, S., Mobarak, A. M., 2014. Underinvestment in a profitable technology: The case of seasonal migration in bangladesh. Econometrica 82 (5), 1671–1748.
Bursztyn, L., Ederer, F., Ferman, B., Yuchtman, N., 2014. Understanding mechanisms
underlying peer effects: Evidence from a field experiment on financial decisions. Econometrica 84 (4), 1273–1301.
Bursztyn, L., Egorov, G., Jensen, R., forthcoming. Cool to be smart or smart to be cool?
understanding peer pressure in education. Review of Economic Studies.
Bursztyn, L., Fiorin, S., Kanz, M., Rao, G., 2018. Status goods: Experimental evidence
from platinum credit cards. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3), 1561–1595.
Bursztyn, L., Jensen, R., 2015. How does peer pressure affect educational investments?
Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3), 1329–1367.
Card, D., Mas, A., Moretti, E., Saez, E., 2012. Inequality at work: The effect of peer
salaries on job satisfaction. American Economic Review 102 (6), 2981C3003.
Carroll, C., Weil, D., 1994. Saving and growth: A reinterpretation. Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 40, 133172.
28

Celhay, P., Gertler, P., Giovagnoli, P., Vermeersch, C., forthcoming. Long run effects of
temporary incentives on medical care productivity. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Clark, A. E., Frijters, P., Shields, M. A., 2008. Relative income, happiness, and utility: An
explanation for the easterlin paradox and other puzzles. Journal of Economic literature
46, 95–144.
Dalton, P. S., Ghosal, S., Mani, A., 2016. Poverty and aspirations failure. The Economic
Journal 126, 165178.
De la Croix, D., Michel, P., 2001. Altruism and self-restraint. Annales dconomie et de
Statistique, 63/64, 233–259.
Dearborn, D., Simon, H., 1958. Selective perception: A note on the departmental identification of executives. Sociometry 21 (2).
Delavalande, A., X. G., Mckenzie, D., 2011. Measuring subjective expectations in developing countries: A critical review and new evidence. Journal of Development Economics
94 (2), 151–63.
Di Tella, R., Haisken-De New, J., MacCulloch, R., 2010. Happiness adaptation to income
and to status in an individual panel. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
76 (3), 834–852.
Duesenberry, J., 1949. Income, saving and the theory of consumer behaviour. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Easterlin, R. A., 1974. Does economic growth improve the human lot? some empirical
evidence. Nations and households in economic growth 89, 89–125.
Easterlin, R. A., 2005. Feeding the illusion of growth and happiness: A reply to hagerty
and veenhoven. Social indicators research 74 (3), 429–443.
Easterlin, R. A., 2006. Building a better theory of well-being. in Luigino Bruni and Pier
Luigi Porta (eds.), Economics & Happiness: Framing the Analysis, New York: Oxford
University Press, 29–64.
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., 1999. Hedonic adaptation. in Kahneman, D., E. Diener and
N. Schwarz (eds.), Hedonic Psychology: Scientific Approaches to Enjoyment, Suffering,
and Well-being, Russell Sage Foundation, New York.
Galiani, S., Gertler, P. J., Undurraga, R., 2018. The half-life of happiness: Hedonic adaptation in the subjective well-being of poor slum dwellers to the satisfaction of basic
housing needs. Journal of the European Economic Association 16 (4), 1189–1233.
Galiani, S., Gertler, P. J., Undurraga, R., Cooper, R., Martinez, S., Ross, A., March 2017.
Shelter from the storm: Upgrading housing infrastructure in latin american slums.
Journal of Urban Economics 98, 187–213.

29

Genicot, G., Ray, D., 2017. Aspirations and inequality. Econometrica 85, 489–519.
Gilboa, I., Schmeidler, D., 1995. Case-based decision theory. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (3), 605–639.
Glaeser, E., 2011. Triumph of the city: How our greatest invention makes us richer,
smarter, greener, healthier, and happier. Penguin Books.
Glewwe, P., Ross, P. H., Wydick, B., 2018. Developing hope among impoverished children: Using child self-portraits to measure poverty program impacts. Journal of Human
Resources 53, 330–355.
Gneezy, U., List, J. A., 2006. Putting behavioral economics to work: Testing for gift
exchange in labor markets using field experiments. Econometrica 74 (5), 1365–84.
Goux, D., Gurgand, M., Maurin, E., 2014. Adjusting your dreams? the effect of school
and peers on dropout behaviour. IZA discussion paper.
Haushofer, J., Reisinger, J., Shapiro, J., 2015. Your gain is my pain: Negative psychological
externalities of cash transfers. Unpublished manuscript.
Hossain, T., List., J. A., 2012. The behavioralist visits the factory: Increasing productivity
using simple framing manipulations. Management Science 58 (12), 2151–67.
Jayaraman, R., Ray, D., de Vericourt, F., 2016. Anatomy of a contract change. American
Economic Review 106 (2), 316–358.
Kahneman, D., 1999. Objective happiness. in Daniel Khaneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert
Schwarz, eds. Well-being: Foundations of hedonic psychology.
Karandikar, R., Mookherjee, D., Ray, D., Vega-Redondo, F., 1998. Evolving aspirations
and cooperation. Journal of Economic Theory 80, 292–331.
Kimball, M., Nunn, R., Silverman, D., 2015. Accounting for adaptation in the economics
of happiness. NBER Working Paper No. 21365.
Krueger, A. B., Schkade, D. A., 2008. The reliability of subjective well-being measures.
Journal of Public Economics 92 (8), 18331745.
Lybbert, T., Wydick, B., 2016. Poverty, aspirations, and the economics of hope. Economic
Development and Cultural Change Forthcoming.
Macours, K., Vakis, R., 2014. Changing households’ investment behaviour through social
interactions with local leaders: Evidence from a randomised transfer programme. The
Economic Journal 124 (576), 607–633.
Manski, C. F., 2004. Measuring expectations. Econometrica 72 (5), 1329–76.
Overland, J., C. D., Weil, D., 2000. Saving and growth with habit formation. American
Economic Review 90 (3), 341175.

30

Ray, D., 1998. Development economics. Princeton University Press.
Ray, D., 2006. Aspirations, poverty, and economic change. In Understanding Poverty,
edited by Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee, Roland Benabou, and Dilip Mookherjee. Oxford
University Press, 409–421.
Seligman, M. E. P., Nolen-Hoeksema., S., 1987. Explanatory style and depression. In D.
Magnusson and A. Ohman. Psychopathology: An Interactional Perspective. New York:
Academic Press, 125–139.
Selten, R., 1998. Aspiration adaptation theory. Journal of mathematical psychology 42 (2),
191–214.
Selten, R., 2001. What is bounded rationality. In Bounded rationality: The adaptive
toolbox, edited by Gerd Gigerenzer and Reinhard Selten, 13–36.
Sen, A., 2002. Health: perception versus observation. British Medical Journal 324, 860–
861.
Simon, H. A., 1957. Models of man; social and rational. John Willey and Sons.
Veblen, T. B., 1899. The theory of the leisure class: An economic study of institutions.
London: Macmillan Publishers.
Veenhoven, R., 1991. Is happiness relative? Social Indicators Research 24 (1), 1–34.

31

0.14

0.02
(0.02)

-0.11**
(0.05)
0.59

0.17

-0.07
(0.06)

γ2

Cont. ×
Phase I

-0.11*** 0.17***
(0.04)
(0.06)
0.23

0.01
(0.01)

0.09**
(0.03)

0.01
(0.04)

γ1

Cont.

Model 2

0.12
(0.33)

0.01
(0.10)

0.28
(0.45)

0.59
(0.49)

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

0.00
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.03
(0.04)

0.04
(0.04)

γ1

Cont.

-0.02
(0.04)
0.53

0.02
(0.02)
0.42

0.01
(0.06)
0.59

0.00
(0.07)
0.52

γ2

Cont. ×
Phase I

Model 1

0.00
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.03
(0.04)

0.04
(0.04)

γ1

-0.02
(0.04)
0.54

0.02
(0.02)
0.43

0.01
(0.06)
0.63

-0.01
(0.07)
0.55

γ2

Cont. ×
Phase I

Model 2
Cont.

Rural

0.31
(0.46)

0.01
(0.11)

0.22
(0.41)

0.46
(0.50)

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

0.02
(0.01)
0.10

-0.05
(0.04)
0.48

-0.05
(0.04)
0.57

γ2

Cont. ×
Phase I

-0.05**
0.07*
(0.02)
(0.04)
0.50

0.00
(0.01)

0.03
(0.03)

0.03
(0.03)

γ1

Cont.

Model 1

-0.05**
(0.02)

0.00
(0.01)

0.03
(0.03)

0.03
(0.03)

γ1

0.07**
(0.04)
0.49

0.02
(0.01)
0.11

-0.05
(0.04)
0.45

-0.04
(0.04)
0.59

γ2

Cont. ×
Phase I

Model 2
Cont.

All

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Note: Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The analysis is divided into three groups: urban households, rural households, and all households. The first column reports
the mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable for the treatment group measured at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a
regression of the dependent variable on Control Assignment and Control Assignment interacted with Phase I plus slum fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust
standard errors. The last two columns, Model 2, additionally control for the household head’s Years of Schooling, Gender, Age, Years living in the slum, as well as the value of household
assets per capita, monthly income per capita, and whether the household’s head aspires to upgrade housing quality materials in-situ, all measured during the baseline round. Following the
standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control
variable was missed. Finally, we report the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that γ1 + γ2 = 0 for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

-0.11*** 0.17***
(0.04)
(0.06)
0.23

0.48
(0.50)

0.02
(0.02)

“Out-of-slum-upgrade”

0.01
(0.01)

0.09***
-0.11**
(0.03)
(0.05)
0.65

0.16

-0.08
(0.06)

γ2

γ1
0.01
(0.04)

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

0.14

0.02
(0.12)

0.16
(0.37)

0.34
(0.48)

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

“Move-to-another-slum”

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

“Within-slum-upgrade”

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

“No-upgrade”

Dependent Variable

Model 1

Urban

Table 1: Adaptation in Housing and Location Aspirations

Table 2: Income, Assets, and Labor Supply - Urban Only
Model 1
Dependent Variable

Assets Value Per Capita (USD)

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

74.89
(163.24)

0.89
-25.46
(12.48) (21.61)
0.16

2.19
-25.84
(12.30) (20.31)
0.15

77.40
(115.15)

-1.31
(9.76)

19.38
(19.41)
0.28

-1.99
(9.65)

20.86
(19.51)
0.26

40.78
(19.23)

0.21
(1.96)

-0.05
(3.07)
0.95

-0.05
(2.00)

-0.50
(3.04)
0.81

36.97
(20.08)

3.49
(2.91)

-5.95
(4.40)
0.46

3.26
(2.92)

-5.49
(4.42)
0.50

0.03
(0.16)

0.02
(0.01)

0.00
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)

0.00
(0.02)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
Hours worked last week by HH
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
Hours worked last week by Spouse
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
If any household’s member have savings

Model 2

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.35

0.42

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
Note: Only urban households are considered. Each row represents a separate dependent
variable. Monetary variables in US dollars as of June 2007. In the case of monetary variables,
observations over the 99th percentile were excluded. The first column reports the mean and
standard deviation of the dependent variable for the treatment group measured at follow-up.
The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a regression of the
dependent variable on Control Assignment and Control Assignment interacted with Phase I
plus slum fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The
last two columns, Model 2, additionally control for the household head’s Years of Schooling,
Gender, Age, Years living in the slum, as well as the value of household assets per capita,
monthly income per capita, and whether the household’s head aspires to upgrade housing
quality materials in-situ, all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard
procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add
a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable
was missed. Finally, we report the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that γ1 + γ2 = 0
for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

33

Table 3: Housing Investment - Urban Only
Model 1
Follow-Up
Treat
Mean

Dependent Variable

If invested on housing materials during the last 12 months

0.40
(0.49)

Model 2

Control

Control
× Phase I

Control

Control
× Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

0.04
(0.04)

-0.02
(0.08)

0.05
(0.04)

-0.03
(0.08)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.74

If invested on access to water during the last 12 months

0.09
(0.28)

-0.02
(0.03)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.75
0.02
(0.05)

-0.02
(0.03)

0.97

If have access to water in terrain

0.81
(0.39)

-0.03
(0.03)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.96
0.05
(0.05)

-0.03
(0.03)

0.52

If invested on sanitation during the last 12 months

0.08
(0.27)

-0.01
(0.03)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
0.69
(0.46)

0.03
(0.05)

-0.02
(0.04)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

-0.01
(0.03)

0.12
(0.32)

0.03
(0.06)

-0.01
(0.03)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

-0.02
(0.04)

0.90
(0.31)

0.00
(0.05)

0.00
(0.02)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

-0.01
(0.03)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

68.29
(226.71)

-10.45
(12.34)

0.04
(0.03)

-13.50
(28.46)
0.35

-0.01
(0.06)
0.68

0.00
(0.02)

0.17

Amount invested on housing during the last 12 months

0.03
(0.06)
0.75

0.86

If have access to electricity

0.03
(0.05)
0.64

0.80

If invested on electricity during the last 12 months

0.05
(0.05)
0.49

0.66

If have access to own bathroom

0.02
(0.05)

0.03
(0.03)
0.17

-10.30
(12.53)

-15.62
(28.53)
0.31

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
Note: Only urban households are considered. Each row represents a separate dependent variable. Monetary variables
in US dollars as of June 2007. In the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded.
The first column reports the mean of the dependent variable for the treatment group measured at follow-up. The
next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a regression of the dependent variable on Control
Assignment and Control Assignment interacted with Phase I plus slum fixed effects. Reports are the estimated
coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns, under the heading Model 2, additionally control for
the household head’s years living in the slum, years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the value of household
assets per capita and monthly income per capita, and whether the household’s head aspires to upgrade housing
quality materials in-situ, all of which were measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure,
when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for
that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we report the p-values of the F-tests
of the null hypothesis γ1 + γ2 = 0. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

34

Table 4: Adaptation in Housing and Location Aspirations, by Income Status - Urban Only

Dependent Variable

“No-upgrade”

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

High Income Status (> p50)

Low Income Status (≤ p50)

Model 1

Model 1

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

-0.06
(0.08)
0.22

-0.03
(0.05)

-0.05
(0.08)
0.19

0.36
(0.48)

0.04
(0.06)

-0.09
(0.09)
0.53

0.06
(0.06)

-0.12
(0.09)
0.39

0.16
(0.37)

0.10**
(0.04)

-0.08
(0.07)
0.64

0.11**
(0.04)

-0.08
(0.07)
0.59

0.16
(0.37)

0.08
(0.06)

-0.18**
(0.07)
0.04

0.06
(0.06)

-0.15**
(0.07)
0.07

0.01
(0.11)

0.03
(0.02)

0.00
(0.03)
0.12

0.03
(0.02)

0.00
(0.03)
0.13

0.02
(0.14)

-0.02
(0.01)

0.04
(0.03)
0.35

-0.02
(0.02)

0.04
(0.03)
0.36

0.49
(0.50)

-0.11**
0.13*
(0.05)
(0.08)
0.76

-0.11**
0.13
(0.05)
(0.08)
0.75

0.46
(0.50)

-0.10*
(0.06)

0.22**
(0.09)
0.10

-0.10*
(0.06)

0.23**
(0.09)
0.09

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Out-of-slum-upgrade”

Cont.

-0.01
(0.05)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Move-to-another-slum”

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Model 2

0.33
(0.47)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Within-slum-upgrade”

Model 2

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
No
Yes
Note: Only urban sample is considered. Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The analysis is divided into two
income sub-groups defined by whether the baseline monthly income per capita is below or above the median in the income
distribution of the urban sample (median equal to US$39). The first column reports the mean and standard deviation of the
dependent variable for the treatment group measured at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report
the results of a regression of the dependent variable on Control Assignment and Control Assignment interacted with Phase I plus
slum fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns, Model 2, additionally
control for the household head’s Years of Schooling, Gender, Age, Years living in the slum, as well as the value of household assets
per capita, monthly income per capita, and whether the household’s head aspires to upgrade housing quality materials in-situ, all
measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a
value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed.
Finally, we report the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that γ1 + γ2 = 0 for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant
at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

35

Table 5: Housing Investment, by Income Status - Urban Only

Dependent Variable

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

High Income Status (> p50)

Low Income Status (≤ p50)

Model 1

Model 1

Model 2

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Model 2

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

If invested on housing quality
during the last 12 months
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.21
(0.41)

0.00
(0.04)

0.06
(0.07)
0.28

0.01
(0.04)

0.06
(0.07)
0.26

0.26
(0.44)

0.05
(0.05)

-0.11
(0.09)
0.46

0.05
(0.06)

-0.11
(0.09)
0.44

If invested on access to water
during the last 12 months
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.06
(0.23)

-0.02
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.04)
0.42

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.04)
0.45

0.04
(0.21)

0.00
(0.05)

0.05
(0.07)
0.29

-0.01
(0.03)

0.05
(0.05)
0.29

If have access to water in terrain

0.82
(0.39)

-0.02
(0.04)

0.02
(0.06)
0.99

-0.02
(0.04)

0.01
(0.06)
0.84

0.81
(0.39)

-0.05
(0.05)

0.07
(0.07)
0.64

-0.05
(0.04)

0.07
(0.07)
0.70

If invested on sanitation
during the last 12 months
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.05
(0.22)

-0.02
(0.03)

0.04
(0.04)
0.45

-0.01
(0.03)

0.04
(0.04)
0.41

0.04
(0.21)

0.02
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.05)
0.91

0.01
(0.03)

0.00
(0.05)
0.83

If have access to own bathroom

0.65
(0.48)

0.04
(0.05)

0.03
(0.08)
0.31

0.05
(0.05)

0.03
(0.08)
0.25

0.73
(0.45)

-0.11*
(0.06)

0.07
(0.09)
0.52

-0.10
(0.06)

0.05
(0.09)
0.47

If invested on electricity
during the last 12 months
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.05
(0.22)

0.02
(0.03)

0.02
(0.04)
0.24

0.02
(0.03)

0.01
(0.04)
0.36

0.09
(0.29)

-0.05
(0.03)

0.02
(0.05)
0.13

-0.05*
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.05)
0.13

If have access to electricity

0.89
(0.31)

0.03
(0.03)

0.04
(0.04)
0.04

0.03
(0.03)

0.04
(0.04)
0.04

0.90
(0.30)

-0.05
(0.04)

0.08
(0.06)
0.52

-0.05
(0.04)

0.08
(0.06)
0.54

-29.05
20.74
(18.96) (47.54)
0.85

-24.36
(20.43)

18.42
(49.27)
0.89

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
Amount invested on housing
during the last 12 months
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

71.80
(271.76)

5.93
-13.79
(15.17) (54.85)
0.88

6.97
-19.60
(15.63) (54.77)
0.81

83.71
(280.13)

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
No
Yes
Note: Only urban sample is considered. Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The analysis is divided into two income subgroups defined by whether the baseline monthly income per capita is below or above the median in the income distribution of the urban
sample (median equal to US$39). The first column reports the mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable for the treatment
group measures at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a regression of the dependent variable
on Control Assignment and Control Assignment interacted with Phase I plus slum fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and
robust standard errors. The last two columns, Model 2, additionally control for the household head’s Years of Schooling, Gender, Age, Years
living in the slum, as well as the value of household assets per capita, monthly income per capita, and whether the household’s head aspires
to upgrade housing quality materials in-situ, all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control
variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that
the control variable was missed. Finally, we report the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that γ1 + γ2 = 0 for each model. *Significant
at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

36

Table 6: Structural Estimation - Urban Only
NLS Estimates
Dependent Variable

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Aspiration Gains Area

Permanent
Effect

Transitory
Effect

Aspiration
Adaptation
Rate

Permanent
Gains
(PG)

Transitory
Gains
(TG)

Total
Gains

βP

βT

δ

βP
η+r

βT
η+r+δ

PG+TG

OLS Estimate
Pooled
Coefficient

“Within-slum-upgrade”

0.16
(0.37)

0.01
(0.03)

0.30
(0.27)

0.38
(0.31)

0.15
(0.48)

0.66**
(0.33)

0.82*
(0.44)

0.06**
(0.02)

“Out-of-slum-upgrade”

0.48
(0.50)

-0.02
(0.10)

-0.09
(0.09)

0.16
(0.54)

-0.21
(1.46)

-0.38
(1.05)

-0.59
(0.54)

-0.05*
(0.03)

Note: Only urban households are considered. Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The first column reports the control
mean at follow-up round and its standard deviation. The next three columns under the heading of NLS Estimates report the structural
parameter estimates of the NLS regression Yij = α + Controlij × [βP + βT e−δ(ti −t0 ) ] + cj + ij , with ti the months of exposure to the program
enjoyed by individual i, t0 the minimum treatment exposure (13 months), and cj the country fixed effects. δ is expressed as a monthly
rate. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The next three columns, under the heading Aspiration Gains Area,
report the area under the permanent, transitory, and total effects, respectively. Permanent Effect Area is calculated as βP divided by the
sum of the mortality rate, d, which is equal to 0.021, and the interest rate, r, which is assumed to be 0.05. Transitory Effect Area is
calculated as βT divided by the sum of d, r, and the aspiration adaptation rate, δ. Total Area is the sum of the permanent and transitory
effects areas. Standard errors of the estimated areas calculated by the Delta Method are reported in parenthesis. Finally, the last column
reports the pooled linear regression coefficient of the assigned-to-control effect and its associated robust standard error. *Significant at 10%.
**Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

37

Appendix A. Tables and Figures (For Online Publication)

38

Figure A1:

Timeline of Intervention and Surveys

ITT Effect over Phases
Mean and 90% Confidence Interval

.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

Out-of-slum-upgrade

ITT Effect over Phases
Mean and 90% Confidence Interval
.6

Within-slum-upgrade

Urban
C
16m

Rural
C
24m

All
T
16m

Urban
T
24m

C
16m

Rural
C
24m

All
T
16m

T
24m

Figure A2: Treatment Effects on Aspirations, by Phase

For each aspiration variable and zone, the first bar is the control mean at Phase II
(16 months of exposure, on average) at follow-up, while the second bar represents the
control mean at Phase I (24 months of exposure, on average) and is estimated as the
mean of the control group in Phase II plus the non-intention-to-treat effect for the Phase
I group. Third and fourth bars replicate the same exercise but for treated units. The
difference between the first bar and the third bar is the non-intention-to-treat effect on
the housing aspiration for the Phase II group. The difference between the second bar and
the fourth bar is the non-intention-to-treat effect on the housing aspiration for the Phase
I group. Then, the double difference between the first and third bars, on the one side,
and the second and fourth bars, on the other side, is therefore the extent of aspirations
adaptation.

40

Housing Quality

C
16m

C
24m

Sh

ar
e
o
w fR
ith o
W om
in s
do
w
s

of
G Ro
oo om
d
R s
oo
fs

Sh

ar
e

of
G Ro
oo om
d
W s
al
ls

re

G

Sh
a

Sh

ar

e

of
R
oo oo
d ms
Fl
oo
rs

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Mean and 90% Confidence Interval

T
16m

T
24m

Figure A3: Treatment Effects on Housing Quality, by Phase - Urban Only

For each housing variable, the first bar is the control mean at Phase II (16 months of
exposure, on average) at follow-up, while the second bar represents the control mean at
Phase I (24 months of exposure, on average) and is estimated as the mean of the control
group in Phase II plus the non-intention-to-treat effect for the Phase I group. Third and
fourth bars replicate the same exercise but for treated units. The difference between the
first bar and the third bar is the non-intention-to-treat effect on the housing quality for
the Phase II group. The difference between the second bar and the fourth bar is the nonintention-to-treat effect on the housing quality for the Phase I group. Then, the double
difference between the first and third bars, on the one side, and the second and fourth
bars, on the other side, is the extent of adaptation in housing quality.

41

Parametric Estimation
Only Urban

.4
.3
.1

.2

.3
.1

.2

Likelihood

.4

.5

Out-of-slum-upgrade

Parametric Estimation
Only Urban
.5

Within-slum-upgrade

14

16

18 20 22 24 26
Months of Exposure
NLS Proj.
Contr.

28

30

14

NLS Proj.
Treat.

16

18

20 22 24 26
Months of Exposure

NLS Proj.
Contr.

kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 3

28

30

NLS Proj.
Treat.

kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 3

Figure A4: Aspirations Adaptation - NLS Estimation - Urban Only

Within-slum-upgrade
High vs Low Income Status

.3
.2
0

.1

Likelihood

.4

.5

Parametric Estimation, Only Urban

14

16

18

20
22
24
Months of Exposure
NLS Proj.
Contr.
High Inc.
NLS Proj.
Contr.
Low Inc.

26

28

30

NLS Proj.
Treat.
High Inc.
NLS Proj.
Treat.
Low Inc.

Figure A5: Aspirations Adaptation by Income Status - NLS Estimation - Urban Only

42

Table A1:

Timeline of Intervention and Surveys
Rural

Urban

All

Phase 1
Constr.

Phase 2
Constr.

Follow-Up
Survey

Phase 1
Constr.

Phase 2
Constr.

Follow-Up
Survey

Phase 1
Constr.

Phase 2
Constr.

Follow-Up
Survey

El Salvador
Average Exposure
HHs Sample Size
Number of Slums

25 months
89
2

17 months
52
3

141
5

25 months
199
6

17 months
316
12

515
18

25 months
288
8

17 months
368
15

656
23

Uruguay
Average Exposure
HHs Sample Size
Number of Slums

27 months
353
6

17 months
375
6

728
12

-

-

-

27 months
353
6

17 months
375
6

728
12

Mexico
Average Exposure
HHs Sample Size
Number of Slums

19 months
93
5

16 months
155
5

248
10

20 months
193
10

14 months
385
19

578
29

20 months
286
15

15 months
540
24

826
39

All countries
Average Exposure
HHs Sample Size
Number of Slums

25 months
535
13

17 months
582
14

1,117
27

23 months
392
16

15 months
701
31

1,093
47

24 months
927
29

16 months
1,283
45

2,210
74

43

Table A2:

Sample Size, Attrition and Compliance

Phase I
Mean
Treat.

Mean
Control

Phase I vs Phase II
All

Phase II
Diff.

Mean
Treat.

Mean
Control

Diff.

Mean
Phase I

Mean
Phase II

Diff.

Phase I vs Phase II
Only Treatments
Mean
Phase I

Mean
Phase II

653
611

703
658

0.06
[0.01]

0.06
[0.01]

0.88

0.86

393
365

331
310

0.07
[0.01]

0.06
[0.02]

0.88

0.83

260
246

372
348

0.05
[0.02]

0.06
[0.01]

Diff.

Panel A. Full Sample
Baseline Households Sample
Follow-Up Households Sample
Attrition Rate
Compliance Rate

653
611

342
316

0.06
(0.01)

0.08
(0.01)

0.88

0.99

-0.01
(0.02)

703
658

675
625

0.06
(0.01)

0.07
(0.01)

0.86

1.00

-0.01
(0.01)

995
927

1,378
1,283

0.07
[0.01]

0.07
[0.01]

0.92

0.93

0.00
[0.01]

0.00
[0.02]

Panel B. Urban Sample
Baseline Households Sample
Follow-Up Households Sample
Attrition Rate
Compliance Rate

393
365

189
170

0.07
(0.01)

0.10
(0.02)

0.88

0.99

-0.03
(0.03)

331
310

283
272

0.06
(0.01)

0.07
(0.02)

0.83

1.00

-0.01
(0.02)

582
535

624
582

0.08
[0.02]

0.07
[0.01]

0.91

0.91

0.01
[0.02]

0.01
[0.02]

Panel C. Rural Sample
Baseline Households Sample
Follow-Up Households Sample
Attrition Rate

260
246

153
146

0.05
(0.01)

0.05
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

372
348

382
353

0.07
(0.01)

0.08
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.02)

413
392

754
701

0.05
[0.01]

0.07
[0.01]

-0.02
[0.02]

-0.01
[0.02]

Compliance Rate
0.87
1.00
0.89
1.00
0.92
0.94
0.87
0.89
Note: This table reports means and differences in means between experimental groups, by phase and zone. For Phase I and Phase II columns,
robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. For Phase I vs Phase II columns, standard errors clustered at slum level are reported in
brackets. Compliance rate refers to the share of households assigned to treatment that indeed received TECHO houses and to the share of
households in the control group that indeed did not receive TECHO houses. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

44

Table A3:

Baseline Balance Within and Between Phases - Full Sample
Phase I

Phase I vs Phase II
All

Phase II

Phase I vs Phase II
Only Treatments

Dependent Variable

Treat.

Control

Diff.

Treat.

Control

Diff.

Phase I

Phase II

Diff.

Phase I

Phase II

Diff.

Years living in the slum

9.82
(0.66)

11.19
(0.89)

0.26
(0.91)

12.80
(0.54)

13.32
(0.56)

0.84
(0.74)

10.34
[2.47]

13.06
[1.33]

-2.72
[2.78]

9.82
[2.18]

12.80
[1.54]

-2.97
[2.65]

Z-score Housing Quality
Summary Index

-0.05
(0.03)

0.00
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.05)

0.01
(0.03)

0.00
(0.03)

0.03
(0.04)

-0.03
[0.04]

0.01
[0.02]

-0.04
[0.05]

-0.05
[0.07]

0.01
[0.05]

-0.07
[0.08]

Aspire to Upgrade Housing
Quality Materials In-situ

0.17
(0.02)

0.14
(0.02)

-0.03
(0.03)

0.12
(0.02)

0.12
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.02)

0.16
[0.03]

0.12
[0.02]

0.04
[0.03]

0.17
[0.03]

0.12
[0.02]

0.05
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Floor Quality

0.19
(0.02)

0.21
(0.02)

0.01
(0.03)

0.25
(0.02)

0.27
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.20
[0.02]

0.26
[0.04]

-0.06
[0.04]

0.19
[0.03]

0.25
[0.04]

-0.06
[0.05]

Satisfaction with Wall Quality

0.15
(0.01)

0.18
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.03)

0.16
(0.01)

0.17
(0.01)

0.03
(0.02)

0.16
[0.02]

0.16
[0.02]

-0.01
[0.03]

0.15
[0.03]

0.16
[0.02]

-0.02
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Roof Quality

0.17
(0.02)

0.20
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.03)

0.16
(0.01)

0.17
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)

0.18
[0.02]

0.16
[0.02]

0.01
[0.03]

0.17
[0.02]

0.16
[0.02]

0.01
[0.03]

Satisfaction with Rain Protection

0.16
(0.01)

0.19
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.03)

0.15
(0.01)

0.14
(0.01)

0.03
(0.02)

0.17
[0.02]

0.14
[0.02]

0.02
[0.03]

0.16
[0.03]

0.15
[0.02]

0.01
[0.03]

Satisfaction with Quality of Life

0.28
(0.02)

0.25
(0.02)

0.02
(0.03)

0.28
(0.02)

0.27
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.27
[0.02]

0.27
[0.03]

0.00
[0.04]

0.28
[0.03]

0.28
[0.03]

0.01
[0.04]

Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)

49.45
(2.63)

59.85
(4.29)

-8.61
(5.99)

52.86
(2.54)

58.74
(2.94)

-5.08
(4.32)

53.08
[4.01]

55.77
[4.27]

-2.69
[5.82]

49.45
[4.54]

52.86
[4.34]

-3.40
[6.24]

Head’s Years of Schooling

4.09
(0.14)

4.34
(0.20)

-0.01
(0.21)

4.37
(0.12)

3.87
(0.12)

0.26
(0.17)

4.18
[0.52]

4.13
[0.29]

0.05
[0.59]

4.09
[0.45]

4.37
[0.32]

-0.29
[0.55]

Head is Male

0.69
(0.02)

0.69
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.03)

0.69
(0.02)

0.71
(0.02)

0.00
(0.03)

0.69
[0.04]

0.70
[0.03]

-0.01
[0.05]

0.69
[0.04]

0.69
[0.04]

0.00
[0.05]

Head’s Age

42.09
(0.63)

41.33
(0.77)

0.52
(1.07)

41.2
(0.59)

40.73
(0.61)

1.01
(0.87)

41.83
[0.96]

40.97
[0.70]

0.86
[1.18]

42.09
[1.09]

41.20
[0.72]

0.89
[1.29]

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
No
No
Note: This table reports baseline means and differences in means of the full sample. For Phase I and Phase II main columns, differences in means
are estimated by regressions that include settlement fixed effects, and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. For the Phase I vs Phase
II main columns, standard errors clustered at the slum level are reported in brackets. Monetary variables in US dollars as of June 2007. In the case
of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

45

Table A4:

Baseline Balance Within and Between Phases - Urban Only
Phase I

Phase I vs Phase II
All

Phase II

Phase I vs Phase II
Only Treatments

Dependent Variable

Treat.

Control

Diff.

Treat.

Control

Diff.

Phase I

Phase II

Diff.

Phase I

Phase II

Diff.

Years living in the slum

7.94
(0.70)

8.50
(1.02)

0.72
(0.90)

9.27
(0.64)

11.70
(0.85)

-0.37
(0.96)

8.14
[3.00]

10.41
[2.06]

-2.27
[3.56]

7.94
[2.55]

9.27
[2.01]

-1.33
[3.18]

Z-score Housing Quality
Summary Index

-0.04
(0.04)

0.00
(0.05)

0.00
(0.07)

0.15
(0.02)

0.19
(0.03)

0.01
(0.04)

-0.02
[0.07]

-0.02
[0.03]

-0.01
[0.07]

-0.04
[0.10]

-0.04
[0.06]

0.00
[0.11]

Aspire to Upgrade Housing
Quality Materials In-situ

0.16
(0.02)

0.11
(0.03)

0.00
(0.04)

0.11
(0.02)

0.12
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.03)

0.14
[0.03]

0.11
[0.01]

0.03
[0.04]

0.16
[0.04]

0.11
[0.02]

0.05
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Floor Quality

0.15
(0.02)

0.19
(0.03)

0.01
(0.04)

0.21
(0.02)

0.27
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.03)

0.16
[0.03]

0.23
[0.06]

-0.07
[0.07]

0.15
[0.03]

0.21
[0.05]

-0.05
[0.06]

Satisfaction with Wall Quality

0.11
(0.02)

0.15
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.04)

0.15
(0.02)

0.18
(0.02)

0.00
(0.03)

0.12
[0.02]

0.16
[0.04]

-0.04
[0.04]

0.11
[0.03]

0.15
[0.04]

-0.04
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Roof Quality

0.14
(0.02)

0.20
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.04)

0.16
(0.02)

0.17
(0.02)

0.03
(0.03)

0.16
[0.02]

0.16
[0.03]

0.00
[0.04]

0.14
[0.02]

0.16
[0.04]

-0.02
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Rain Protection

0.13
(0.02)

0.19
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.04)

0.15
(0.02)

0.14
(0.02)

0.01
(0.03)

0.15
[0.03]

0.14
[0.01]

0.00
[0.03]

0.13
[0.03]

0.15
[0.02]

-0.01
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Quality of Life

0.24
(0.02)

0.20
(0.03)

0.01
(0.04)

0.25
(0.02)

0.31
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.04)

0.23
[0.03]

0.28
[0.04]

-0.05
[0.05]

0.24
[0.03]

0.25
[0.04]

-0.01
[0.05]

Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)

56.03
(3.86)

61.17
(5.38)

-3.88
(7.86)

65.25
(4.86)

81.11
(7.51)

-17.32*
(10.47)

60.00
[4.55]

69.53
[4.60]

-9.54
[6.34]

57.74
[5.74]

65.25
[5.69]

-7.51
[7.93]

Head’s Years of Schooling

4.81
(0.18)

5.53
(0.27)

-0.26
(0.31)

5.55
(0.17)

4.79
(0.18)

0.47*
(0.24)

5.04
[0.60]

5.19
[0.33]

-0.15
[0.67]

4.81
[0.52]

5.55
[0.23]

-0.74
[0.56]

Head is Male

0.61
(0.03)

0.63
(0.04)

-0.03
(0.05)

0.57
(0.03)

0.63
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.04)

0.62
[0.04]

0.60
[0.05]

0.02
[0.06]

0.61
[0.05]

0.57
[0.05]

0.04
[0.07]

Head’s Age

41.52
(0.78)

39.93
(1.01)

1.61
(1.33)

39.84
(0.78)

39.46
(0.90)

1.17
(1.21)

41.00
[1.43]

39.66
[0.79]

1.34
[1.59]

41.52
[1.61]

39.84
[0.70]

1.68
[1.71]

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
No
No
Note: This table reports baseline means and differences in means of the urban sample. For Phase I and Phase II main columns, differences in means
are estimated by regressions that include slum fixed effects, and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. For the Phase I vs Phase II
main columns, standard errors clustered at the slum level are reported in brackets. Monetary variables in US dollars as of June 2007. In the case
of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

46

Table A5:

Baseline Balance Within and Between Phases - Rural Only
Phase I

Phase I vs Phase II
All

Phase II

Phase I vs Phase II
Only Treatments

Dependent Variable

Treat.

Control

Diff.

Treat.

Control

Diff.

Phase I

Phase II

Diff.

Phase I

Phase II

Diff.

Years living in the slum

13.63
(1.36)

15.37
(1.57)

-0.52
(1.91)

15.92
(0.82)

14.56
(0.74)

1.88*
(1.11)

14.36
[3.16]

15.23
[1.32]

-0.88
[3.36]

13.63
[3.19]

15.92
[1.42]

-2.30
[3.43]

Z-score Housing Quality
Summary Index

-0.08
(0.06)

0.00
(0.05)

-0.07
(0.08)

0.06
(0.04)

0.00
(0.03)

0.06
(0.05)

-0.05
[0.06]

0.03
[0.03]

-0.08
[0.06]

-0.08
[0.09]

0.06
[0.06]

-0.14
[0.11]

Aspire to Upgrade Housing
Quality Materials In-situ

0.18
(0.03)

0.23
(0.05)

-0.09
(0.07)

0.13
(0.03)

0.12
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.04)

0.20
[0.04]

0.12
[0.03]

0.07
[0.05]

0.18
[0.05]

0.13
[0.05]

0.05
[0.07]

Satisfaction with Floor Quality

0.26
(0.03)

0.24
(0.04)

0.03
(0.05)

0.30
(0.02)

0.28
(0.02)

0.03
(0.03)

0.25
[0.04]

0.29
[0.05]

-0.04
[0.06]

0.26
[0.05]

0.30
[0.05]

-0.04
[0.07]

Satisfaction with Wall Quality

0.21
(0.03)

0.21
(0.03)

0.00
(0.04)

0.18
(0.02)

0.15
(0.02)

0.05*
(0.03)

0.21
[0.04]

0.17
[0.03]

0.05
[0.05]

0.21
[0.05]

0.18
[0.03]

0.03
[0.06]

Satisfaction with Roof Quality

0.20
(0.03)

0.19
(0.03)

0.00
(0.04)

0.16
(0.02)

0.16
(0.02)

0.01
(0.03)

0.20
[0.04]

0.16
[0.03]

0.04
[0.05]

0.20
[0.04]

0.16
[0.03]

0.04
[0.05]

Satisfaction with Rain Protection

0.19
(0.03)

0.18
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.04)

0.15
(0.02)

0.13
(0.02)

0.04
(0.03)

0.19
[0.04]

0.14
[0.03]

0.05
[0.05]

0.19
[0.05]

0.15
[0.03]

0.04
[0.06]

Satisfaction with Quality of Life

0.34
(0.03)

0.31
(0.04)

0.03
(0.05)

0.30
(0.02)

0.24
(0.02)

0.05
(0.03)

0.33
[0.03]

0.27
[0.04]

0.06
[0.05]

0.34
[0.04]

0.30
[0.04]

0.05
[0.05]

Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)

38.57
(2.65)

58.12
(7.16)

-12.76*
(7.28)

41.48
(2.30)

45.44
(2.34)

-1.55
(3.05)

42.68
[4.41]

44.23
[4.51]

-1.55
[6.22]

38.57
[4.11]

42.21
[3.80]

-3.63
[5.53]

Head’s Years of Schooling

3.00
(0.20)

2.88
(0.25)

0.32
(0.28)

3.33
(0.16)

3.17
(0.16)

0.07
(0.23)

2.96
[0.48]

3.25
[0.22]

-0.29
[0.52]

3.00
[0.46]

3.33
[0.30]

-0.33
[0.54]

Head is Male

0.81
(0.02)

0.77
(0.03)

0.03
(0.05)

0.79
(0.02)

0.76
(0.02)

0.01
(0.03)

0.80
[0.02]

0.78
[0.02]

0.02
[0.03]

0.81
[0.02]

0.79
[0.02]

0.02
[0.03]

Head’s Age

42.94
(1.06)

43.09
(1.19)

-0.91
(1.76)

42.41
(0.86)

41.70
(0.82)

0.87
(1.23)

43.00
[0.98]

42.05
[1.00]

0.95
[1.38]

42.94
[1.31]

42.41
[1.10]

0.53
[1.68]

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
No
No
Note: This table reports baseline means and differences in means of the rural sample. For Phase I and Phase II main columns, differences in means
are estimated by regressions that include settlement fixed effects, and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. For the Phase I vs Phase
II main columns, standard errors clustered at the slum level are reported in brackets. Monetary variables in US dollars as of June 2007. In the case
of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

47

Table A6:

Baseline Balance Between Phases at Slum Level
Urban

Rural

All

Phase I
Slums
Mean

Phase II
Slums
Mean

Mean
Diff.

Phase I
Slums
Mean

Phase II
Slums
Mean

Mean
Diff.

Phase I
Slums
Mean

Phase II
Slums
Mean

Mean
Diff.

Years living in the slum

11.75
(12.42)

12.49
(6.88)

-0.75
[4.02]

13.63
(12.08)

15.83
(6.54)

-2.21
[3.21]

12.82
(12.03)

14.79
(6.75)

-1.98
[2.48]

Z-score Housing Quality
Summary index

-0.02
(0.32)

0.01
(0.11)

-0.03
[0.10]

0.00
(0.25)

0.04
(0.16)

-0.04
[0.07]

-0.01
(0.27)

0.03
(0.15)

-0.04
[0.06]

Aspire to Upgrade Housing
Quality Materials In-situ

0.16
(0.11)

0.13
(0.06)

0.03
[0.04]

0.17
(0.09)

0.12
(0.12)

0.05
[0.05]

0.17
(0.10)

0.13
(0.10)

0.04
[0.03]

Satisfaction with Quality of Life

0.23
(0.11)

0.26
(0.12)

-0.04
[0.05]

0.37
(0.13)

0.29
(0.17)

0.08*
[0.04]

0.31
(0.14)

0.28
(0.15)

0.03
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Floor Quality

0.16
(0.09)

0.21
(0.17)

-0.05
[0.05]

0.27
(0.13)

0.29
(0.28)

-0.02
[0.06]

0.22
(0.13)

0.26
(0.25)

-0.04
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Wall Quality

0.12
(0.09)

0.15
(0.11)

-0.04
[0.04]

0.28
(0.19)

0.18
(0.17)

0.10*
[0.06]

0.21
(0.17)

0.17
(0.15)

0.04
[0.04]

Satisfaction with Roof Quality

0.13
(0.09)

0.15
(0.10)

-0.02
[0.04]

0.23
(0.12)

0.16
(0.16)

0.07
[0.04]

0.19
(0.12)

0.16
(0.15)

0.03
[0.03]

Satisfaction with Rain Protection

0.14
(0.09)

0.12
(0.07)

0.02
[0.03]

0.20
(0.13)

0.16
(0.16)

0.04
[0.04]

0.17
(0.11)

0.15
(0.14)

0.03
[0.03]

Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)

56.87
(16.16)

65.02
(20.94)

-8.14
[7.29]

47.11
(19.58)

49.27
(22.11)

-2.16
[6.28]

51.47
(19.02)

54.23
(22.93)

-2.76
[4.96]

Head’s Years of Schooling

4.37
(1.64)

4.71
(1.49)

-0.34
[0.62]

3.24
(1.68)

3.34
(1.18)

-0.10
[0.47]

3.73
(1.73)

3.77
(1.42)

-0.43
[0.39]

Head is Male

0.65
(0.15)

0.63
(0.18)

0.02
[0.06]

0.80
(0.11)

0.78
(0.10)

0.02
[0.03]

0.74
(0.15)

0.74
(0.15)

0.00
[0.04]

Head’s Age

43.07
(6.62)

41.28
(5.87)

1.79
[2.47]

43.46
(4.19)

43.47
(6.38)

-0.01
[1.55]

43.29
(5.26)

42.79
(6.24)

0.50
[1.36]

Slum Size (Number of Households)

48.50
(31.35)

44.57
(31.80)

3.93
[12.41]

25.81
(18.24)

24.32
(16.12)

1.49
[5.37]

35.54
(26.76)

30.62
(23.79)

4.91
[6.16]

Distance to TECHO Office (kms)

47.77
(57.36)

47.70
(34.52)

0.07
[19.53]

107.76
(48.32)

94.21
(32.45)

13.57
[13.64]

82.38
(59.47)

79.74
(39.29)

2.64
[13.01]

Dependent Variable

Sample Size (Number of Slums)
12
14
26
16
31
47
28
45
73
Note: This table reports baseline means and differences in means of Phase I and Phase II slums for urban, rural, and full
sample. Standard Deviations are reported in parenthesis and robust standard errors are reported in brackets. Monetary
variables in US dollars as of June 2007. In the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded.
*Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

48

Table A7:

The Rural-Urban Divide
Mean
Urban Slums

Mean
Rural Slums

Diff.

Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)

63.23
(76.62)

44.39
(44.10)

18.84***
(2.79)

Number of Rooms per Capita

0.73
(0.54)

0.69
(0.49)

0.03
(0.04)

Share of Rooms with Good Quality Floors

0.40
(0.43)

0.42
(0.42)

-0.02
(0.02)

Share of Rooms with Good Quality Walls

0.22
(0.36)

0.18
(0.30)

0.04***
(0.01)

Share of Rooms with Good Quality Roofs

0.33
(0.42)

0.33
(0.41)

0.00
(0.02)

Share of Rooms with Windows

0.46
(0.40)

0.22
(0.32)

0.24***
(0.01)

Aspire to Upgrade Housing Quality Materials In-situ

0.13
(0.33)

0.15
(0.36)

-0.02
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Floors Quality

0.20
(0.40)

0.27
(0.45)

-0.07***
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Walls Quality

0.14
(0.35)

0.18
(0.39)

-0.04**
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Roofs Quality

0.16
(0.37)

0.18
(0.38)

-0.01
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Protection against Rain

0.15
(0.35)

0.16
(0.37)

-0.01
(0.01)

Satisfaction with Quality of Life

0.25
(0.44)

0.29
(0.45)

-0.04**
(0.02)

Z-score Satisfaction Summary Index

0.02
(0.72)

0.07
(0.71)

-0.05*
(0.03)

Dependent Variable

Notes: This table reports baseline means, and differences in means between urban and rural slum
dwellers. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. Monetary variables in US dollars
as of June 2007. In the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were
excluded. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

49

Table A8:

Treatment Effect on Housing Quality and Housing Satisfaction, by Zone
Urban

Rural

Model 1

Model 2

Model 1

Model 2

Follow-Up
Control
Mean

Treat

Treat

Follow-Up
Control
Mean

Treat

Treat

Number of Rooms per Capita

0.79
(0.60)

0.01
(0.05)

0.00
(0.04)

0.69
(0.46)

0.04
(0.04)

0.03
(0.04)

Share Rooms Good Quality Floors

0.44
(0.44)

0.18***
(0.03)

0.19***
(0.03)

0.44
(0.43)

0.18***
(0.02)

0.18***
(0.03)

Share Rooms Good Quality Walls

0.43
(0.44)

0.15***
(0.03)

0.14***
(0.04)

0.23
(0.34)

0.25***
(0.02)

0.25***
(0.02)

Share Rooms Good Quality Roof

0.39
(0.42)

0.18***
(0.03)

0.18***
(0.03)

0.43
(0.41)

0.15***
(0.03)

0.15***
(0.03)

Share Rooms with Windows

0.46
(0.38)

0.14***
(0.03)

0.14***
(0.03)

0.24
(0.30)

0.21***
(0.02)

0.22***
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Floors Quality

0.36
(0.48)

0.13***
(0.04)

0.13***
(0.04)

0.37
(0.48)

0.26***
(0.04)

0.26***
(0.04)

Satisfaction with Walls Quality

0.27
(0.44)

0.21***
(0.04)

0.21***
(0.04)

0.27
(0.46)

0.36***
(0.04)

0.36***
(0.04)

Satisfaction with Roofs Quality

0.28
(0.45)

0.23***
(0.04)

0.23***
(0.04)

0.31
(0.46)

0.33***
(0.04)

0.33***
(0.04)

Satisfaction with Rain’s Protection

0.28
(0.45)

0.18***
(0.04)

0.17***
(0.04)

0.25
(0.43)

0.31***
(0.04)

0.31***
(0.04)

Dependent Variable

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
No
Yes
Note: We analyze urban and rural samples from Phase II (short treatment exposure), separately. Each
row represents a separate dependent variable. The first column reports the mean of the dependent variable
for the control group measured at follow-up. The next column, under the heading Model 1, reports the
results of a regression of the dependent variable on Treatment Assignment plus slum fixed effects. Reports
are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The next column, under the heading Model 2,
additionally control for the household head’s years living in the slum, years of schooling, gender and age, as
well as the value of household assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured
during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value,
we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates
that the control variable was missed. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

50

Table A9:

High vs Low Income Divide - Urban Only
Mean High
Income Status
(> p50)

Mean High
Income Status
(≤ p50)

Diff.

Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)

110.54
(94.39)

19.06
(11.49)

92.32***
(4.29)

Number of Rooms per Capita

0.84
(0.60)

0.56
(0.24)

0.19***
(0.07)

Share of Rooms with Good Quality Floors

0.39
(0.43)

0.38
(0.41)

0.01
(0.03)

Share of Rooms with Good Quality Walls

0.23
(0.37)

0.23
(0.36)

-0.02
(0.02)

Share of Rooms with Good Quality Roofs

0.32
(0.42)

0.31
(0.41)

0.00
(0.02)

Share of Rooms with Windows

0.47
(0.40)

0.43
(0.39)

0.01
(0.02)

Z-score Housing Quality Summary Index

-0.07
(0.79)

0.00
(0.76)

-0.06
(0.04)

Aspire to Upgrade Housing Quality Materials In-situ

0.14
(0.34)

0.13
(0.34)

0.01
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Floors Quality

0.20
(0.40)

0.15
(0.36)

0.04
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Walls Quality

0.12
(0.33)

0.13
(0.33)

0.00
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Roofs Quality

0.17
(0.37)

0.13
(0.34)

0.01
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Protection against Rain

0.16
(0.36)

0.11
(0.32)

0.05**
(0.02)

Satisfaction with Quality of Life

0.24
(0.42)

0.26
(0.44)

0.00
(0.03)

Z-score Satisfaction Summary Index

0.06
(0.74)

-0.02
(0.67)

0.05
(0.04)

Dependent Variable

Note: This table reports baseline means, and differences in means between urban households who
are above and below the median monthly income per capita at baseline, which is US$39. Robust
standard errors are reported in parenthesis. Monetary variables in US dollars as of June 2007. In
the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded. *Significant
at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

Table A10: Adaptation in Housing and Location Aspirations, by Income Status - Rural Only
High Income Status (> p50)
Model 1
Dependent Variable

“No-upgrade”

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Model 2

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

0.03
(0.05)

0.06
(0.09)
0.17

0.05
(0.05)

0.05
(0.09)
0.17

0.61
(0.49)

0.03
(0.06)

-0.08
(0.11)
0.61

0.03
(0.06)

-0.08
(0.11)
0.58

0.30
(0.46)

-0.06
(0.05)

-0.03
(0.08)
0.15

-0.07
(0.05)

-0.01
(0.08)
0.22

0.26
(0.44)

0.03
(0.06)

0.03
(0.10)
0.52

0.03
(0.06)

0.04
(0.11)
0.45

0.01
(0.08)

-0.01
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)
0.49

-0.01
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)
0.47

0.02
(0.12)

0.00
(0.01)

0.01
(0.04)
0.76

0.00
(0.01)

0.01
(0.05)
0.79

0.13
(0.33)

0.03
(0.03)

-0.05
(0.06)
0.70

0.03
(0.03)

-0.06
(0.06)
0.54

0.11
(0.32)

-0.06
(0.04)

0.03
(0.06)
0.67

-0.06
(0.04)

0.03
(0.07)
0.59

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Out-of-slum-upgrade”

Model 1

0.57
(0.50)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Move-to-another-slum”

Model 2

Cont.

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Within-slum-upgrade”

Low Income Status (≤ p50)

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
No
Yes
Note: Only rural sample is considered. Each row represents a separate dependent variable. The analysis is divided into two income
sub-groups defined by whether the baseline monthly income per capita is below or above the median in the income distribution of
the urban sample. The first column reports the mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable for the treatment group
measures at follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a regression of the dependent
variable on Control Assignment and Control Assignment interacted with Phase I plus slum fixed effects. Reports are the estimated
coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns, Model 2, additionally control for the household head’s Years of
Schooling, Gender, Age, Years living in the slum, as well as the value of household assets per capita, monthly income per capita,
and whether the household’s head aspires to upgrade housing quality materials in-situ, all measured during the baseline round.
Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy
variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we report the p-values of
F-tests of the null hypothesis that γ1 + γ2 = 0 for each model. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

52

Table A11:

Adaptation in Housing and Location Aspirations, by Country - Urban Only
“Out-of-slum-upgrade”

“Within-slum-upgrade”
Model 1
Country

Sample
Size

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Model 2

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

Model 1
Sample
Size

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Model 2

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

El Salvador

140

0.28
(0.45)

0.05
(0.15)

-0.13
(0.15)

0.04
(0.15)

-0.17
(0.17)

140

0.05
(0.22)

-0.06
(0.06)

0.18
(0.15)

-0.04
(0.07)

0.16
(0.16)

Uruguay

708

0.12
(0.33)

0.10***
(0.04)

-0.10*
(0.06)

0.10**
(0.04)

-0.09
(0.06)

708

0.64
(0.48)

-0.11**
(0.05)

0.16**
(0.08)

-0.11**
(0.05)

0.16**
(0.08)

Mexico

248

0.31
(0.47)

0.08
(0.08)

-0.15
(0.13)

0.11
(0.08)

-0.24*
(0.13)

248

0.18
(0.39)

-0.12*
(0.06)

0.20*
(0.10)

-0.13**
(0.06)

0.21**
(0.10)

1,096

0.19
(0.39)

0.09***
(0.03)

-0.11**
(0.05)

0.09**
(0.03)

-0.11**
(0.05)

1,096

0.46
(0.50)

-0.11***
(0.04)

0.17***
(0.06)

-0.11***
(0.04)

0.17***
(0.06)

All Countries

p-value for F-test
of Pooling Countries

0.60

0.65

0.91

0.84

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Slum Fixed Effects
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
No
Yes
Note: Each row represents a separate country. Only urban households are considered. For each aspiration variable, the first column reports the
sample size. The second column reports the mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable for the treatment group measures at follow-up.
The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a regression of the dependent variable on Control Assignment and Control
Assignment interacted with Phase I plus slum fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns,
Model 2, additionally control for the household head’s Years of Schooling, Gender, Age, Years living in the slum, as well as the value of household
assets per capita, monthly income per capita, all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has
a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable
was missed. Additionally, we report the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that γ1 + γ2 = 0 for each model. Finally we report the p-values of
F-tests of the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficients on Control and the estimated coefficient on Control × Phase I are jointly equal to all
countries for models 1 and 2. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

53

Table A12:

Adaptation in Housing Quality - Urban Only
Model 1

Dependent Variable

Number of Rooms per Capita

Follow-Up
Control
Mean

0.80
(0.55)

Treat

Treat
× Phase I

Treat

Treat
× Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

0.01
(0.05)

0.07
(0.07)

0.00
(0.04)

0.07
(0.07)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
Share Rooms Good Quality Floors

0.16
0.43
(0.43)

0.18***
(0.03)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
Share Rooms Good Quality Walls

0.44
(0.44)

-0.04
(0.05)

0.15***
(0.03)

0.19***
(0.03)

0.38
(0.42)

-0.03
(0.06)

0.18***
(0.03)

0.14***
(0.04)

-0.03
(0.05)

0.14***
(0.03)

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

0.18***
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.05)
0.00

-0.02
(0.04)
0.00

-0.02
(0.06)
0.00

0.00
0.49
(0.37)

-0.04
(0.05)
0.00

0.00

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
Share Rooms with Windows

0.17

0.00

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
Share Rooms Good Quality Roof

Model 2

0.14***
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.04)
0.00

Yes
Yes
Slum Fixed Effects
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
Note: Only urban households are considered. Each row represents a separate dependent variable.
The first column reports the mean of the dependent variable for the control group measured at
follow-up. The next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a regression
of the dependent variable on Treatment Assignment and Treatment Assignment interacted with
Phase I plus slum fixed effects. Reports are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors.
The last two columns, under the heading Model 2, additionally control for the household head’s
years living in the slum, years of schooling, gender and age, as well as the value of household
assets per capita and monthly income per capita, all of which were measured during the baseline
round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute
a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates
that the control variable was missed. Finally, we report the p-values of the F-tests of the null
hypothesis γ1 + γ2 = 0. *Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

54

Table A13: Adaptation in Housing and Location Aspirations
in the presence of potential wear-and-tears of the house - Urban Only

Model 1
Dependent Variable

“No-upgrade”

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

0.34
(0.48)

0.02
(0.04)

-0.08
(0.06)
0.22

0.02
(0.04)

-0.07
(0.06)
0.24

0.16
(0.37)

0.07*
(0.03)

-0.10**
(0.05)
0.37

0.07*
(0.04)

-0.10**
(0.05)
0.31

0.02
(0.12)

0.01
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)
0.13

0.01
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)
0.13

0.48
(0.50)

-0.10** 0.16***
(0.04)
(0.06)
0.17

-0.09**
(0.04)

0.16***
(0.06)
0.16

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Within-slum-upgrade”
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Move-to-another-slum”
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Out-of-slum-upgrade”
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

Model 2

Yes
Yes
Slum Fixed Effects
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
Note: Only urban households are considered. Each row represents a separate
dependent variable. The first column reports the mean and standard deviation
of the dependent variable for the treatment group measured at follow-up. The
next two columns, under the heading Model 1, report the results of a regression
of the dependent variable on Control Assignment and Control Assignment interacted with Phase I plus slum fixed effects and a set of housing quality measures
including number of rooms, share of rooms with good quality floors, share of
rooms with good quality walls, share of rooms with good quality roofs, share
of rooms with windows, all measured at the follow-up round. Reports are the
estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns, Model
2, additionally control for the household head’s Years of Schooling, Gender, Age,
Years living in the slum, as well as the value of household assets per capita, and
monthly income per capita, and whether the household’s head aspires to upgrade
housing quality materials in-situ, all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we
impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally, we report
the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that γ1 + γ2 = 0 for each model.
*Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

55

Table A14:

Adaptation in Housing and Location Expectations - Urban Only
Model 1

Dependent Variable

“No-upgrade” (Expectation)

Follow-Up
Treat.
Mean

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

Cont.

Cont. ×
Phase I

γ1

γ2

γ1

γ2

0.62
(0.49)

-0.03
(0.04)

0.07
(0.07)
0.45

-0.03
(0.04)

0.08
(0.07)
0.38

0.09
(0.29)

0.03
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.04)
0.58

0.03
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.04)
0.68

0.02
(0.15)

0.01
(0.01)

-0.02
(0.02)
0.47

0.01
(0.01)

-0.02
(0.02)
0.41

0.27
(0.44)

-0.01
(0.04)

-0.04
(0.06)
0.32

0.00
(0.04)

-0.04
(0.06)
0.33

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Within-slum-upgrade” (Expectation)
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Move-to-another-slum” (Expectation)
p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)
“Out-of-slum-upgrade” (Expectation)

Model 2

p-value (γ1 + γ2 = 0)

Slum Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Baseline Covariates
No
Yes
Note: Only urban households are considered. Each row represents a separate dependent
variable. The first column reports the mean and standard deviation of the dependent
variable for the treatment group measures at follow-up. The next two columns, under the
heading Model 1, report the results of a regression of the dependent variable on Control
Assignment and Control Assignment interacted with Phase I plus slum fixed effects. Reports
are the estimated coefficients and robust standard errors. The last two columns, Model 2,
additionally control for the household head’s Years of Schooling, Gender, Age, Years living
in the slum, as well as the value of household assets per capita, monthly income per capita,
and whether the household’s head aspires to upgrade housing quality materials in-situ, all
measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control
variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal
to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. Finally,
we report the p-values of F-tests of the null hypothesis that γ1 + γ2 = 0 for each model.
*Significant at 10%. **Significant at 5%. ***Significant at 1%.

56

Table A15:

Description of Variables and Sample Sizes. Follow-Up Survey
Phase I

Variable

Description

Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)

Monthly Income per capita in US dollars as of July 2007.
It is calculated as the sum of the monthly earnings
of each household’s member divided by the household size.
Total Assets Value per capita in US dollars as of July 2007.
It is calculated as the sum of the value of each household’s asset
from a list of 20 items divided by the household size.
Age of head of household in years.
Indicator equal to one if the head of household is a man.
Years of Schooling of head of household equivalent to the
higher level of education reached.
Hours worked last week by Head of Household.
Hours worked last week by the Spouse of Head of Households.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being “Satisfied”
or “Very satisfied” with the quality of floors, measured by a Likert
scale of 4 categories: “Unsatisfied”, “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”,
“Satisfied”, and “Very Satisfied”.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being “Satisfied”
or “Very satisfied” with the quality of walls, measured by a Likert
scale of 4 categories: “Unsatisfied”, “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”,
“Satisfied”, and “Very Satisfied”.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being “Satisfied”
or “Very satisfied” with the quality of roofs, measured by a Likert
scale of 4 categories: “Unsatisfied”, “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”,
“Satisfied”, and “Very Satisfied”.
Indicator equal to one if respondent reports being “Satisfied”
or “Very satisfied” with the houses’ protection against water
when it rains, measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories:
“Unsatisfied”, “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”,
“Satisfied”, and “Very Satisfied”.
Indicator equal to one if respondent reports being “Satisfied”
or “Very satisfied” with the quality of life, measured by a Likert
scale of 4 categories: “Unsatisfied”, “Neither Satisfied nor Unsatisfied”,
“Satisfied”, and “Very Satisfied”.
Proportion of rooms with floors made of good quality materials
like cement, brick, or wood (observed by the enumerator).
Proportion of rooms with walls made of good quality materials
like wood, cement, brick or zinc metal (observed by the
enumerator).
Proportion of rooms with roofs made of good quality materials
like cement, brick, tile and zinc metal (observed by the
enumerator).
Proportion of rooms with at least one window (observed
by the enumerator).
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports to
aspire to stay and keep the same housing conditions within the slum.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports to
aspire to upgrade housing conditions and get own land within the slum.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports to
aspire to move to another slum.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports to
aspire to upgrade housing conditions and get own land outside of a slum.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports to
expect to stay and keep the same housing conditions within the slum
during the next 5 years.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports to
expect to upgrade housing conditions and get own land within the slum
during the next 5 years.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports to
expect to move to another slum
during the next 5 years.
Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports to
expect to upgrade housing conditions and get own land outside of a slum
during the next 5 years.

Assets Value Per Capita (USD)

Head of HH’s Age
Head of HH’s Gender
Head of HH’s Years of Schooling
Hours worked last week by Head
Hours worked last week by Spouse
Satisfaction with Floor Quality

Satisfaction with Wall Quality

Satisfaction with Roof Quality

Satisfaction with Rain Protection

Satisfaction with Quality of Life

Share Rooms Good Quality Floors
Share Rooms Good Quality Walls

Share Rooms Good Quality Roof

Share Rooms with Windows
“No-upgrade”
“Within-slum-upgrade”
“Move-to-another-slum”
“Out-of-slum-upgrade”
“No-upgrade” (Expectation)

“Within-slum-upgrade” (Expectation)

“Move-to-another-slum” (Expectation)

“Out-of-slum-upgrade” (Expectation)

Phase II

All

Obs.
Control

Obs.
Treat.

Obs.
Control

Obs.
Treat.

Obs.
Control

Obs.
Treat.

265

513

532

557

797

1,070

281

543

562

595

843

1,138

312
316
313

601
610
594

618
625
609

651
658
649

930
941
922

1,252
1,268
1,243

230
107
313

469
190
606

469
143
623

504
179
657

699
250
936

973
369
1,263

313

607

623

657

936

1,264

313

607

623

657

936

1,264

313

607

623

657

936

1,264

293

584

622

644

915

1,228

312

608

625

658

937

1,266

316

610

621

658

937

1,268

315

609

623

657

938

1,266

315

610

625

658

940

1,268

313

599

620

653

933

1,252

313

599

620

653

933

1,252

313

599

620

653

933

1,252

313

599

620

653

933

1,252

313

599

620

653

933

1,252

313

599

620

653

933

1,252

313

599

620

653

933

1,252

313

599

620

653

933

1,252

Appendix B. The TECHO Program: Description and slums sample design
(For Online Publication)
The TECHO Program. The TECHO program provides basic, pre-fabricated, transitional houses to extremely poor families living in informal settlements (or the so-called
“slums”) in Latin America regardless of whether or not they own the land on which they
live. The aim of this program is to increase the well-being of these families. The program
started 21 years ago in Chile and now works in more than 20 Latin American countries.
This NGO has built more than 100,000 houses with the help of an army of volunteers.
Every year, more than 30,000 youths throughout Latin America volunteer to work with
TECHO.
TECHO targets the poorest informal settlements and, within these settlements, households that are lodged in very substandard dwellings. TECHO serves “irregular settlements,” which are defined as communities in which a majority of the families are living on
plots of land that they do not own. These settlements are plagued by a host of problems,
including insufficient access to basic utilities (water, electricity and sanitation), significant
levels of soil and water contamination, and overcrowding. The typical housing units in
these informal settlements are no better than the surrounding dwellings, as they are rudimentary units constructed from discarded materials such as cardboard, tin and plastic,
have dirt floors and lack connections to basic utilities such as water supply and sewerage
systems.
The TECHO housing units are 18 square meters (6m by 3m) in size. The walls are
made of pre-fabricated, insulated pinewood or aluminum panels, and the roofs are made
of tin to keep occupants warm and protect them from humidity, insects, and rain. Floors
are built on top of 15 stacks that raise them up to between 30 and 80 centimeters off the
ground in order to reduce dampness and protect occupants from floods and infestations.
Although these houses are a major improvement over the recipients’ previous dwellings,
the amenities that they offer are limited, as they do not include a bathroom or kitchen or
plumbing, drinking water hook-ups or gas connections.
The houses are designed to be low in cost and easy to construct; they can be placed
on a plot of land next to an existing house or as a new unit that replaces the existing
one. Units are modular and portable, can be built with simple tools, and are set up by
volunteers working in squads of from 4 to 8 members. The cost of a TECHO house is less
than US$1,000 - with the bulk of the cost being accounted for by the acquisition, storage
and transportation of the building materials, since there are essentially no labor costs.
The beneficiary family contributes 10% of that amount (around US$100) under a scheme
of flexible payments over time that allows the families to smooth consumption. In El
Salvador, US$100 is approximately equivalent to 3.3 months’ per capita baseline earnings,
while in Mexico and Uruguay, it is roughly equivalent to 1.6 and 1.4 months, respectively.
Figure B1 shows examples of the TECHO houses. Importantly, in addition to the fact
that the TECHO house is heavily subsidized, there are no exact substitutes of TECHO
houses on the market that households could be investing in incrementally. TECHO does
not offer these houses on the market but instead makes them available only to selected

58

Figure B1: TECHO House

slum dwellers living under the poorest conditions. Consequently, even if households did not
face credit constraints that hampered their access to housing improvements, they would
not have access to houses of the type or at the price offered by the TECHO program.
Finally, the TECHO houses are easy to disassemble and move to a new location. It is
important for the houses to be movable because most of the families in these makeshift
settlements do not have formal title to the land that they live on. TECHO managers were
concerned that upgrading the value of the land by building permanent housing might
induce both public and private owners to try to force residents to move in order to reclaim
the improved land. However, making the housing mobile does away with that incentive.
Slum Sample Design. The experiment was conducted in three countries: El Salvador, Mexico, and Uruguay. The TECHO program’s budget and personnel constraints
limit the number of housing units that can be built at any one time, which in turn constrained the size of the sample used in our study in each country. Under these constraints,
TECHO opted to select beneficiaries through a lottery system that gives all eligible households in each selected slum an equal opportunity to receive the housing upgrade in a given
year.
TECHO first selected a set of eligible slums and then conducted a census to identify
eligible households within each slum (i.e., those poor enough to be given priority). Eligible
settlements are slums where: (i) at least 50% of the residents do not have land title,
and/or (ii) the majority of slum dwellers lack access to at least one of the following three
basic services: electricity, drinking water or sanitation. Settlements where TECHO had
intervened in the past were considered ineligible and were not included in our sample of
study.
In El Salvador, we first randomly selected 6 departments (excluding San Salvador),
then randomly selected municipalities within each selected state, and then TECHO did a
census of eligible settlements within each selected municipality. In the case of Mexico, we
first randomly selected 16 municipalities within Estado de Mexico, and then TECHO did
a census of eligible slums within each selected municipality, all of which were considered in
the sample. Finally, in the case of Uruguay, since most of the municipalities in Montevideo

59

Figure B2: Map of Evaluation Sites

Department included settlements in which TECHO had already worked, the sampling was
non-random and based on a census of settlements where TECHO had not implemented
the program in the past. For a map of the regions where the settlements included in the
study are located in each country, see Figure B2.
The locations of the settlements in El Salvador are somewhat different than the sites in
the other two countries. In El Salvador, TECHO works in poor areas scattered throughout
the country, but not in the country’s main urban center of San Salvador. In contrast, the
TECHO intervention sites are concentrated closer to the largest urban centers in the
other two countries. In Mexico, this includes urban and rural slums in Estado de Mexico
located adjacent to Mexico City and, in Uruguay, only urban slums located in and around
Montevideo.

60

