                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                         RANDOMIZING RELIGION:
      THE IMPACT OF PROTESTANT EVANGELISM ON ECONOMIC OUTCOMES

                                       Gharad T. Bryan
                                        James J. Choi
                                         Dean Karlan

                                     Working Paper 24278
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24278


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2018


This study was registered, along with a pre-analysis plan, in the American Economic Association
Registry for randomized control trials under trial number AEARCTR-0001060. Institutional
Review Board approval by Innovations for Poverty Action (#1185), NBER (#17_116), and
Yale University (#1410014779). For funding, we thank the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
for funding related and overlapping data collection on access to savings, Celia and Joseph
Grenny, NIH grant P01AG005842, and the Yale University Economic Growth Center. We
thank Sachet Bangia, Nate Barker, Leah Bridle, Samantha Horn, Rebecca Hughes, Marius
Karabaczek, Sana Khan, Megan McGuire, Neil Mirochnick, Isabel Oñate, Nassreena
Sampaco-Baddiri, Cornelius Saunders, Martin Sweeney, and Sneha Stephen from
Northwestern University and Innovations for Poverty Action for research assistance and
management support. We thank Peter Aronow, Latika Chaudhary, Gregory Cox, Dan
Hungerman, Laurence Iannaccone, Jared Rubin, and numerous seminar audiences for
helpful comments. We thank Lincoln Lau, David Sutherland, Peter Nitchke, Daniel Mayhugh,
Zaldy Rodriguez, the ICM Metrics team, Danilo Mijares and the ICM Bacolod staff, Lilian
Barinas and the ICM Dumaguete staff, Jonathan Sanchez and the ICM Koronadal staff, and
Evren Managua and the ICM General Santos staff for their collaboration, patience, flexibility,
and curiosity throughout the design and implementation of this study. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Gharad T. Bryan, James J. Choi, and Dean Karlan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Randomizing Religion: The Impact of Protestant Evangelism on Economic Outcomes
Gharad T. Bryan, James J. Choi, and Dean Karlan
NBER Working Paper No. 24278
February 2018
JEL No. D12,I30,O12,Z12

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the causal impact of religiosity through a randomized evaluation of an evangelical
Protestant Christian values and theology education program delivered to thousands of ultra-poor
Filipino households. Six months after the program ended, treated households have higher
religiosity and income; no statistically significant differences in total labor supply, consumption,
food security, or life satisfaction; and lower perceived relative economic status. Exploratory
analysis suggests that the income treatment effect may operate through increasing grit. Thirty
months after the program ended, significant differences in the intensity of religiosity disappear,
but those in the treatment group are less likely to be Catholic and more likely to be Protestant,
and there is some mixed evidence that their consumption and perceived relative economic status
are higher.

Gharad T. Bryan                                  Dean Karlan
London School of Economics                       Kellogg Global Hub
Houghton Street                                  Northwestern University
London WC2A 2AE                                  2211 Campus Drive
United Kingdom                                   Evanston, IL 60208
g.t.bryan@lse.ac.uk                              and CEPR
                                                 and also NBER
James J. Choi                                    dean.karlan@gmail.com
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24278
                                                 I. INTRODUCTION
     A literature dating back at least to Adam Smith and Max Weber has argued that religiosity is
associated with a set of characteristics that promote economic success, including diligence,
thriftiness, trust, and cooperation (Iannaccone 1998; Iyer 2016). More recent research has linked
religiosity to positive outcomes in domains such as physical health (Ellison 1991), crime rates
(Freeman 1986), drug and alcohol use (Gruber and Hungerman 2008), income (Gruber 2005), and
educational attainment (Freeman 1986; Gruber 2005). Other studies have argued for negative
economic effects of some aspects of religiosity due to a focus on otherworldliness (Weber [1905]
1958 in his discussion of Catholicism) and substitution toward church attendance away from
production (Barro and McCleary 2003). Despite extensive research, claims that religion causes
outcomes remain controversial, in part because people choose their religion. Naturally occurring
religious affiliation is likely to be correlated with unobserved personal characteristics, which may
be the true drivers of the observed correlations. Iannaccone (1998) writes that “nothing short of a
(probably unattainable) ‘genuine experiment’ will suffice to demonstrate religion’s causal impact.”
     To study the causal impact of religiosity, we partnered with International Care Ministries
(ICM), an evangelical Protestant anti-poverty organization founded by Filipino pastors that
operates through a local network of pastors in the Philippines, to conduct an evaluation that
randomly assigned invitations to attend Christian theology and values training. There are 285
million evangelical Christians in the world, comprising 13% of Christians and 36% of Protestants
(Hackett and Grim 2011). 1 ICM is representative of an important sector that attempts to generate
religiosity while alleviating poverty.
     ICM’s program, called Transform, normally consists of three components—Protestant
Christian theology, values, and character virtues (“V”), health behaviors (“H”), and livelihood
(i.e., self-employment) skills (“L”)—taught over 15 weekly meetings (plus a 16th meeting for a
graduation ceremony). Each meeting lasts 90 minutes, spending 30 minutes per component. ICM’s
leadership believes that the Values curriculum lies firmly in the mainstream of evangelical belief.
Between 2009 and 2017, 194,000 people participated in Transform. The basic structure of the

1
  The National Association of Evangelicals lists four defining characteristics of evangelical Christians that have been
identified by historian David Bebbington: “the belief that lives need to be transformed through a ‘born-again’
experience and a life long process of following Jesus,” “the expression and demonstration of the gospel in missionary
and social reform efforts,” “a high regard for and obedience to the Bible as the ultimate authority,” and “a stress on
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the cross as making possible the redemption of humanity.” (https://www.nae.net/what-
is-an-evangelical/, accessed April 20, 2018)


                                                          1
program, using a set series of classes outside of a Sunday worship service to evangelize, is a
common model. For example, over 24 million people in 169 countries have taken the evangelistic
Alpha course since 1977 (Bell 2013), and Samaritan’s Purse has enrolled 11 million children in
about 100 countries in its evangelistic Greatest Journey course since 2010 (Samaritan’s Purse
2017). Like Transform, these are courses of approximately a dozen sessions.
     We randomly assigned 320 communities (from which we selected 7,999 households) to
receive the full Transform curriculum (VHL), to receive only the Health and Livelihood
components of the curriculum (HL), to receive only the Christian values component of the
curriculum (V), or to be a no-curriculum control (C). (Our experimental design was such that the
total amount of religious outreach done by ICM was unaffected during the course of our study.
We discuss ethical considerations regarding our study in Section VI.) We identify the effect of
religiosity by comparing invited households in VHL communities to invited households in HL
communities, and invited households in V communities to households in C communities that
would have been invited had that community been assigned to be treated.
     We measure outcomes approximately six months and 30 months after the training sessions
ended and analyze them in accordance with a pre-analysis plan. At six months, we find that those
who were invited to receive the V curriculum have significantly higher religiosity than those who
did not receive the V curriculum, demonstrating that the treatment had its intended first-stage
effect. Examining downstream economic outcomes while correcting for multiple hypothesis tests
by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR), we find that the V curriculum increased household
income by 9.2%, but had no statistically significant effect on total labor supply, assets,
consumption of a subset of goods, food security, or life satisfaction, and it decreased perceptions
of relative economic status within one’s community by 0.11 points on a 10 point scale. 2 Post-hoc
analysis shows that the income effect is strongly concentrated on the Transform invitee and is not




2
  In post-hoc analysis not contained in our pre-analysis plan, we find that the treatment effects on religiosity and
income remain statistically significant when we instead control for the family-wise error rate (FWER). We discuss in
Section IV.E.1 the conceptual differences between controlling the FDR versus the FWER. We do not combine all of
our outcomes into a single index and compute an unadjusted p-value for that index because the outcomes are not all
proxies for a single concept. If we were to find that half of our outcomes had positive treatment effects and the other
half had negative treatment effects of equivalent magnitude, we would not conclude that the treatment had zero effect.
An F-test of the outcomes jointly equaling zero would tell us whether the treatment had any statistically significant
effect, but it would not tell us which outcomes the treatment affected.


                                                          2
significant for other household members’ labor income, providing further support that the
estimated income effect is not a Type I error.
     Exploratory regressions suggest that the religiosity treatment effect operates by increasing grit
(Duckworth et al. 2007)—specifically, the portion of grit associated with perseverance of effort
(and in particular, agreement with the statements “I am a very hard worker,” “I finish whatever I
begin,” and “Setbacks don’t discourage me.”). This mechanism accords with Weber’s conception
of the Protestant work ethic. We find no consistent movement in the other potential mechanisms
that we measured: social capital, locus of control (other than the belief that God is in control, which
increases), optimism, and self-control. Furthermore, post-hoc analysis finds that the HL treatment
had no statistically significant effects on income or perceived relative economic status at six
months. 3 Because the HL treatment includes many of the non-religious aspects of the V
intervention (e.g., meeting in a group over a number of weeks), this null finding suggests that the
six-month V curriculum treatment effect primarily captures the impact of altered religiosity.
     By 30 months, there is no longer a statistically significant difference in the intensity of
religiosity between the experimental groups. However, individuals who received the V curriculum
are 3.6 percentage points less likely to identify as Catholic and 2.3 percentage points more likely
to identify as Protestant. To put these changes in context, the control group at 30 months is 70%
Catholic and 21% Protestant.
     There is mixed evidence on the effects on downstream economic outcomes. Relative to the
no-curriculum control, those who received only the V curriculum have a significantly higher
perceived relative economic status (0.34 points on a 10-point scale) and marginally significantly
higher consumption (7.5% of the control group mean, FDR q-value = 0.062). Exploration of the
mechanisms responsible for these positive effects finds that V curriculum recipients are more
optimistic, even though they do not have higher grit. On the other hand, we find no statistically
significant effects on primary economic outcomes when combining the VHL versus HL and V
versus control comparisons. This difference in findings is driven by the fact that the HL group
appears better off than the VHL group at 30 months. Relative to the no-curriculum control, the HL




3
  The p-value of the null hypothesis that receiving any HL curriculum has no effect is 0.299 for income (95%
confidence interval = [-2.8%, 9.0%]) and 0.395 for perceived relative economic status (95% confidence interval =
[-0.13, 0.05]).


                                                       3
group has significantly higher income and perceived relative economic status (in tests that do not
adjust for multiple comparisons).
    Interpreting these results requires an understanding of the context and details of the
intervention. ICM operates in a setting where most people claim to be religious. In the six-month
survey, only 2.4% of those who did not receive the V curriculum and 2.3% of those who did receive
the V curriculum indicate that they are “not religious at all.” Our experiment should therefore be
understood as measuring the effects of strengthening pre-existing religiosity or changing the
emphasis of pre-existing religious beliefs, rather than the effects of causing the completely
irreligious to become religious. Arguably, these intensive margin effects are the most relevant
ones, since 84% of the world’s population is religious (Pew Research Center 2015). It is also
important to note that ICM targets the ultra-poor within communities, and the communities in our
study (including those in the no-curriculum control) are chosen by pastors who presumably believe
that they would be able to run a successful program there. Most expansions by religious
organizations into a community are probably based on a belief that the community would be
receptive, so these are an externally relevant type of community. It is possible that the ultra-poor
are more receptive to religious outreach than less impoverished individuals (Chen 2010), so ICM’s
outreach may be more effective than comparable outreach to higher-income populations.
    In addition, religiosity is not a singular concept, and its causal impact will likely depend on
many factors. Johnson, Tompkin, and Webb (2008) differentiate between “organic” exposure to
religion over a prolonged period of time (e.g., through one’s upbringing at home) and “intentional”
exposure through participation in a specific program targeting a specific set of individuals. Both
are important channels of religious propagation, and the type of religiosity produced may depend
on the channel. Our study is about intentionally generated religiosity of a specific kind (evangelical
Protestant Christian), and a significant aim of our study is to establish, in the context of a
randomized controlled trial, that intentional exposure to a religious program can generate the
critical first stage: an exogenous change in religiosity.
    Our paper contributes to a recent literature that argues that non-cognitive skills are important
drivers of economic outcomes and can be improved through specific interventions (Duckworth et
al. 2007; Kautz et al. 2014; Blattman, Jamison, and Sheridan 2017). This body of work raises the
possibility that programs to improve non-cognitive skills might have large positive impacts on the
lives of the most disadvantaged people, but three obstacles need to be overcome to meet this goal.



                                                  4
First, with a few exceptions (e.g., Blattman, Jamison, and Sheridan 2017), existing studies
concentrate on high-income countries, while most of the world’s poorest people live in the
developing world. Even if we can assume that non-cognitive skills are similarly malleable in the
developing world, it is not clear that the environment and market structures allow for economic
gains. Second, much of the literature concentrates on children, and little is known about the ability
to improve the non-cognitive skills of adults, although Kautz et al. (2014) notes that non-cognitive
skills are more malleable later in life than cognitive skills. Finally, it is unclear whether
interventions that create large improvements can be delivered in a cost-effective, scalable manner.
Our results suggest that church-based programs might be a solution for building non-cognitive
skills. Church-based programs make use of a large existing infrastructure, teach a well-understood
and developed set of values, and are often low-cost because they leverage volunteer labor via the
intrinsic motivation of church members.
     Our work also relates to a growing number of papers that use instrumental variables or natural
experiments to study the causal effect of religion on economic outcomes. 4 Clingingsmith, Khwaja,
and Kremer (2009) find that winning a lottery for hajj visas changes beliefs, values, and religious
practices. Barro and McCleary (2003) conduct a cross-country analysis of economic growth using
the existence of a state religion, state regulation of religion, adherence shares for the major
religions, and a religious pluralism index as instruments. They find that religious beliefs
(“believing”) increase economic growth, whereas religious service attendance (“belonging”)
decreases growth. Because our study does not induce independent exogenous variation in beliefs
versus behaviors, we cannot add further evidence on this “believing versus belonging” hypothesis.
Gruber (2005) uses local ancestral mix as an instrument and finds that religious participation in
the U.S. (which is almost entirely Christian) increases education, income, and marriage rates and
decreases disability and divorce rates. Gruber and Hungerman (2008) exploit the repeal of U.S.
state laws prohibiting retail activity on Sundays and find that Christian religious participation
decreases drinking and drug use. Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2015) study the decline in Catholic
religious participation caused by clergy scandals and find evidence that religious participation
increases charitable giving.



4
 Laboratory experiments that study religious effects by exogenously varying the salience of religion include Shariff
and Norenzyan (2007), Mazar, Amir, and Ariely (2008), Hilary and Hui (2009), Horton, Rand, and Zeckhauser (2011),
and Benjamin, Choi, and Fisher (2016). See Shariff et al. (2016) for a review of the laboratory literature.


                                                         5
     Becker and Woessmann (2009) and Cantoni (2015) use geographic distance from Wittenberg,
where Martin Luther posted his Ninety-Five Theses, as an instrument for adoption of
Protestantism. Becker and Woessmann (2009) conclude that Protestantism does increase income,
but this can be entirely accounted for by its effect on literacy, whereas Cantoni (2015) finds no
impact on economic growth. Woodberry (2012) argues that Protestants’ desire for people to read
the Bible fostered mass education, mass printing, and civil society, making it more likely that a
country on the receiving end of high historical Protestant missionary activity is a democracy today.
Basten and Betz (2013) and Spenkuch (2017) use different peace treaties signed 500 years ago as
instruments for local Protestant versus Catholic share and find support for a Protestant work ethic.
     The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II describes ICM’s Transform
program, and Section III describes the experimental design. Section IV covers our six-month
survey. Section V discusses our 30-month survey, as well as a survey of pastors conducted in order
to examine whether the fading of the religiosity results at 30 months is due to the pastors engaging
with the control group after Transform ended. We discuss ethical considerations regarding our
study in Section VI, and Section VII concludes.


                                   II. THE ICM TRANSFORM PROGRAM

     Transform’s Values curriculum begins by teaching participants to recognize the goodness of
the material world and their own high worth as God’s creation. The theme then shifts towards
humanity’s rebellion against God and its negative consequences, while contrasting that with the
message that “believers of Jesus will discover joy in sorrow, strength in weakness, timely provision
in time of poverty, and peace in the midst of problems and pain.” (Transform does not, however,
teach prosperity theology—the belief that following God will guarantee economic prosperity and
physical health. 5) The Protestant doctrine of salvation by grace—people cannot earn their way into
heaven by performing good works, but can only be saved by putting their faith in Jesus, upon
which God forgives their sins as a free act of grace—is taught. The proper response to God’s grace
is to do good works out of gratitude. The final section of the curriculum covers what such good
works would be. They include stopping wasting money on gambling and drinking, saving money,


5
  The teacher’s manual for the Values curriculum says that “we also see ordinary and simple people who enthrone
God as their Lord and Savior discover the deep satisfaction and contentment that make them happy even in their
relative poverty.”


                                                      6
treating everyday work as “a sacred ministry,” and becoming active in a local church community.
Participants are encouraged to find hope in the midst of disasters through faith and generally see
that “life’s trials and troubles” are “God’s pruning knife” that will result in “more fruitfulness.”
In other words, the curriculum teaches students that their suffering has meaning and purpose, and
aims to build the ability to persevere through setbacks. These curricular elements dovetail with the
growing literature on non-cognitive skills that emphasizes the importance of characteristics like
conscientiousness, grit, resilience to adversity, self-esteem, and the ability to engage productively
in society (Kautz et al. 2014).
        The Health training focuses on building health knowledge and changing health and hygiene
practices in the household. Additionally, ICM staff identify participants experiencing
malnourishment and common health issues such as diarrhea, tuberculosis, and skin problems. They
then receive nutritional supplements (estimated to have market value of approximately 5 USD per
family per week), deworming pills, other medical treatments, and follow-up care. 6
        The Livelihood section of the program consists of training in small business management
skills, training in one of several different livelihood options (for example, an introduction to
producing compost through vermiculture), and being invited to a savings group. Minor agricultural
assistance is given in the form of small seed kits. These activities are intended to provide key tools
for achieving a more sustainable income and smoothing economic shocks.
        The Health and Livelihood components are led by two employees of ICM, while the religious
training is led by a local pastor following an ICM-provided curriculum. The local pastor is not
compensated by ICM but does receive training and support. Six lay volunteers from the pastor’s
church serve as counselors who offer support and encouragement to the participants.
        The teacher’s manuals used by ICM are available on the authors’ websites.


                                           III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

         For the experiment, ICM recruited 160 pastors to each choose two communities in which
(s)he did not already minister and that were at least ten kilometers away from each other. Selected
communities were required to be predominantly Catholic or Protestant—which meant that
Muslim-majority communities were excluded 7—and not to have been previously contacted by


6
    For a small number of households (fewer than 1%), ICM also arranges treatment for serious medical needs.
7
    There is only one ICM base (located in Mindanao) that is close to any communities that are predominantly Muslim.


                                                          7
ICM. Within each community, the pastor created a list of 40 households that (s)he considered the
poorest and thus eligible for participation in Transform, and interacted with these households to
assess their willingness to participate in the program, should it be launched in their village. The
pastor identified one member of the household—usually the female head of household or the
female spouse of the male head of household—as the potential invitee to Transform. ICM staff
then administered a poverty verification questionnaire, based on indicators such as the quality of
a home’s construction materials, access to electricity, clean water and sanitation, and household
income—most of which do not rely on self-reports. The previously identified individuals in the 30
households deemed poorest out of the 40 households were then invited to participate in the
program if their community was selected for treatment.
      The randomization was a two-stage clustered design. In the first stage, the pastors were
randomly assigned to either group VHL-C or group HL-V. In the second stage, pastors in group
VHL-C had one of their communities randomly assigned to receive the full Transform program
(VHL) and the other to be a no-treatment control (C). Pastors in group HL-V had one of their
communities randomly assigned to receive only the Health and Livelihood component of
Transform (HL), and the other to receive only the Christian values component of Transform (V). 8
We implemented this randomization scheme because each pastor had capacity to provide values
training in only one community, and thus the scheme allowed every invited pastor to be involved
in exactly one Transform implementation. The design also meant that the total amount of religious
outreach done by ICM was not altered due to the study. Since the treatments were assigned at the
community level, the estimated effect of the Values treatment on downstream economic outcomes
should be interpreted as the effect of increasing religious engagement for a group of individuals in
a community, rather than the effect for an isolated individual. We view this as a desirable feature,
since religion is most often experienced and practiced in a communal context.
      The four-month Transform program ran from February to May 2015. HL/VHL households
on average attended 8.9 class sessions, and 83% attended at least one. 9 Participants in the VHL
and HL treatment arms received nutritional supplements as described in Section II. Participants in
the V treatment arm received food assistance only for child malnutrition, and ICM estimates that


8
  Both HL and V communities were also assisted by six counselors recruited by the pastors prior to the random
assignment.
9
  ICM did not track attendance in the V group. If somebody was sent in the place of an invited individual, ICM
recorded that individual as present. We cannot distinguish these substitute attendances from regular attendances.


                                                       8
there were fewer than five such cases. ICM arranged treatment for serious medical needs in the
VHL, HL, and V arms (fewer than 1% of participants).
      ICM carried out the experimental implementation, independent of the researchers, although
the research team did the randomization. ICM covered the costs of the V and VHL treatments, but
the researchers raised funds to cover the costs of implementing the HL curriculum, as ICM’s
unrestricted donations were typically raised with the understanding that they would be used for
programs that included a religious component. Neither ICM nor its donors provided compensation
to the researchers.


                                           IV. SIX-MONTH SURVEY

IV.A. Data Collection, Six-Month Survey
     Approximately six months after Transform ended (between August 12, 2015, and January 14,
2016), we sent surveyors to the poorest 25 households selected by the pastors in each community. 10
Respondents were compensated with 100 PHP (about 2.5 USD), irrespective of whether they
completed the survey.
     To reduce the correlation between treatment assignment and social desirability bias in survey
responses, we used surveyors from Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA), a nonprofit research
organization that is independent from ICM. Respondents were not told of any relationship between
ICM and IPA, and the informed consent script introduced the survey as follows: “Hello, my name
is _____ with the research organization Innovations for Poverty Action. I am working to learn
about the economic and social conditions and well-being of families in the Philippines. You are
being invited to be one of the participants in this study. We expect the results from this survey will
help Filipino NGOs and international organizations to develop policies and procedures that
improve the lives of people.”
     As we will discuss in Section IV.B, we divide our outcomes into primary religious outcomes,
primary economic outcomes, mechanisms, and secondary outcomes. All of the questions about
primary economic outcomes came before the main religiosity questions. If these direct religiosity
questions caused subjects to discern a link between ICM and IPA, only some of the secondary
outcome and mechanism questions would have been affected. We did mention religion at three

10
  We sampled the 25 poorest households, rather than the full 30 identified by ICM, because of budget constraints and
the programmatic importance of measuring the impact on the poorer individuals within the sample.


                                                         9
points prior to measuring primary economic outcomes. First, the script for obtaining informed
consent said, “If you agree to participate in this study, we will ask you questions about your
household’s economic, health, social, and religious status.” Second, when constructing the
household roster, we asked about each household member’s relation to the head of the household,
permanence of his or her residence in the home, gender, age, religious denomination, marital
status, schooling, literacy, and work status. Third, we asked five list-randomized questions
(described in Section IV.B), two of which measure religiosity in an obscured way. Given the many
different characteristics mentioned in the informed consent script and measured in the household
roster, the obscured nature of the list-randomized questions, and the fact that only two of the five
list-randomized questions had religious content (which in turn was shown to only half the
respondents; see Section IV.B), we think it is unlikely that respondents would have inferred a link
to ICM when we were eliciting primary economic outcomes.
     Surveyors attempted to interview, in descending order of preference, (a) the person previously
identified as a potential Transform invitee, (b) the female head of household if the head of
household was female, (c) the female spouse/partner of the male head of household, or (d) the
person reporting to be responsible for health and household expense decisions. Out of 7,999
households targeted for surveying, we successfully surveyed 6,507 (81%); in 88% of these
households, the respondent was the potential/actual Transform invitee. Insurgent violence and
political opposition prevented the field teams from surveying in six communities (150 households),
and some households refused to be surveyed (60 households), could not be contacted (1,252
households), or suffered from survey data issues (30 households).
     Management data and internal control checks identified five instances (out of the 157 pastors
whose communities we surveyed) in which ICM and the pastor switched the assignments within a
community pair, treating one with what the other was supposed to receive, and vice versa. Because
of the paired randomization, we drop these five community pairs in our analysis without harming
internal validity. There was also one community that was supposed to receive the V treatment but
did not. We retain this community in our regressions (coded as a V community), since the
compliance issue was not present in both communities in the pair. 11 Thus, we only use data from



11
  We show in Online Appendix Tables 3-5 the main six-month regressions including the five pairs dropped in the
main regressions, using the assigned treatment status for each community. Online Appendix Tables 48-50 show
analogous regressions for the 30-month survey.


                                                     10
6,276 households in our main analyses. Online Appendix Table 1 shows that the attrition rate and
the number of days between program end and survey date do not differ significantly across the
four experimental groups.
      Before the intervention, we intended to conduct a baseline survey of the 7,999 households.
However, we underestimated the time this would take, and we were unable to delay the start of
Transform in order to complete the baseline survey. This means that we have baseline data on only
2,634 of the households. Online Appendix Table 1 shows that the four experimental groups are
well-balanced on characteristics measured in the six-month survey that are unlikely to have
changed in response to the treatment. Online Appendix Table 2 shows that in the subsample of
households we were able to survey at baseline and which are not in the excluded communities,
household income and respondent age, education, income, and religiosity at baseline do not predict
attrition from the six-month survey, but males are 4.8 percentage points less likely to be in the six-
month survey. 12
      We filed a pre-analysis plan with the American Economic Association RCT Registry before
seeing any follow-up data. In accordance with our first filing, we then examined the follow-up
data blinded to treatment assignment and filed a supplement to the pre-analysis plan. 13


IV.B. Outcome Variables, Six-Month Survey
      Our pre-analysis plan divided outcomes into primary religious outcomes, primary economic
outcomes, mechanisms, and secondary outcomes. Many of these outcome variables are indices,


12
   In unreported regressions, we find that when baseline characteristics are interacted with treatment assignment, these
interactions jointly predict attrition at six months at p < 0.05 for household income and p < 0.10 for respondent income,
education, and religiosity. The income interactions’ significance is driven by higher income predicting less attrition
in the HL group relative to the control group. The religiosity interaction’s significance is driven by higher religiosity
predicting more attrition from the VHL group relative to the control group. These would bias against our finding
positive income and religiosity effects of the Values curriculum. The education interaction’s significance is driven by
higher education predicting more attrition in the VHL group relative to the control group, which would again bias
against finding a positive Values curriculum income effect. However, this appears to have had a minor effect in
practice because average education is well-balanced between the VHL and control groups in the complete six-month
survey sample (p = 0.777; see Online Appendix Table 1).
13
   In accordance with the first phase of our pre-analysis plan, we analyzed the data stripped of treatment status. We
randomly generated treatment assignments and checked whether including control variables from the available
baseline observations reduced the standard errors of the coefficients on the randomly generated treatment dummies.
We did not find any efficiency gains, so we decided not to use the baseline survey in our final regressions. We do,
however, include controls for demographic variables that were collected after the intervention and which were unlikely
to be affected by the treatment. Online Appendix Tables 6-8 show the six-month treatment effect estimates on the
primary outcomes, mechanisms, and secondary outcomes if we additionally control for baseline survey measurements
and dummies for each of these baseline variable values being missing.


                                                          11
which we standardize so that the control group has zero mean and unit variance. If the index is
found in previous academic literature, we use the construction method from that literature, which
in our cases always involves simply summing the components (which are sometimes reverse-
coded). If there is no pre-existing index, we use the index construction methodology of Kling,
Liebman and Katz (2007). We first sign all component variables such that higher is telling a
consistent story for each component of the index. Then we standardize each component by
subtracting its control group mean and dividing by its control group standard deviation. We
compute the sum of the standardized components 14 and standardize the sum once again by the
control group sum’s standard deviation. Appendix Table A.1 shows all of the questions that
comprise each of our variables. Online Appendix Tables 12-40 show the treatment effect estimates
on each component of the outcome variables. 15
      The primary religious outcomes are the intrinsic religious orientation scale and the sum of the
two extrinsic religious orientation scales of Gorsuch and McPherson (1989), a general religion
index that consolidates responses to nine religious belief and practice questions, and the average
of two binary indicators for whether the respondent reports that “I have made a personal
commitment to Jesus Christ that is still important to me today” and “I have read or listened to the
Bible in the past week.” These last two binary indicators are elicited using list randomization, a
technique for eliciting responses to sensitive questions that conceals any given individual’s
response from the interviewer (Droitcour et al. 2011; Karlan and Zinman 2012). We do this to
minimize experimenter demand and social desirability effects. In a list-randomized elicitation,
participants are randomly selected to receive either a list of n non-sensitive statements or these
same n statements plus a sensitive statement. They are asked to answer how many of the statements
are true without specifying which ones are true. The difference in the average number of statements
reported to be true between participants who received n statements and n + 1 statements is the
estimated fraction of participants for whom the sensitive statement is true. 16


14
   For observations without information on one or more components of the index, we impute the missing component
standardized values as the mean of the non-missing components’ standardized values for that individual/household.
15
   We also include Online Appendix Table 41, which shows treatment effects on consumption of “temptation goods”
(cigarettes and alcoholic beverages).
16
   An individual’s answer about the sensitive statement can only be deduced if he or she answers 0 (implying falsity
of the sensitive statement) or n + 1 (implying truth of the sensitive statement). An individual can answer truthfully
about the longer list while being assured that her response to the sensitive statement is concealed if the number of non-
sensitive questions that are true for her is not 0 or n. Among respondents who did not receive the sensitive statement,



                                                          12
      After data collection, we discovered an issue with our measure of intrinsic religiosity. The
indices for intrinsic and extrinsic religious orientation were measured using one 14 question block,
with eight questions constituting the intrinsic index and six constituting the extrinsic index. For
each question, respondents were asked to state on a Likert scale a level of agreement with a
statement. In 11 out of the 14 questions, stronger agreement corresponds to stronger religiosity. In
the remaining three—all of which are part of the intrinsic index—weaker agreement corresponds
to stronger religiosity. We believe that respondents did not perceive the subtle changes in the
direction of the questions, causing them to use stronger agreement to express stronger religiosity
even for the reversed questions. 17 Agreement levels are positively correlated across all seven
intrinsic orientation statements, regardless of whether greater agreement corresponds to greater
religiosity or not. Because of this, we have chosen to exclude the three reversed questions from
the intrinsic index used for the main analysis. Our broad conclusions about the six-month treatment
effect on religiosity are unchanged by this choice. 18
      The primary economic outcomes are household expenditure on a sample of consumption
goods, a food security index, household income, total household adult labor supply in hours, an
index of life satisfaction, and perceived relative economic status.
     The mechanism outcomes are three measures of social capital (a general trust index, a strength
of social safety net index, and a participation in community activities index), three measures of a


the fraction who did not give a boundary response was 73% for the list associated with the commitment to Jesus
statement, and 80% for the list associated with the Bible statement. The corresponding percentages are 82%, 83%,
and 86% for the water treatment, hand washing, and domestic abuse questions, respectively. Therefore, the list-
randomization questions concealed the truth about the sensitive statements for the majority of our respondents.
17
   Thirty-three percent of respondents answered “agree” or “strongly agree” to all 14 questions, regardless of whether
the question was reversed, whereas only 0.02% of respondents answered “agree” or “strongly agree” to all non-
reversed questions and “disagree” or “strongly disagree” to all reversed questions. The finding that many subjects
indiscriminately agree with statements to express a general support for religion goes back to the earliest research on
intrinsic and extrinsic religious orientation. Allport and Ross (1967) argue, “In responding to the religious items these
individuals seem to take a superficial or ‘hit and run’ approach. Their mental set seems to be ‘all religion is good.’
‘My religious beliefs are what really lie behind my whole life’—Yes! ‘Although I believe in my religion, I feel there
are many more important things in my life’—Yes!” They classify such types as the “indiscriminately pro-religious”
and find that they are likely to be less educated.
18
   If we instead use the eight-question intrinsic measure, as stated in our pre-analysis plan, the point estimate of the
“Any V” treatment effect on intrinsic religious orientation in the pooled regression specification is 0.04 standard
deviations, and its q-value rises to 0.084. In the disaggregated regression specification, the point estimate of the V
versus control effect on intrinsic religious orientation is 0.01 standard deviations (q = 0.899), and the point estimate
of the VHL versus HL effect on intrinsic religious orientation is 0.074 standard deviations (q = 0.330). The q-values
on the other religious outcomes are qualitatively similar regardless of whether we use the eight-question or five-
question intrinsic measure. Therefore, even though the estimates of the V curriculum’s effect on intrinsic religious
orientation weaken when we use the eight-question measure, we still find robust first-stage effects on other measures
of religiosity.


                                                          13
sense that one has control over one’s life (a perceived stress index, the Levenson (1981) Powerful
Others index modified to apply to God’s control of one’s life, and a locus of control index that
combines the internality and chance subscales of Levenson (1981) and the World Values Survey
locus of control question), three measures of optimism (the Life Orientation Test - Revised index
(Scheier, Carver, and Bridges 1994), an index of expectations about one’s life satisfaction and
relative economic status five years in the future, and a general optimism index), the Short Grit
Scale (Duckworth and Quinn 2009), and a subset of the Brief Self-Control Scale (Tangney,
Baumeister, and Boone 2004).
      The secondary outcomes are an index of belief in the Protestant doctrine of salvation by grace
(an outcome of interest to ICM because the doctrine is taught in the V curriculum, and the
mechanism through which Weber ([1905] 1958) hypothesized Protestantism’s encouragement of
capitalistic activities operated), an asset index, a financial inclusion index, a health index, two
hygienic practice variables, a home quality index, a migration and remittance index, an absence of
domestic discord index, absence of domestic violence, child labor supply, and the number of
children enrolled in school.


IV.C. Prespecified Econometric Strategy
      In this subsection, we discuss our prespecified econometric strategy. (In Section IV.E, we
will present several post-hoc analyses.) Treatment effects are estimated using ordinary least
squares regressions with the following explanatory variables: treatment indicator variables, an
indicator variable for the respondent’s gender, an indicator variable for the respondent being
married, an indicator variable for the respondent being divorced or separated, the respondent’s
years of educational attainment, 19 the number of adults in the household (age ≥ 17), the number of
children in the household (age < 17), and the number of days between June 1, 2015 and the
interview date. 20 We also include fixed effects for each pair of communities chosen by a given

19
   Pre-school only is coded as 0.5 years, 1st grade only is coded as 1 year, 2nd grade only is coded as 2 years, …, 11th
grade only is coded as 11 years, some 12th grade without high school graduation is coded as 12 years, high school
graduation is coded as 13 years, partial vocational education is coded as 14 years, complete vocational education is
coded as 15 years, partial college is coded as 16 years, and college graduation is coded as 17 years. There are 27
observations for which the respondent’s name is not in the household roster, and thus respondent demographic
information is missing. We code the respondent demographic variables as equaling zero for these 27 observations and
control for an indicator variable equal to one if respondent demographic information is missing.
20
   These control variables were measured at the same time as the outcome variables, but are unlikely to have been
affected by the treatments. Online Appendix Tables 9-11 show the treatment effect estimates on the pre-specified
outcomes when the only explanatory variables are the treatment dummies and community pair or ICM base dummies.


                                                          14
pastor (“community-pair fixed effects”) where possible, as discussed in detail below. We cluster
standard errors by community (the unit of randomization).
      We estimate the treatment effect on list-randomized variables by stacking the responses of
those who did and did not receive the sensitive statement in a regression that controls for treatment
assignment indicator variables, an indicator variable for whether the individual received the
sensitive statement, the interaction between receiving the sensitive statement and each treatment
indicator variable, and all the other non-treatment variable controls from the main specification.
The coefficients on the interaction variables are the treatment effects of interest. We estimate the
control mean by calculating within the control group the difference (without adjusting for
covariates) in the mean response between those who did get the sensitive statement and those who
did not. When two list-randomized variables are combined to form an outcome variable, we stack
the responses for both variables into a single regression while retaining the same control variables
as above. The coefficient on each interaction variable in this case is the treatment effect on the
average of the two outcomes of interest.
      We test for the effect of religiosity by comparing VHL to HL respondents, and V to control
respondents. We do not reject the hypothesis that the V and HL curricula have additive effects
when testing jointly across all outcomes of interest; the p-values for this test are 0.344, 0.634,
0.890, and 0.234 when looking across religious primary outcomes, all primary outcomes, all
primary outcomes and mechanisms, and all outcomes, respectively. Therefore—following our pre-
analysis plan—we also run a pooled specification that estimates the effect of being invited to
receive any V curriculum, while controlling for whether the household was invited to receive any
HL curriculum. This pooled specification gives consistent inference on the average of the V
curriculum effect with and without a concurrent Health and Livelihood curriculum and has greater
statistical power than a specification that separately estimates the VHL-versus-HL and V-versus-
control effects. 21
      Since we conducted a matched-pair randomization, our pooled specification controls for the
community-pair fixed effects previously mentioned. In our disaggregated specification, where we
estimate VHL, HL, and V treatment effects separately, the estimation of the VHL treatment effect
versus control also controls for community-pair fixed effects. However, we cannot include


21
   The fact that we cannot reject that the treatment effects are additive gives some confidence that this average effect
is the same as the Values curriculum effect without a concurrent Health and Livelihoods curriculum.


                                                          15
community-pair fixed effects when estimating the HL and V treatment effects versus control
because pastors were assigned either to get one HL and one V community, or to get one VHL and
one control community. No pastor who had one community assigned to control had the other
assigned to HL or V. We therefore generate the disaggregated specification’s treatment estimates
from two independently estimated regressions: one to estimate the treatment effect for VHL
relative to control with community-pair fixed effects, and a second to estimate the treatment effects
for HL and V relative to control with fixed effects for the ICM base with which the community is
associated. 22
      Because of the multiple hypotheses tested, we follow Banerjee et al. (2015): for each primary
test in our pre-analysis plan, we calculate a q-value—the minimum false discovery rate (i.e., the
expected proportion of rejected null hypotheses that are actually true) at which the null hypothesis
would be rejected for that test (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995; Anderson 2008), given the other
tests run within the family. 23 For the purposes of this correction, and in accordance with our pre-
analysis plan, we consider the tests on primary religious outcomes to be one family (because they
are a test of the study’s first stage, a null result here would eliminate the justification for examining
the non-religious outcomes), and the tests on primary non-religious outcomes to be another family.
We implement adjustments once among the pooled specification regressions, and separately
among the disaggregated specification regressions. In other words, the tests run within the pooled
specification do not affect the q-values from the disaggregated specification, and vice versa.
Following our pre-analysis plan, we do not apply multiple hypothesis test corrections to our tests
of hypothesized mechanisms and secondary outcomes because these analyses are exploratory.



22
   There are four ICM bases. Our pre-analysis plan stated that we would control for community-pair fixed effects in
all regressions. We have deviated from the plan here because it is mathematically impossible to control for community-
pair fixed effects in the disaggregated specification while estimating every single treatment effect. Due to the
randomized design, the inability to control for community-pair fixed effects when estimating the HL and V treatment
effects relative to control does not bias our estimates, but it does reduce our statistical power.
23
   Within each of our outcome families, let p1 ≤ p2 ≤ … ≤ pm be the set of ordered p-values that correspond to the m
hypotheses tested. For a given false discovery rate α, let k be the largest value of i such that pi ≤ iα/m, and reject all
hypotheses with rank i ≤ k. The q-value of a hypothesis, an analog to the p-value, is the smallest α for which the
hypothesis would be rejected (Anderson 2008). The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was originally proven to work
under the assumption that the test statistics were independent. Subsequent work has shown that the procedure is robust
to various dependence structures (Goeman and Solari 2014). Romano, Sheikh, and Wolf (2008) develop a testing
procedure that incorporates information about the dependence structure. Benjamini-Hochberg q-values are
conservative, and more powerful procedures have been more recently developed (e.g., Storey, Taylor, and Siegmund
2004; Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli 2006). We do not follow these approaches because we wish to stay as close
as possible to our pre-analysis plan, which specified the more conservative Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.


                                                           16
IV.D. Results of Pre-Specified Analyses, Six-Month Survey
     The majority of our sample (69%) self-identifies as Catholic, and 21% as Protestant. Online
Appendix Tables 12-15 summarize the control group’s level of religiosity, and indicate that many
are not maximally religiously fervent. For example, when asked, “To what extent do you consider
yourself a religious person?,” the average control respondent rates herself at 2.8 on a 4-point scale,
where higher numbers indicate greater religiosity. Only 66% say that they have made a personal
commitment to Jesus Christ that is still important to them today, and 56% have read or listened to
the Bible in the past week.
     Tables I-III contain all of our pre-specified analyses. Columns 1-4 of Table I show the
treatment effects on the primary religious outcomes. The pooled specification (Panel A) finds that
the V curriculum, offered either on its own or in conjunction with the HL curriculum, increases all
four measures of religiosity, three of them at q < 0.01. 24 The Any V effect on the three statistically
significant indices ranges from 0.08 to 0.13 standard deviations. The change in the list-
randomization outcome—which we have lower statistical power to detect, both because list-
randomized questions measure the outcome of interest in only half the sample and because we
only have two such questions—is positive, and its 4.8 percentage point magnitude (corresponding
to a 0.10 standard deviation movement given the 60.6% control group mean) is economically
significant and in line with the magnitudes (in standard deviation space) we get from the three
direct elicitation measures. However, the 95% confidence interval for the list-randomization index
treatment effect is wide and encompasses zero. Furthermore, recent work has demonstrated a large
amount of instability in estimates coming from list randomization. In a developing country context,
Chuang et al. (2020) find that within a single survey of about 1,000 respondents, estimates of the
prevalence of a given sensitive behavior can vary by as much as 39 percentage points across two
list-randomized elicitations, and there is no clear evidence that the list-randomized estimates are
systematically less biased than direct responses. Thus, we believe little should be concluded from
the treatment effect estimates on the list randomization outcome. The statistically significant first-
stage effect of the treatment on directly elicited religiosity justifies examining differences in
downstream non-religious outcomes across treatment groups to gain insight into the effects of
religiosity.


24
  Although intrinsic and extrinsic religious orientation were originally conceived of as opposing concepts on a
unidimensional scale, empirical work has found the two to be orthogonal to each other (Kirkpatrick and Hood 1990).


                                                       17
     We also present results for the disaggregated specification in Panel B, where we estimate the
impact of the V curriculum by separately comparing VHL against HL and V against control.
Although the point estimates of VHL’s effect on religiosity relative to HL are always positive,
they are not statistically significant. On the other hand, V significantly increases extrinsic religious
orientation (0.20 sd, q = 0.013) and marginally statistically significantly increases intrinsic
religious orientation (0.12 sd, q = 0.058) relative to the control group. Therefore, while we report
all treatment effect estimates on downstream outcomes from the disaggregated specification, we
only discuss and interpret these outcomes for the V versus control comparisons, and only correct
for multiple hypothesis tests within the V versus control comparisons.
     The primary economic outcome effects are reported in columns 5-10 of Table I. We find no
statistically significant treatment effects on consumption, food security, total adult labor supply,
or life satisfaction. We have enough statistical power to reject, at the 95% confidence level,
increases in these variables of more than 0.06 standard deviations and decreases of more than 0.04
standard deviations. However, we do find a statistically significant 9.2% increase in income (386
PHP ≈ 8.6 USD per month, q = 0.015) in the pooled specification (Panel A). 25 In the disaggregated
specification (Panel B), where we have less statistical power (the standard errors are over twice as
large as in the pooled specification), the 574 PHP income effect for V compared to C is statistically
significant before correcting for multiple hypothesis tests but not after (p = 0.045, q = 0.271). We
also find a decrease in perceived relative economic status (-0.11 points on a 10-point scale, which
corresponds to -0.05 sd, q = 0.050) in the pooled specification. Perceived relative economic status
is measured by one question that asks respondents to place themselves on a ladder of life where
the top rung (10) represents the best-off people in their community and the bottom rung (1) the
poorest people in their community. We discuss potential interpretations of these results in Section
IV.F.
     Table II reports tests of mechanisms that might generate the primary economic effects. The V
curriculum teaches that God’s love continues during adversity, which he ultimately uses for good,
so participants can find hope in the midst of hardship. Correspondingly, we find in the pooled
specification (Panel A) that the V curriculum leads to increases in the sense that God is in control



25
 The results become more statistically significant when income is winsorized at the 95th or 99th percentile, or when
we use the log of income (see Online Appendix Table 42).


                                                        18
(powerful others index, 0.09 sd, p = 0.001) 26 and a marginally statistically significant increase in
grit (0.04 sd, p = 0.065). However, there is no consistent effect on the three measures of optimism.
Perceived self-control falls by a marginally statistically significant extent (-0.03 sd, p = 0.095),
which could be due to the V curriculum increasing the number of behaviors participants believe to
be undesirable temptations rather than an actual reduction in self-control. There is also a
marginally statistically significant reduction in perceived locus of control (-0.04 sd, p = 0.075),
although subcomponent analysis finds that V recipients report that both personal initiative and
chance play larger roles in their life (Online Appendix Table 27). While all three of the treatment
arms—VHL, HL, and V—involve group meetings that could increase social capital, we see no
consistent or statistically significant effects of any of the treatments on our measures of trust, the
presence of a social safety net, or participation in community activities. 27
     Finally, we examine treatment effects on secondary outcomes (Table III). In the pooled
specification, we find that the V curriculum leads to statistically significant (p = 0.0002) increases
in hygienic behaviors not measured by list randomization (avoiding open defecation and keeping
animals in a sanitary way), but no statistically significant increase in the list-randomization
response regarding washing hands after using the bathroom and treating water. We note that we
find via list randomization an increase in reported domestic violence, although it is only significant
at the 10% level. This finding could be interpreted either as an increase in identifying behaviors as
abuse or an increase in actual abuse. Although we do not observe a statistically significant change
in the non-list-randomized discord index, we do in post hoc analysis observe a significant increase
in one of its components, major arguments regarding interactions with relatives (2.2 percentage
points, p = 0.009, Online Appendix Table 39).
     The remainder of the secondary outcomes are not statistically significant at the 5% level. We
do find an unexpected marginally statistically significant decrease in the index for the belief in the
doctrine of salvation by grace. This may be because of the counterintuitive nature of the doctrine,
which requires one to disagree with two of the three statements in our index: “I follow God’s laws
so that I can go to heaven” and “If I am good enough, God will cleanse me of my sins.” In becoming


26
   Although our pre-analysis plan treats the powerful others index as a potential mechanism rather than a primary
outcome, the increase in its value could also be seen as evidence that the V curriculum succeeded in increasing
religiosity.
27
   Online Appendix Table 14 shows that the Any V effect on religious service attendance frequency is not statistically
significant (0.9 times per year increase, standard error = 0.6, with a control mean of 39.5 times per year).


                                                         19
more religiously fervent, subjects may have felt that they should agree more strongly with these
pious-sounding statements despite the efforts of the V curriculum. The V curriculum also increases
agreement with the third statement in the index, “I will go to heaven because I have accepted Jesus
Christ as my personal savior,” even though that statement is consistent with salvation by grace.
The pattern of responses is consistent with the V curriculum increasing agreement with all pious-
sounding statements.


IV.E. Post-Hoc Analyses, Six-Month Survey
     In this subsection, we discuss assorted post-hoc (non-preregistered) analyses, many of which
address robustness.


     1. Controlling the Family-Wise Error Rate (FWER). An alternative approach to correcting for
multiple hypothesis tests is to control the family-wise error rate (FWER) instead of the false
discovery rate (FDR). The FWER is the probability of incorrectly rejecting at least one true null
hypothesis among all those tested, while the FDR is the expected proportion of rejected null
hypotheses that are actually true. The following matrix, taken from Efron (2013), illustrates the
difference between these two quantities.
                                                       Decision
                                              Null                Non-null
                          Null               N0 – x                  x          N0
               Actual
                          Non-null           N1 – y                  y          N1
                                             N–R                     R          N

There are N null hypotheses being tested, of which N0 are actually true (null) and N1 are actually
false (non-null). Consider a decision rule that incorrectly decides that x of the true null hypotheses
are false, and N1 – y of the false null hypotheses are true. The FWER is the probability that x > 0,
while the FDR is the expectation of x/R (defining x/R to be 0 when R = 0). Controlling the FWER
results in fewer false positives at the cost of lower statistical power relative to controlling the FDR.
Controlling the FDR instead of the FWER is appropriate if one judges the cost of false positives
to be relatively low compared to the benefit of detecting true positives.
     In post-hoc analysis, we control the FWER using the procedure of Holm (1979), which has
greater power than the Bonferroni correction to detect truly false nulls while preserving the upper




                                                  20
bound on the FWER. The FWER-adjusted p-value for a null hypothesis is the FWER tolerance
level above which we would reject that null.
    Table I shows FWER-adjusted p-values—the only non-prespecified analysis contained in this
table. In our setting, both FDR and FWER control lead to similar qualitative inferences, in part
because of the relatively modest number of hypotheses tested. In the pooled specification, only the
effect on perceived relative economic status crosses a 1% or 5% significance boundary, with an
adjusted p-value of 0.083 versus a q-value of 0.050. In the disaggregated specification, the V
versus control effect on intrinsic religious orientation is no longer significant even at the 10% level
(adjusted p = 0.102 versus q = 0.058), but the V versus control effect on extrinsic religion
orientation remains significant (adjusted p = 0.013).


    2. Naïve OLS Versus Instrumental Variable Estimates of Religiosity Effect. What would a
researcher who naively runs an OLS regression of economic outcomes on religiosity in our control
and HL groups find? We construct a composite religiosity index for each respondent by adding
her intrinsic, extrinsic, and general religion indices together and normalizing so that its standard
deviation in the control group is 1. Online Appendix Table 45 shows that this naïve analysis leads
to a significant negative coefficient of religiosity on monthly income of –291 PHP and on weekly
adult labor supply of –2.3 hours, indicating negative selection into religiosity. This is consistent
with a literature that suggests that the club good provision aspects of religion are likely to generate
more demand from those with low income (Chen 2010). Also interesting is that despite lower
objective economic status among the more religious, the religiosity coefficient on life satisfaction
is statistically significantly positive, and the religiosity coefficient on perceived relative economic
status is marginally significantly positive (p = 0.091) as well.
    In contrast, an instrumental variable estimation on our full sample, using receipt of the V
curriculum as the instrument, finds that a one standard deviation increase in composite religiosity
significantly increases monthly income by 3,073 PHP and decreases perceived relative economic
status by 0.9 points on a 10-point scale. These are large estimates, but they should be interpreted
with caution because it seems likely that nearly all Transform participants had their religiosity
increased by much less than a full standard deviation. If so, the estimated effect of a one standard
deviation increase in religiosity achieved through intentional means (as opposed to organic means,
as discussed in the introduction, which is probably mostly responsible for the cross-sectional



                                                  21
variance in control group religiosity) is a linear extrapolation of an effect that is estimated over a
much smaller range. The true effect size curve may be quite concave, so the actual causal effect of
increasing religiosity by a full standard deviation through intentional means may be much smaller
than our estimate.
     Figure 1 shows suggestive evidence that the V curriculum had an impact on religiosity that is
consistently less than one standard deviation, indicating that the instrumental variable estimation
relies heavily on linear out-of-sample extrapolation to obtain a one-standard-deviation effect size.
The three graphs split the sample by whether the community received the V curriculum (VHL and
V groups) or not (HL and control groups), sorts each subsample by one of the directly elicited
measures of religiosity, and displays, for each percentile, the difference in the religiosity variable
value between the Any V individual and the No V individual at this percentile. For example, the
leftmost point in the top graph shows the 1st percentile intrinsic religion index value among the
Any V groups minus the 1st percentile intrinsic religion index value among the No V groups. The
difference in religiosity never exceeds 0.35 standard deviations for the intrinsic index, exceeds
0.22 standard deviations only once for the extrinsic index, and exceeds 0.18 standard deviations
only once for the general index. 28 (The intrinsic and extrinsic indexes are measured on a discrete
scale, with one point on the scale corresponding to 0.35 standard deviations for the intrinsic index
and 0.22 standard deviations for the extrinsic index. The graphs show that at no percentile do Any
V and No V subjects differ by more than one point on this scale.) Although the V curriculum could
cause religiosity ranks to change within a population, these graphs suggest that the V curriculum
seldom increases religiosity by anything close to a full standard deviation.


     3. Treatment Effect Heterogeneity, Six-Month Survey. The differences plotted in Figure 1 tend
to be smaller at higher percentiles. This suggests that the V curriculum increases our religiosity
measures more at lower percentiles of religiosity. If that is true and our religiosity variables map
linearly to true religiosity, then the V curriculum has a stronger impact on religiosity for the less




28
   Top-coding is significant for the intrinsic and extrinsic indexes; 25% of the sample has the maximum possible
intrinsic index value, and 13% of the sample has the maximum possible extrinsic index value.


                                                      22
religious, in which case downstream economic treatment effects might also be stronger for the less
religious.
     Our ability to rigorously identify treatment effect heterogeneity is limited because we were
unable to collect pre-treatment baseline data on most of our sample. What we are able to do is
stratify the sample based on a small number of characteristics collected in the six-month survey
that are unlikely to have been affected by the treatment at the time of measurement (respondent
age, gender, years of education, literacy, marital status, number of children in the household, and
number of adults in the household). Employing the leave-one-out procedure of Abadie, Chingos,
and West (2018), we use these variables to predict the composite religiosity index (defined above
in Section IV.E.2) at six months in the HL and control groups. 29 We then sort observations into
terciles based on their predicted composite religiosity index in the absence of the V curriculum,
and estimate treatment effects separately within each tercile as before. Throughout this analysis,
we restrict the sample to those where the respondent is the targeted or actual Transform invitee.
     Using this method, Table IV shows no clear pattern of treatment effect heterogeneity. While
the treatment effect on the composite religiosity index decreases with predicted composite
religiosity sans V curriculum (significantly only in the disaggregated specification), the treatment
effect on the list-randomized religiosity measure (which was not shown in Figure 1) increases with
predicted composite religiosity sans V curriculum (significantly only in the pooled specification).
There is correspondingly no statistically significant difference across terciles in the treatment
effect on monthly income and perceived relative economic status—the two primary economic
outcomes for which we found a significant effect over the entire sample.


         4. How Much of the Any V Treatment Effect Operates Through the V Curriculum? Those
assigned to the V treatment not only received the V curriculum, but also socialized with other
classmates, spent time away from home in order to attend class, received medical treatment (with
less than 1% probability), etc. How much of the Any V treatment effect is due to the V curriculum
itself rather than the other accompanying factors?
     We can gain some insight into this question by comparing the effect of the HL treatment,
which also brought participants together for ICM-sponsored classes, to the effect of the V


29
  In a multivariate regression that does not leave any observations out, significant positive predictors of religiosity in
the HL and control groups are being female, older, literate, less educated, and not divorced.


                                                           23
treatment. Under the assumption that the HL curriculum’s treatment effect has the same sign as
the V curriculum’s treatment effect, the difference between the Any V and Any HL effects is a
lower bound on the portion of the Any V effect that comes from the V curriculum.
     Comparing magnitudes of the point estimates in Table I, we see that the Any V treatment
effect on income is 386 PHP, whereas the Any HL treatment effect is only 131 PHP, suggesting
that at least 66% of the Any V treatment effect is due to the V curriculum itself. Similarly, at least
64% of the decrease in perceived relative economic status caused by the Any V treatment is due
to the V curriculum itself. An analogous comparison of the V treatment effect to the HL treatment
effect in the disaggregated specification suggests a lower bound of 50% for the income effect and
45% for the perceived relative economic status effect due to the V curriculum. However, we note
that we cannot statistically reject equality of the Any V and Any HL effects on these outcomes in
the pooled specification, nor the equality of the corresponding V and HL effects in the
disaggregated specification, which means we cannot rule out the possibility that the economic
effects we identify are due to non-curricular elements that accompany the V curriculum. 30


     5. Social Desirability Bias in Survey Responses, Six-Month Survey. Although it is possible
that the V curriculum is causing respondents to increase the amount by which they falsely inflate
reported income for social desirability reasons, this seems unlikely, since there is no positive V
treatment effect on other economic outcomes—in particular, self-reported life satisfaction, a more
subjective outcome than income that seems at least as susceptible to social desirability motives.
     We can also test for the existence of social desirability bias in some of our survey responses
by using the technique of Coffman, Coffman, and Marzilli Ericson (2017). For four of the sensitive
statements whose truth we elicited by list randomization, we have direct questions elsewhere in
the survey that ask about the same issue. We take respondents whose list randomized question did
not include the sensitive statement of interest and compute how many of the list items would have
been reported true if their list had included the sensitive statement of interest, using their response

30
  The p-value of the difference between the Any V and Any HL treatment effects is 0.160 for income and 0.270 for
perceived relative economic status. The p-value of the difference between the V and HL treatment effects is 0.257 for
income and 0.628 for perceived relative economic status. We can also compare the VHL to HL treatment effects in
the disaggregated specification, although this analysis is clouded by the fact that we detected no significant difference
in religiosity between these two treatment cells. We find that the incremental addition of the V curriculum accounts
for 45% of the VHL effect on income and 52% of the VHL effect on perceived relative economic status. The p-value
of the difference between the VHL and HL treatment effects is 0.390 for income and 0.488 for perceived relative
economic status.


                                                          24
to the direct question to impute whether the sensitive statement would have been counted as true
in the list randomized question. 31 Under the null of no social desirability bias (but keeping in mind
the caveats about the instability of list randomized estimates raised by Chuang et al. (2020)), there
should be no difference between (1) the number of statements that are indicated to be true by those
who did receive the sensitive statement in their list randomized question, and (2) the number of
statements that we impute would have been marked as true by those who did not receive the
sensitive statement in their list randomized question.
     Panel A of Table V shows the results of a regression that tests the null of no social desirability
bias, where the dependent variable is the number of statements that the respondent said were true
(either actual or imputed) and the main explanatory variable is a dummy for having actually
received the sensitive statement in the list. We see that the fraction that reports a personal
commitment to Jesus, reading or listening to the Bible in the past week, washing their hands after
going to the bathroom, or that nobody in their household is experiencing physical abuse is 26, 22,
23, and 9 percentage points lower, respectively, when this is elicited via list randomization rather
than directly. This indicates the existence of social desirability bias. However, in Panel B, we see
that the size of this bias does not vary significantly with whether the respondent received the V
curriculum. Although the standard errors of these interaction coefficients are relatively large, they
do suggest that social desirability is not biasing our treatment effect estimates. 32
     It may also be the case that it is more psychologically costly to lie about publicly observable
expressions of religiosity, making self-reports about them more truthful. We asked respondents
about two religious activities that would have been observed by others: “In the last month, have
you tried to convince anyone else to change the way they think about God?” and “How often do
you go to religious services?” A binary indicator for the first question and a coding of the second


31
   The directly asked questions are “How much do you agree with this statement: ‘I have made a personal commitment
to Jesus Christ that is still important to me today’”; “In the past 7 days, how many times did you read or listen to the
Bible, the Koran, or other religious literature?”; “Do you wash your hands with ash or soap after using the latrine?”;
and “Is the following true or false? Someone in my household is experiencing physical abuse.” We code the “personal
commitment to Jesus Christ” statement as true if the respondent slightly agrees, agrees, or strongly agrees; reading or
listening to the Bible as true if the respondent did so at least once; and washing hands as true if the respondent answers
sometimes or always. The results are directionally identical if we count the “personal commitment to Jesus” statement
as true only if the respondent agrees or strongly agrees, and if we count washing hands as true only if the respondent
answers “always.” Due to a programming problem in the questionnaire, we only have 1,447 observations for the
physical abuse question.
32
   An alternative analysis that estimates treatment effects on the responses to the direct questions finds that none of
the Any V treatment effects estimated in this way are statistically distinguishable from the Any V treatment effects
estimated using list randomization, although the standard errors of the list randomization estimates are large.


                                                           25
question into the number of attendances per year are positively and significantly (p < 0.01)
correlated with the intrinsic, extrinsic, and general religion indices (with the general religion index
stripped of these two publicly observable components).


     6. Sensitivity of Estimates to Survey Attrition, Six-Month Survey. We noted in Section IV.A
that the survey attrition rate did not differ across experimental cells. In this subsection, we examine
how our results would be affected if the outcomes of non-responders systematically differ across
experimental cells.
     Let j index primary outcomes excluding list-randomized religiosity. For every missing
response to outcome j, we impute a value xj if the household is in the VHL or V group and yj if the
household is in the HL or control group. In the most pessimistic scenario, for all primary outcomes
excluding list-randomized religiosity, we set xj equal to the minimum observed value of j in the
household’s ICM base × treatment arm cell and yj equal to the maximum observed value of j in
the same cell. In the most optimistic scenario, we set xj equal to the maximum observed value in
the household’s ICM base × treatment arm cell and yj equal to the minimum observed value of the
outcome in the same cell. We also consider the scenarios (xj, yj) = (µj – Z𝜎𝜎j, µj + Z𝜎𝜎j) for Z = {–
0.25, –0.1, –0.05, 0.05, 0.1, 0.25}, where µj and 𝜎𝜎j are the mean and standard deviation of observed
j within the household’s base × treatment cell. For each scenario, we estimate treatment effects for
all the primary outcomes, setting missing explanatory variables equal to their observed base ×
treatment means, and compute q-values. 33
     Online Appendix Table 43 shows that the most pessimistic scenario in which the Any V
treatment effect on religiosity remains statistically significantly positive is if all missing VHL and
V observations have religiosity 0.1 standard deviations below their base × treatment means and all
missing HL and control observations have religiosity 0.1 standard deviations above their base ×
treatment means. The most pessimistic scenario in which the Any V treatment effect on income
remains statistically significantly positive is if all missing VHL and V observations have primary
economic outcomes 0.05 standard deviations below their base × treatment means and all missing
HL and control observations have primary outcomes 0.05 standard deviations above their base ×



33
  In the q-value calculation, we use the p-value from the list-randomized religiosity treatment effect without imputed
observations.


                                                         26
treatment means. Even the smallest optimistic perturbation considered suffices to eliminate the
statistical significance of the negative perceived relative economic status effect.


IV.F. Discussion of Six-Month Results
     A puzzle regarding the treatment effect on income is that we do not observe movement in
other variables that would be expected to rise with income—total labor supply, consumption, food
security, and assets—and perceived relative economic status decreases.
     For labor supply, although there is no change in total hours, we do see a shift from agriculture
to non-agricultural self-employment, livestock tending, fishing, and other employment of unclear
formality (Online Appendix Table 19), which could increase income. Furthermore, we cannot
observe labor effort per hour worked, which may increase with grit and which the V curriculum
encourages as “a sacred ministry” that “merits heavenly reward.” In post hoc analysis, we examine
two subscales within the grit index (Duckworth et al. 2007; Duckworth and Quinn 2009) and find
that all of the movement in grit is coming from the “perseverance of effort” subscale
(p = 0.00003 for Any V, p = 0.041 for V = C)—which is the sum of agreement with the statements
“I am a very hard worker,” “I finish whatever I begin,” “Setbacks don’t discourage me,” and “I
am diligent”—and not the “consistency of interests” subscale (p = 0.396 for Any V, p = 0.655 for
V = C). This is consistent with the doctrine of hard work promoted by the V curriculum. 34
     A simple explanation could in principle account for the lack of observed movement in
consumption and assets: all of the additional income was consumed, but we do not have the
statistical power to detect this. However, when we test whether the Any V income and
consumption effects are equal to each other, we reject this hypothesis at p = 0.003. This leaves
open the possibility that there was an increase in expenditures on the goods, services, and assets
that we did not measure. 35
     Of course, it is possible that the income result is a purely random Type I error despite the
multiple-testing correction. Further evidence, however, seems inconsistent with this interpretation.
Among the 88% of households where the individual identified as a potential Transform invitee


34
   In Online Appendix Table 30, columns 3, 5, 8 and 9 are the subcomponents that sum up to the perseverance of effort
subscale, and columns 2, 4, 6 and 7 are the subcomponents that sum up to the consistency of interests subscale.
35
   For example, we did not collect data on tithing. ICM reports that its pastors collect on average 570 PHP per month
from their entire congregation, and the average congregation has about 25 adults. Thus, the gap between the income
and consumption treatment effects is unlikely to be entirely explained by tithing.


                                                        27
was the survey respondent, the Any V effect on labor income is 236 PHP (p = 0.0006) for the
respondent herself and 164 PHP (p = 0.151) summed across all other household members. Hence,
the labor income effect is strongly concentrated on the Transform beneficiary.
    Another possibility is that control and HL group respondents are understating their income to
the surveyor as part of a general practice of understating their resources in order to avoid having
to share them with others, and the V curriculum raises reported income because it causes
respondents to be more honest about their income. But this is inconsistent with the lack of a V
curriculum effect on the number of meals the household gave to others in the local community in
the past 30 days (Online Appendix Table 23), although it is possible that the V treatment both
increases actual meals given and reduces exaggeration in the number of meals that respondents
reported having given by approximately the same amount.
    The negative effect on perceived relative economic status could arise from participants
realizing that Transform targeted those in extreme poverty. However, the HL treatment used the
same targeting process, and we do not observe a significant negative effect on perceived relative
economic status for the HL curriculum. Furthermore, Banerjee et al. (2015) find that other
programs that target those in extreme poverty do not generate a negative effect on perceived
relative wellbeing, although their measurements occurred two years after program completion
rather than six months. The V curriculum did move participants into work activities where they
earned more per hour (as noted above, income increases but hours of labor supply did not increase)
and from agricultural labor to enterprise labor, both of which may have increased their contact
with higher-income individuals. Alternatively, the Values curriculum, by attempting to build hope
and aspiration, may make salient to attendees that others are living without as much economic
hardship.


                                     V. 30-MONTH SURVEY

V.A. Survey Administration, 30-Month Survey
    Thirty months after the end of the Transform program, we started sending IPA surveyors to
households again and successfully interviewed 5,878 of them (73%) over a six-month span (from
November 27, 2017 to June 6, 2018). Surveyors attempted to interview the potential/actual
Transform invitee, and if he or she was not available, the potential/actual invitee’s spouse or
partner. In 84% of successfully interviewed households, the respondent was the potential/actual


                                                28
invitee. Insurgent violence prevented surveyors from entering eight communities—the six affected
by violence during the six-month survey plus two others. Respondents were compensated with 100
PHP. We again drop from our analysis sample the five community pairs that were not treated in
accordance with their treatment assignment. Online Appendix Table 46 shows that the attrition
rate does not differ significantly across the four experimental groups and that the groups are
balanced on observable characteristics in joint tests of equality. Online Appendix Table 47 shows
that among those successfully surveyed at six months, attrition at 30 months is statistically
significantly higher for younger and male respondents, but is not statistically significantly related
to education, household or respondent income, or religiosity measured at six months. 36


V.B. Econometric Strategy and Outcome Variables, 30-Month Survey
     We did not separately pre-register the analysis for the 30-month survey, but generally follow
the pre-analysis plan used for the six-month survey.
     Because of the trouble respondents had in the six-month survey with the three reversed
questions in the intrinsic religiosity index, we replaced those reversed questions with analogous
questions for which stronger agreement indicates greater religiosity. 37 In the analysis below, we
construct the intrinsic religiosity index excluding these three revised questions, but including them
does not qualitatively change our results.
     Based on feedback from ICM and surveyors in the field, we modified some of the other
questions that comprise our outcome variables. Although we sacrificed comparability across the
two surveys in order to gain precision and surveying efficiency, we do not believe that any of the
changes bias the treatment effect estimates by affecting some treatment cells differently in
expectation than the others.
     We added questions about spending on gambling and gaming, snacks, water, and electricity,
which we then include in our consumption variable. Recall periods were changed from one week

36
   In untabulated results, we find that the predictiveness of education and income measured at six months for 30-month
attrition significantly varies across treatment arms. The significance of the education variation is driven by each year
of education being associated with a 0.6 percentage point higher probability of attrition in the HL group relative to the
control group. But Online Appendix Table 46 shows that when testing the equality of education levels between the
control and HL groups at 30 months, the p-value is 0.880, indicating that this differential attrition created minimal
imbalance in practice. The significance of the income variation is driven by 1,000 PHP of extra income being
associated with 1.0 percentage point lower probability of attrition in the VHL arm than the control arm. This would
bias us towards finding a positive Any V income effect, but we in fact estimate a null effect.
37
   The three revised questions ask about agreement with the statements, “My religious beliefs are important as well as
my behavior,” “My religion affects my daily life,” and “My religion is one of the most important things in my life.”


                                                          29
to 30 days for the following spending categories: phone credit, transportation, clothing and shoes,
soaps, and cosmetics and detergents. We stopped asking about spending on gifts because we
separately ask about spending on weddings, funerals, festivals, anniversaries, and birthdays, so the
response to the gifts question may lead to double-counting of spending. As in the six-month survey,
we scale all reported spending to obtain monthly spending rates.
     We shifted from measuring household business and non-business income in separate sections
to measuring both in the same section in a uniform manner. The recall period for non-business
income was changed from 30 days to seven days, and household business profit was also measured
over the past seven days rather than over the most recent month with “normal sales.” We scale all
income categories up to monthly rates for the purposes of analysis. In order to reduce the frequency
of income sources falling into the “other” category, we changed the set of available categories in
the survey’s income classification question, and labor supply categories were changed to match
the income categories. 38,39
     Due to budget constraints, we dropped some questions from the 30-month survey, most of
which had high overlap with other questions. We dropped three sets of questions from the life
satisfaction index—whether taking all things together, the respondent would say she is happy;
whether the respondent experienced enjoyment/happiness/worry/sadness during a lot of the day
yesterday; and whether the respondent smiled or laughed a lot yesterday. From the community
activities index, we dropped a question on attendance at village leaders meetings. From the three
mechanism measures related to locus of control, we dropped the perceived stress scale index. From
the three mechanism measures related to optimism, we dropped the life orientation index and
optimism index. Among secondary outcomes, we dropped the questions about open defecation


38
   In the six-month survey, the income categories were agricultural labor for a non-household member, salaried/formal
employment outside the household, housework in an outside household, animal tending in an outside household,
operating a business that is not the household's, daily labor, and other. In the 30-month survey, the income categories
were self-employed/household business/own business, wage labor, casual labor, piece worker, and other. For those
who were reported to be in wage or casual labor, we asked whether the work fell into one of 11 subcategories. For
those who were self-employed or working in a household business or in their own business, we asked whether the
business fell into one of eight subcategories. For those who were doing piece work, we asked whether it involved food
products or non-food products.
39
   We added an additional income question asking about any other income received over the last 30 days that had not
been mentioned yet, such as money from friends and family, remittances, additional labor income, pensions, and
government transfers. These income sources were not measured in the six-month survey, so we exclude it from the
main 30-month income variable. Online Appendix Table 60 shows that the 30-month Any V treatment effect on this
other non-labor income is a 139 PHP increase (p = 0.055), which approximately offsets the –117 PHP Any V treatment
effect on the main income variable shown in Table VI.


                                                         30
from the non-list-randomized hygiene index (leaving only a question about whether animals are
kept in a stable separate from the house), the question about whether the primary latrine is in the
house from the six-component house index, and the number of days migrators in the household
were gone in the last six months from the five-component migration and remittance index.


V.C. Treatment Effects on Primary Outcomes, Mechanisms, and Secondary Outcomes, 30-Month
Survey
     Table VI shows 30-month treatment effect estimates for the primary outcomes. (Online
Appendix Tables 54-81 show the treatment effect estimates on each component of the outcome
variables.) There is no statistically significant treatment effect for any of the primary religious
outcomes; in fact, three of the four Any V point estimates are negative, and these are significantly
different from their corresponding six-month treatment effects (p ≤ 0.002). However, we also
investigated whether the treatment had an impact on denominational affiliation. These regressions,
reported in Table VII, were not included in our six-month pre-analysis plan. The results show that
there is a shift in religious affiliation at 30 months. Receiving the V curriculum is associated with
a 3.6 percentage point decline in the likelihood of the survey respondent identifying as a Catholic
(p = 0.014), a 2.3 percentage point increase in the likelihood of identifying as a Protestant (p =
0.102), and a 1.3 percentage point increase in the likelihood of identifying with some other religion
(p = 0.025). The increase in “other” affiliation is mostly driven by a 0.7 percentage point increase
in affiliation with Iglesia Filipina Independiente (p = 0.044), which is in full communion with the
Anglican Communion and can thus be thought of as a quasi-Protestant denomination. Thus, even
though the V curriculum effect on the intensity of religiosity—which is what our primary religious
outcomes mostly measure—dissipates at 30 months, its overall effect on religiosity may not be
null. Table VII also shows that this shift in religious affiliation was already underway six months
after Transform, although the decrease in Catholic affiliation was only marginally statistically
significant at that time (p = 0.064). 40
     Like in the six-month survey, we analyze the 30-month effects on primary economic outcomes
by comparing V against control in the disaggregated specification, and estimating the effect of


40
  Nearly all of the remaining increase in “other” religious affiliation at 30 months is accounted for by a 0.6 percentage
point increase in affiliation with Iglesia Ni Cristo (p = 0.166), a nontrinitarian Christian sect that denies the deity of
Jesus and the Holy Spirit. At six months, the Any V treatment effects are a 1.2 percentage point increase for Iglesia
Filipina Independiente (p = 0.008) and a 0.5 percentage point increase for Iglesia Ni Cristo (p = 0.150).


                                                           31
Any V in the pooled specification. In the main analysis of the disaggregated specification, we do
not consider the comparison between VHL and HL, since there was no statistically significant
difference in religiosity between these two experimental cells at six months.
     Table VI shows that in the disaggregated specification, V households perceive their relative
economic status to be 0.34 points higher (q = 0.019) on a 10-point scale than control households
(this has the opposite sign from the six-month point estimate, with the p-value of the difference
between the effects across surveys being 0.002). In addition, their monthly consumption is 481
PHP ≈ 9.6 USD higher than control households, a 7.5% increase that is marginally statistically
significant (q = 0.062, p-value of difference versus six-month effect = 0.005). 41 This higher
consumption appears to be supported by monthly income that is 501 PHP ≈ 10.0 USD, or 6.1%,
higher than control households, although this income effect is estimated with a great deal of noise
and is not statistically significant (q = 0.375). 42 Online Appendix Table 83 shows that if we
estimated the V effect on log income instead, we would get a statistically significant 0.11 log point
increase (q = 0.027).
     In contrast, in the pooled specification, none of the primary economic outcomes has
statistically significant Any V effects. (The change between the six- and 30-month effects for
income and perceived relative economic status has p = 0.012 and 0.0004, respectively.) The
difference in this pattern of results relative to the disaggregated specification comes from VHL
households being generally worse off at 30 months than HL households, even though the point
estimates of most of the VHL treatment effects relative to the control group are positive. The HL
group, which showed little indication of being better off than the control group at six months, is
doing substantially better at 30 months. In tests that do not correct for multiple comparisons, the
HL group has statistically significantly higher income (842 PHP ≈ 16.8 USD, 10.3% greater than
the control mean, p = 0.033), adult labor supply (4.3 hours per week, 6.3% greater than the control


41
   If we excluded consumption categories that were not measured at six months, the 30-month effect of V on
consumption would be 378 PHP (q = 0.117).
42
   The control group’s average monthly income at 30 months is 9,707 PHP, which is much higher than the 4,213 PHP
we measured at six months. The control group’s average monthly consumption level also grew from 5,001 PHP to
6,378 PHP. Although some of this growth may be due to changes in the way we measured income and consumption
between surveys, at least some of it is likely to reflect real economic improvements. Food security was measured in a
consistent way across surveys; the fraction of control households that reported that no household member has gone
hungry in the last six months rose from 82% at six months to 94% at 30 months (Online Appendix Tables 17 and 59).
This improvement is probably due in large part to regression to the mean, as households were selected for being among
the poorest 30 in their community before Transform. In addition, Filipino GDP per capita grew 22% from 2015 to
2018.


                                                        32
mean, p = 0.045), and perceived relative economic status (0.23 points relative to a control mean
of 3.66 on a 10-point scale, p = 0.033). It is not obvious why the V curriculum would have a
negative marginal effect when combined with the HL curriculum in the long run but not the short
run.
       Table VIII presents results for potential mechanisms. We no longer see a positive treatment
effect of the V curriculum on grit, although this is not statistically distinguishable from the six-
month effect. Unlike at six months, there is no statistically significant treatment effect on the
“perseverance of effort” subscale of grit (p-value of Any V effect = 0.982; p-value of change in
Any V effect from six to 30 months = 0.003), and the “consistency of interests” subscale continues
to have no statistically significant treatment effect (p-value of Any V effect = 0.724; p-value of
change in Any V effect from six to 30 months = 0.364). There is, however, a statistically significant
increase in optimism in both the disaggregated specification (0.12 standard deviations, p = 0.029)
and the pooled specification (0.05 standard deviations, p = 0.034), which is driven equally by
expectations of greater life satisfaction and expectations of higher relative economic status five
years in the future (Online Appendix Table 69). 43 One objective of Transform is to increase hope
in participants. Although an increase in optimism can be the result of improved circumstances,
many scholars have argued that optimism, at least in moderate quantities, causes better outcomes
through a motivational channel (e.g., Scheier and Carver 1985; Puri and Robinson 2007). We note
that in the six-month survey, where we had measured three different optimism scales, we estimated
one significant positive Any V effect and one marginally negative Any V effect on optimism. In
the 30-month survey, we have only one optimism scale. Therefore, this positive effect at 30 months
should be interpreted with caution.
       Additionally, in the pooled specification only, we see a positive and statistically significant
Any V effect on social safety net strength (0.038 standard deviations, p = 0.046). This effect comes
from an increased belief that the household could access 40 PHP or 1,000 PHP from outside the
household for an urgent need (Online Appendix Table 65).
       At six months, we had estimated a positive Any V treatment effect on the powerful others
index—the sense that God is in control of one’s life. Table VIII shows that at 30 months, this
treatment effect has reversed to become negative and statistically significant. This is in accord with


43
  These are unadjusted p-values. As discussed previously, we do not control for multiple testing when exploring
possible mechanisms.


                                                      33
the negative (albeit not statistically significant) effects of Any V on the directly elicited religiosity
measures at 30 months, reported in Table VI. Relatedly, among secondary outcomes in Table IX,
the strongest Any V treatment effect is an increase in stated belief in salvation by grace. We saw
that at six months, increases in religiosity due to the V curriculum are associated with decreases
in agreement with this doctrine, so increases in agreement with this doctrine at 30 months could
be interpreted as a decrease in religiosity. However, Protestants express significantly more
agreement with the doctrine than Catholics at both six months (0.13 standard deviations, p =
0.000002) and 30 months (0.21 standard deviations, p < 0.000001). In light of the increased self-
identification with Protestantism caused by the V curriculum, it may be better to interpret greater
agreement with the doctrine at 30 months as being the result of the V curriculum having its
intended effect in the long run, although the contradictory results at six months make this
interpretation uncertain.
     The statistically significant Any V treatment effects on other secondary outcomes in Table IX
are mostly positive. There is a statistically significant positive effect on the non-list-randomized
hygiene index (which in the 30-month survey only measured whether animals are kept in a stable
separate from the house). There are marginally statistically significant positive effects on financial
inclusion and the list-randomized hygiene outcome, which measures hand washing and treatment
of drinking water, and a marginally statistically significant negative effect on the number of
children enrolled in school. In the disaggregated specification, the only marginally statistically
significant effect is an improvement in the house quality index, which is driven by an increase in
the prevalence of electricity being the primary source for lighting (Online Appendix Table 77).


V.D. Were No V Communities Evangelized Between the Six- and 30-Month Surveys?
     One hypothesis for why the V curriculum effects on religious intensity disappeared at 30
months is that the pastors evangelized the No V communities after the first Transform
implementation. 44 To test whether this occurred, in October 2018 (about three years after the

44
  Consistent with this story, the directly measured religiosity variables are higher at 30 months than at six months in
all the treatment cells. For example, among control group respondents who were interviewed at both times, intrinsic
religiosity rises by 0.18 standard deviations, extrinsic religiosity rises by 0.34 standard deviations, and general
religiosity rises by 0.20 standard deviations (where standard deviation is measured at six months over control group
respondents who appear in both surveys). On the other hand, religiosity measured via list randomization is much lower
at 30 months than at six months in all treatment cells. The proportion of 30-month respondents for whom list
randomization was expected to successfully anonymize their response about the targeted sensitive statement (see



                                                         34
program), we surveyed 131 of the 160 pastors involved in the study. Each pastor was presented
with 45 people’s names sorted alphabetically: 15 Transform invitees from the community in which
the pastor had taught the V curriculum, 15 potential Transform invitees from the community in
which the pastor had identified potential invitees but which had not been selected to receive the V
curriculum, and 15 from a placebo community that is far from where the pastor worked, randomly
selected from the communities served by a different ICM base than the one associated with the
pastor.
     The survey prompt read, “We have a list of people you may have interacted with in a ministry
context during and after the ICM Transform Values training that you led from February to June
2015, three years ago. We believe that some of these people participated in your Transform
program, and some did not.” To test whether there had been any evangelism of the control group,
the survey asked whether each person in the list had ever participated in a Transform Values
program with the pastor. To test whether this interaction occurred between the six- and 30-month
surveys, the survey asked whether this participation in the Transform program occurred in 2015
or after 2015. The survey also asked whether the pastor had interacted with the listed person in
any ministry context (defined as “an occasion where spiritual matters were discussed, or an event
sponsored by a religious ministry”), and if yes, whether that interaction happened in 2015, after
2015, or both in and after 2015.
     If pastors evangelizing the control group explains the fading of the religiosity treatment effect
from six months to 30 months, we would expect to see both that pastors report more contact with
people in their No V community than in their placebo community, and that a significant amount
of the reported No V contact occurred exclusively between the six- and 30-month surveys.
     Pastors report that 79% of actual Transform invitees, 58% of No V individuals, and 25% of
placebo group members participated in the Transform Values program. Similarly, pastors report
having interacted in a ministry context with 65% of actual Transform participants, 46% of No V
individuals, and 19% of placebo group members (some pastors did not classify Transform as a
“ministry context”). Thus, there is some reason to believe that part of the No V group may have
been treated, which would attenuate our estimated treatment effects. However, conditional on
believing that an individual participated in Transform, pastors report that that participation


footnote 16) is similar to the six-month survey’s proportions: 76% for commitment to Jesus, 82% for reading the
Bible, 85% for water treatment, 84% for hand washing, and 90% for domestic abuse.


                                                      35
happened in 2015 for 99% of the individuals. Among No V individuals whom the pastor reports
interacting with in a ministry context, only 2% of those interactions happened exclusively after
2015, 75% of them happened exclusively in 2015 or earlier, and the remaining 23% happened in
both periods. Because the six-month survey completed data collection in January 2016, we see
little evidence that a significant portion of the No V group was treated exclusively between the
six- and 30-month surveys.
       If the reported evangelism of the control group is real, rather than due to recall error, then we
would expect to see larger six-month religiosity treatment effects for pastors who recall ministering
to relatively few people in their No V group compared to their Any V group. In fact, there is a
slightly negative and not statistically significant (p = 0.447, 0.425, and 0.864 for intrinsic, extrinsic,
and general religiosity, respectively) relationship between pastor-level religiosity treatment effects
at six months and the difference between the fraction of Any V and No V group members the
pastor reports to have participated in Transform. 45 This suggests that the high fraction of No V
individuals reported to have been in Transform is due to recall error rather than non-compliance
with the treatment assignment. (Pastors may recall more No V individuals having been in
Transform than placebo members because pastors did interact with No V individuals when
identifying potential Transform invitees.)
       Although it is possible in principle that Transform participants’ evangelization of No V
communities is responsible for the erosion of the estimated V curriculum effect, we believe that
this is unlikely given the geographic distance between the communities and the fact that any
evangelization effort in a No V community would have been dispersed among both those who
were identified as potential Transform invitees (and hence were in our survey) and those who were
not.


V.E. Discussion of 30-Month Results
       The 30-month results provide a mixed message. There is reason to believe that the Values
curriculum had an ongoing impact on religiosity. The six-month impact on intensity of religiosity
dies down, but there is evidence of a shift away from Catholicism toward Protestantism. It is less



45
  The pastor-level treatment effect is estimated as the difference in mean religiosity between the pastor’s Any V and
No V community, with no further control variables. This analysis excludes 13 pastors who said that 10 or more of
the 15 placebo names participated in Transform.


                                                         36
clear that this change had ongoing economic effects. Although we see some evidence of positive
consumption and perceived relative economic status differences, supported by an increase in
income, the statistically significant consumption and relative economic status effects only appear
in the disaggregated specification when comparing V to control, and the income effect is not
statistically significant. There are also positive income, adult labor supply, and perceived relative
economic status effects of the HL treatment relative to control. This generates a negative estimated
marginal effect of the V curriculum when it is added to the HL curriculum, since there are low
levels of well-being in the VHL group relative to the HL group. There is no obvious reason why
such a strong negative interaction between the V and HL curricula would exist at 30 months but
not six months. If one’s prior belief put significant weight on the V and HL curricula having
additive treatment effects, then the best estimate of the V curriculum effect at 30 months would
come from the pooled specification, which finds no significant economic effects.


                                      VI. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

         As this is a study on the impact of religious outreach, a contentious topic, it seems
appropriate to briefly discuss the ethics of the study. We make an important distinction between
our study and the program we studied. Our discussion is about the decision to study Transform
and the research protocols chosen, and not the ethics of the religious outreach itself. 46
        First, our study had no impact on the number of people who received the V curriculum
during the study period, although it did change the identities of those who received the curriculum.
In this case as with many others, we believe that random assignment of treatment is not only
valuable for estimating causal impacts, but also a fair way of allocating a program that would go
ahead even without the study. Additional ethical concerns may have been relevant had the research
design required changing the number of people receiving the V curriculum relative to what would
have happened otherwise. This was not the case in our design.
        Second, there is equipoise: religious programming is pervasive throughout the world, often
delivered in coordination with poverty alleviation programs, yet there is no consensus on its

46
  Our role as researchers consisted of suggesting that ICM remove the V curriculum from randomly chosen Transform
implementations and deliver that V curriculum elsewhere; working with ICM to construct guidance to pastors on how
to choose eligible communities; randomly assigning communities to experimental arms; securing funding for the no-
religion HL treatment arm and our direct research expenses such as surveying costs; securing Institutional Review
Board approval for human subjects research; designing and conducting surveys of potential participants; analyzing
the data; interpreting the results; and writing this paper.


                                                       37
impacts. We were agnostic about what the findings would be. Indeed, we believe the enormous
scale of religious outreach creates an ethical obligation to study its impacts, as challenging and
sensitive as the topic may be.
       Third, we did not decide to conduct the study with the goal of generating a positive result
for Transform or ICM. We chose to work with ICM because they were willing to randomize the
inclusion of religious programming with their health and livelihoods curriculum. We were
committed to publishing the results regardless of whether they were positive, null, mixed, or
negative.
       Finally, we alone are responsible for the way the paper is written. We believe we have
presented the material in a dispassionate way and drawn appropriate conclusions, but would like
to remind readers that using our results to extrapolate to other settings; to answer questions about
Filipino history; or to predict impacts at a larger scale of operations, at longer time horizons, or on
economic, social, or psychological variables that we did not measure all require great care.


                                          VII. CONCLUSION

    Our work demonstrates that a randomized controlled trial is a viable tool to study the effect
of religiosity on social and economic outcomes. As with all program evaluations, our results are,
strictly speaking, specific to the program and setting we study. Having said that, Transform’s
curriculum and dissemination method are similar to efforts by many religious organizations around
the world, and evangelization of Catholics by evangelical Protestants is a widespread phenomenon
(Pew Research Center 2014).
    We find that increasing religiosity via a four-month Protestant pastor-led program increases
income while decreasing perceived relative economic status in the short run. The effects on the
intensity of religiosity dissipate 30 months after the program ends, but there is a shift in affiliation
from Catholicism to Protestantism. There is mixed evidence on whether the positive economic
effects of the curriculum persist to 30 months. When comparing those who received only the
Protestant Christian theology, values, and character virtues curriculum against the no-treatment
control group, we find that religious curriculum recipients have higher consumption and perceived
relative economic status. But in a pooled specification that identifies the religious curriculum effect
by comparing both the religious curriculum-only group against the no-treatment control and those
who received the full religious, health, and livelihood skills curriculum against those who received


                                                  38
only the health and livelihood skills curriculum, we find no statistically significant effects on
primary economic outcomes. Although church-based programs may represent a method of
increasing non-cognitive skills and reducing poverty in the short run among adults in developing
countries, more work is required to understand whether the effects can persist and if not, why not.


                                   SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
An Online Appendix for this article can be found at The Quarterly Journal of Economics online.
Data and code replicating the tables and figures in this article can be found in the IPA, JPAL, and
QJE Dataverses.


                                           REFERENCES
Abadie, Alberto, Matthew M. Chingos, and Martin R. West, “Endogenous Stratification in
       Randomized Experiments,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 100 (2018), 567–580.
Allport, Gordon W., and J. Michael Ross, “Personal Religious Orientation and Prejudice,” Journal
       of Personality and Social Psychology, 5 (1967), 432–443.
Anderson, Michael, “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
       Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
       Projects,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 (2008), 1481–1495.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William Parienté,
       Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry, “A Multifaceted Program
       Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six Countries,” Science, 348
       (2015), 1260799.
Barro, Robert J., and Rachel M. McCleary, “Religion and Economic Growth across Countries,”
       American Sociological Review, 68 (2003), 760–881.
Basten, Christoph, and Frank Betz, “Beyond Work Ethic: Religion, Individual, and Political
       Preferences,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5 (2013), 67–91.
Becker, Sascha O., and Ludger Woessmann, “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of
       Protestant Economic History,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2009), 531–596.
Bell, Matthew, “Alpha: The Slickest, Richest, Fastest-Growing Division of the Church of
       England.” The Spectator, November 30, 2013.




                                                39
Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and Geoffrey Fisher, “Religious Identity and Economic
       Behavior,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98 (2016), 617–637.
Benjamini, Yoav, and Yosef Hochberg, “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and
       Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
       (Methodological), 57 (1995), 289–300.
Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M. Krieger, and Daniel Yekutieli, “Adaptive Linear Step-up Procedures
       That Control the False Discovery Rate,” Biometrika, 93 (2006), 491–507.
Blattman, Christopher, Julian Jamison, and Margaret Sheridan, “Reducing Crime and Violence:
       Experimental Evidence from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Liberia,” American
       Economic Review, 107 (2017), 1165–1206.
Bottan, Nicolas L., and Ricardo Perez-Truglia, “Losing My Religion: The Effects of Religious
       Scandals on Religious Participation and Charitable Giving,” Journal of Public Economics,
       129 (2015), 106–119.
Cantoni, Davide, “The Economic Effects of the Protestant Reformation: Testing the Weber
       Hypothesis in the German Lands,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 13
       (2015), 561–598.
Chen, Daniel L., “Club Goods and Group Identity: Evidence from Islamic Resurgence during the
       Indonesian Financial Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy 118 (2010), 300–354.
Chuang, Erica, Pascaline Dupas, Elise Huillery, and Juliette Seban, “Sex, Lies, and Measurement:
       Do Indirect Response Survey Methods Work?,” Working Paper, 2020.
Clingingsmith, David, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Michael Kremer, “Estimating the Impact of the
       Hajj: Religion and Tolerance in Islam’s Global Gathering,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 124 (2009), 1133–1170.
Coffman, Katherine B., Lucas C. Coffman, and Keith M. Marzilli Ericson, “The Size of the LGBT
       Population and the Magnitude of Antigay Sentiment Are Substantially Underestimated,”
       Management Science, 63 (2017), 3168–3186.
Cohen, Sheldon, Tom Kamarck, and Robin Mermelstein, “A Global Measure of Perceived Stress.”
       Journal of Health and Social Behavior 24 (1983), 385–396.
Droitcour, Judith, Rachel A. Caspar, Michael L. Hubbard, Teresa L. Parsley, Wendy Visscher, and
       Trena M. Ezzati, “The Item Count Technique as a Method of Indirect Questioning: A
       Review of Its Development and a Case Study Application,” in Wiley Series in Probability



                                               40
       and Statistics, Paul P. Biemer, Robert M. Groves, Lars E. Lyberg, Nancy A. Mathiowetz,
       and Seymour Sudman, ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2011).
Duckworth, Angela Lee, Christopher Peterson, Michael D. Matthews, and Dennis R. Kelly, “Grit:
       Perseverance and Passion for Long-Term Goals,” Journal of Personality and Social
       Psychology, 92 (2007), 1087–1101.
Duckworth, Angela Lee, and Patrick D. Quinn, “Development and Validation of the Short Grit
       Scale (Grit–S),” Journal of Personality Assessment 91 (2009), 166–174.
Efron, Bradley, Large-Scale Inference: Empirical Bayes Methods for Estimation, Testing, and
       Prediction (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2013).
Ellison, Christopher G., “Religious Involvement and Subjective Well-Being,” Journal of Health
       and Social Behavior, 32 (1991), 80–99.
Fetzer Institute, Multidimensional Measurement of Religiousness/Spirituality for Use in Health
       Research (Kalamazoo, MI: John E. Fetzer Institute, 1999).
Freeman, Richard B., “Who Escapes? The Relation of Churchgoing and Other Background Factors
       to the Socioeconomic Performance of Black Male Youth from Inner-City Tracts,” in The
       Black Youth Employment Crisis, Richard B. Freeman and Harry J. Holzer, ed. (Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, 1986).
Goeman, Jelle J., and Aldo Solari, “Multiple Hypothesis Testing in Genomics,” Statistics in
       Medicine, 33 (2014), 1946–1978.
Gorsuch, Richard L., and Susan E. McPherson, “Intrinsic/Extrinsic Measurement: I/E-Revised and
       Single-Item Scales,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 28 (1989), 348–354.
Gruber, Jonathan, “Religious Market Structure, Religious Participation, and Outcomes: Is Religion
       Good for You?,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 5 (2005).
Gruber, Jonathan, and Daniel Hungerman, “The Church vs. the Mall: What Happens When
       Religion Faces Increased Secular Competition?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123
       (2008), 831–862.
Hackett, Conrad, and Brian J. Grim, Global Christianity: A Report on the Size and Distribution of
       the World’s Christian Population (Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, 2011).
Hilary, Gilles, and Kai Wai Hui, “Does Religion Matter in Corporate Decision Making in
       America?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 93 (2009), 455–473.




                                                41
Horton, John J., David G. Rand, and Richard J. Zeckhauser, “The Online Laboratory: Conducting
       Experiments in a Real Labor Market,” Experimental Economics, 14 (2011), 399–425.
Iannaccone, Laurence R., “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic
       Literature, 36 (1998), 1465–1495.
Iyer, Sriya, “The New Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic Literature, 54 (2016), 395–
       441.
Johnson, Byron R., Ralph Brett Tompkins, and Derek Webb, Objective Hope: Assessing the
       Effectiveness of Faith-Based Organizations: A Review of the Literature (Waco, TX:
       Baylor University, 2008).
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman, “List Randomization for Sensitive Behavior: An Application
       for Measuring Use of Loan Proceeds,” Journal of Development Economics, 98 (2012), 71–
       75.
Kautz, Tim, James Heckman, Ron Diris, Bas ter Weel, and Lex Borghans, “Fostering and
       Measuring Skills: Improving Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills to Promote Lifetime
       Success,” NBER Working Paper No. 20749, 2014.
Kemper, Christoph J., Maria Wassermann, Annekatrin Hoppe, Constanze Beierlein, and Beatrice
       Rammstedt, “Measuring Dispositional Optimism in Large-Scale Studies: Psychometric
       Evidence for German, Spanish, and Italian Versions of the Scale Optimism-Pessimism-2
       (SOP2),” European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 33 (2017), 403–408.
Kessler, R. C., G. Andrews, L. J. Colpe, E. Hiripi, D. K. Mroczek, S.-L. T. Normand, E. E. Walters,
       and A. M. Zaslavsky, “Short Screening Scales to Monitor Population Prevalences and
       Trends in Non-Specific Psychological Distress,” Psychological Medicine, 32 (2002), 959–
       976.
Kirkpatrick, Lee A., and Ralph W. Hood, “Intrinsic-Extrinsic Religious Orientation: The Boon or
       Bane of Contemporary Psychology of Religion?,” Journal for the Scientific Study of
       Religion, 29 (1990), 442–462.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz, “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
       Effects,” Econometrica 75 (2007), 83–120.
Levenson, Hanna, “Differentiating Among Internality, Powerful Others, and Chance,” in Research
       with the Locus of Control Construct, Hebert M. Lefcourt, ed. (New York: Academic Press,
       1981).



                                                42
Mazar, Nina, On Amir, and Dan Ariely, “The Dishonesty of Honest People: A Theory of Self-
       Concept Maintenance,” Journal of Marketing Research, 45 (2008), 633–644.
Pew Research Center, “Religion in Latin America: Widespread Change in a Historically Catholic
       Region,” http://www.pewforum.org/2014/11/13/religion-in-latin-america/ (2014).
— —, “The Future of World Religions: Population Growth Projections, 2010-2050: Why Muslims
       Are Rising Fastest and the Unaffiliated Are Shrinking as a Share of the World’s
       Population,”    https://www.pewforum.org/2015/04/02/religious-projections-2010-2050/
       (2015).
Puri, Manju, and David Robinson, “Optimism and Economic Choice,” Journal of Financial
       Economics, 86 (2007), 71–99.
Romano, Joseph P., Azeem M. Shaikh, and Michael Wolf, “Control of the False Discovery Rate
       Under Dependence Using the Bootstrap and Subsampling,” TEST 17 (2008), 417–442.
Samaritan’s Purse, “Along the Samaritan Road: Samaritan’s Purse 2016 Annual Report.”
       https://s3.amazonaws.com/static.samaritanspurse.org/pdfs/ANNUAL_REPORT_web_do
       wnload.pdf (2017).
Scheier, Michael F., and Charles S. Carver, “Optimism, Coping, and Health: Assessment and
       Implications of Generalized Outcome Expectancies,” Health Psychology 4 (1985), 219–
       247.
Scheier, Michael F., Charles S. Carver, and Michael W. Bridges, “Distinguishing Optimism from
       Neuroticism (and Trait Anxiety, Self-Mastery, and Self-Esteem): A Reevaluation of the
       Life Orientation Test,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67 (1994), 1063–78.
Shariff, Azim F., and Ara Norenzayan, “God Is Watching You: Priming God Concepts Increases
       Prosocial Behavior in an Anonymous Economic Game,” Psychological Science, 18 (2007),
       803–809.
Shariff, Azim F., Aiyana K. Willard, Teresa Andersen, and Ara Norenzayan, “Religious Priming:
       A Meta-Analysis with a Focus on Prosociality,” Personality and Social Psychology
       Review, 20 (2016), 27–48.
Spenkuch, Jörg L., “Religion and Work: Micro Evidence from Contemporary Germany,” Journal
       of Economic Behavior & Organization, 135 (2017), 193–214.
Storey, John D., Jonathan E. Taylor, and David Siegmund, “Strong Control, Conservative Point
       Estimation and Simultaneous Conservative Consistency of False Discovery Rates: A



                                              43
       Unified Approach,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical
       Methodology), 66 (2004), 187–205.
Tangney, June P., Roy F. Baumeister, and Angie Luzio Boone, “High Self-Control Predicts Good
       Adjustment, Less Pathology, Better Grades, and Interpersonal Success,” Journal of
       Personality, 72 (2004), 271–324.
Weber, Max, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (New York: Scribner, (1905) 1958).
Woodberry, Robert D., “The Missionary Roots of Liberal Democracy,” American Political
       Science Review 106 (2012), 244–274.




                                              44
                                                                     TABLE I
                                                        PRIMARY OUTCOMES, SIX-MONTH SURVEY
                                (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)              (5)            (6)            (7)          (8)           (9)           (10)
                                          Primary religious outcomes                                               Primary economic outcomes
                                                                                                                                     Adult
                              Religion     Religion      General        Religion,       Monthly           Food       Monthly        weekly          Life        Perceived
                              intrinsic    extrinsic     religion           list-     consumption       security      income     labor supply   satisfaction     relative
                                index       index         index       randomized          (PHP)           index        (PHP)        (hours)        index       econ. status
                                                                        Panel A: Pooled specification
 Any V                         0.102          0.130       0.077            0.048            -1.1          0.010       386.1           0.9           0.019         -0.113
                              (0.024)       (0.024)      (0.023)         (0.037)         (100.4)        (0.023)      (126.8)        (1.1)         (0.022)        (0.047)
 Any HL                        0.014         -0.021       0.001           -0.028          -103.0         -0.044       131.2          -1.8          -0.010         -0.040
                              (0.024)       (0.024)      (0.023)         (0.038)          (93.3)        (0.023)      (126.3)        (1.1)         (0.022)        (0.047)
 FDR q-value, Any V            0.000          0.000       0.001            0.197           0.991          0.778       0.015         0.595           0.595          0.050
 FWER p-value, Any V           0.000          0.000       0.002            0.197           1.000          1.000       0.015         1.000           1.000          0.083
                                                                    Panel B: Disaggregated specification
 VHL                           0.115         0.109         0.077           0.020          -102.2         -0.033       524.4          -0.9           0.009         -0.151
                              (0.034)       (0.037)      (0.031)         (0.054)         (159.5)        (0.037)      (175.0)        (1.4)         (0.028)        (0.067)
 HL                            0.047         0.073        -0.029          -0.002          -314.3         -0.050       287.9          -0.1          -0.031         -0.073
                              (0.055)       (0.065)      (0.054)         (0.055)         (203.0)        (0.051)      (278.4)        (2.4)         (0.056)        (0.112)
 V                             0.123         0.204         0.052           0.070          -167.4         -0.007       574.2           3.0          -0.018         -0.133
                              (0.050)       (0.064)      (0.051)         (0.057)         (209.5)        (0.050)      (285.4)        (2.3)         (0.047)        (0.119)
 FDR q-value, VHL = HL         0.393         0.653         0.146           0.653             --             --          --             --             --             --
 FDR q-value, V = C            0.058         0.013         0.416           0.393           0.637          0.885       0.271         0.529           0.850          0.529
 FWER p-value, VHL = HL        1.000         1.000         0.330           1.000             --             --          --             --             --             --
 FWER p-value, V = C           0.102         0.013         1.000           1.000           1.000          1.000       0.271         1.000           1.000          1.000
                                                                       Panel C: Summary information
 Control mean                    0             0            0              0.606           5,001            0         4,213          79.6            0            3.242
 Control standard deviation      1             1            1                 --           4,720            1         5,567          57.7            1            2.256
 # observations in VHL         1,578         1,578        1,578           1,578            1,578         1,526        1,452         1,452          1,578          1,576
 # observations in HL          1,549         1,549        1,549           1,549            1,549         1,521        1,440         1,439          1,549          1,548
 # observations in V           1,550         1,550        1,550           1,550            1,550         1,517        1,435         1,434          1,550          1,547
 # observations in C           1,599         1,599        1,599           1,599            1,599         1,567        1,490         1,490          1,599          1,596
Notes. Panels A and B show treatment effect estimates relative to control. The dependent variables are indicated in the column title. See Appendix for
details on variable construction. In Panel A, “Any V” refers to the “Values only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups, and “Any HL”
refers to the “Health and Livelihood only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups. Standard errors clustered by community are in
parentheses. In Panel B, we do not show VHL = HL q-values and FWER-adjusted p-values for primary economic outcomes because there is no significant
first-stage VHL versus HL difference in religiosity. All regressions control for the respondent’s gender, marital status, and education; the number of adults
in the household; the number of children in the household; and the number of days between June 1, 2015 and the interview date. The regressions in Panel
A and the regressions estimating the VHL effect in Panel B control for community-pair fixed effects. The regressions estimating the HL and V effects in
Panel B control for ICM base fixed effects.
                                                                             TABLE II
                                                                   MECHANISMS, SIX-MONTH SURVEY
                                (1)       (2)              (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)      (10)      (11)
                                        Social capital                          Locus of control                             Optimism
                                          Social     Community         Perceived      Powerful     Locus of       Life                                            Self-
                              Trust     safety net    activities      stress scale      others      control   orientation   Expectations   Optimism    Grit     control
                              index       index         index             index         index         index      index         index        index     index      index
                                                                            Panel A: Pooled specification
 Any V                          0.004      0.026          0.005          -0.011         0.093        -0.035     -0.050         -0.037         0.053    0.041     -0.034
                              (0.022)    (0.024)         (0.025)        (0.020)        (0.027)      (0.020)    (0.027)        (0.025)       (0.024)   (0.022)   (0.021)
 Any HL                        -0.023     -0.027          0.041          -0.018         0.044        -0.000      0.016         -0.016        -0.024    0.017      0.006
                              (0.022)    (0.024)         (0.025)        (0.021)        (0.027)      (0.020)    (0.027)        (0.025)       (0.024)   (0.022)   (0.020)
 p-value, Any V                 0.865      0.282          0.851           0.596         0.001         0.075      0.065          0.133         0.029    0.065      0.095
                                                                       Panel B: Disaggregated specification
 VHL                           -0.019      0.000           0.045         -0.026         0.135        -0.035     -0.034         -0.055         0.030    0.056     -0.027
                              (0.032)    (0.032)         (0.034)        (0.026)        (0.038)      (0.029)    (0.037)        (0.032)       (0.032)   (0.029)   (0.025)
 HL                            -0.023     -0.076           0.019         -0.009         0.031        -0.064     -0.046         -0.014        -0.007    0.030      0.039
                              (0.043)    (0.048)         (0.058)        (0.044)        (0.060)      (0.057)    (0.068)        (0.056)       (0.061)   (0.058)   (0.047)
 V                             -0.018     -0.023          -0.011         -0.007         0.073        -0.085     -0.103         -0.054         0.069    0.041     -0.001
                              (0.046)    (0.048)         (0.059)        (0.043)        (0.059)      (0.050)    (0.069)        (0.057)       (0.066)   (0.058)   (0.050)
 p-value for VHL = HL           0.927      0.140           0.655          0.684         0.085         0.605      0.862          0.468         0.541    0.671      0.155
 p-value, V = C                 0.704      0.631           0.857          0.876         0.222         0.090      0.132          0.344         0.298    0.484      0.980
                                                                           Panel C: Summary information
 Control mean                   0           0              0                0             0             0         0              0            0         0         0
 Control standard deviation     1           1              1                1             1             1         1              1            1         1         1
 # observations in VHL        1,578       1,578          1,561            1,577         1,578         1,578     1,578          1,542        1,578     1,578     1,578
 # observations in HL         1,549       1,549          1,542            1,549         1,549         1,549     1,549          1,508        1,549     1,549     1,549
 # observations in V          1,550       1,550          1,534            1,549         1,550         1,550     1,550          1,518        1,550     1,550     1,550
 # observations in C          1,599       1,599          1,592            1,599         1,599         1,599     1,599          1,567        1,599     1,599     1,599
Notes. Panels A and B show treatment effect estimates relative to control. The dependent variables are indicated in the column title. Indices have been
coded so that more positive numbers are better. See Appendix for details on variable construction. In Panel A, “Any V” refers to the “Values only” and
“Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups, and “Any HL” refers to the “Health and Livelihood only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood”
treatment groups. Standard errors clustered by community are in parentheses. All regressions control for the respondent’s gender, marital status, and
education; the number of adults in the household; the number of children in the household; and the number of days between June 1, 2015 and the interview
date. The regressions in Panel A and the regressions estimating the VHL effect in Panel B control for community-pair fixed effects. The regressions
estimating the HL and V effects in Panel B control for ICM base fixed effects.
                                                                      TABLE III
                                                        SECONDARY OUTCOMES, SIX-MONTH SURVEY
                              (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)       (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)      (12)
                                                                            Hygiene                              Migration                  No        Child
                           Salvation               Financial                 index,    Hygiene,                     and         No      domestic      labor    # children
                           by grace      Assets    inclusion    Health      non-list-       list       House     remittance   discord   violence,    supply     enrolled
                          belief index   index       index      index       random.     random.         index      index       index    list-rand.   (hours)   in school
                                                                        Panel A: Pooled specification
 Any V                       -0.036       -0.027    0.020       0.000        0.092        0.043         0.030       0.027      -0.034    -0.072       0.2         -0.02
                            (0.020)      (0.021)   (0.024)     (0.020)      (0.024)      (0.033)       (0.025)    (0.019)     (0.024)   (0.040)      (0.2)       (0.02)
 Any HL                      -0.005       -0.025    0.157       0.015        0.030        0.066         0.007      -0.015      -0.029    -0.048       0.0         -0.01
                            (0.020)      (0.021)   (0.025)     (0.020)      (0.024)      (0.033)       (0.025)    (0.019)     (0.024)   (0.040)      (0.2)       (0.02)
 p-value, Any V               0.079        0.211    0.396       0.985        0.000        0.191         0.239       0.153       0.164     0.078      0.256       0.349
                                                                     Panel B: Disaggregated specification
 VHL                         -0.040       -0.050      0.179      0.015        0.121        0.108         0.036     0.012       -0.063    -0.118        0.3        -0.03
                            (0.026)      (0.031)    (0.038)    (0.028)       (0.034)      (0.049)      (0.036)    (0.031)     (0.036)   (0.055)      (0.3)       (0.02)
 HL                          -0.021        0.014      0.124     -0.027        0.136        0.121         0.045     -0.083      -0.036    -0.081       -0.1        -0.01
                            (0.045)      (0.057)    (0.048)    (0.042)       (0.070)      (0.043)      (0.059)    (0.038)     (0.052)   (0.058)      (0.4)       (0.04)
 V                           -0.061        0.008     -0.010     -0.044        0.208        0.105         0.068     -0.039      -0.049    -0.120        0.1        -0.02
                            (0.041)      (0.060)    (0.044)    (0.041)       (0.067)      (0.045)      (0.060)    (0.039)     (0.049)   (0.061)      (0.4)       (0.04)
 p-value for VHL = HL         0.696        0.265      0.297      0.334        0.836        0.779         0.879     0.017        0.617     0.509      0.404       0.687
 p-value, V = C               0.143        0.899      0.811      0.285        0.002        0.020         0.258     0.317        0.326     0.050      0.775       0.618
                                                                       Panel C: Summary information
 Control mean                  0           0          0            0            0          0.558           0         0          0        0.903        1.6        1.67
 Control std. deviation        1           1          1            1            1            --            1         1          1        0.037        12.3       1.37
 # observations in VHL       1,578       1,578      1,578       1,578         1,578        1,578        1,578      1,578      1,267      1,579       1,452       1,578
 # observations in HL        1,549       1,549      1,549       1,549         1,549        1,549        1,549      1,549      1,297      1,550       1,439       1,549
 # observations in V         1,550       1,550      1,550       1,550         1,550        1,550        1,550      1,550      1,263      1,551       1,434       1,550
 # observations in C         1,599       1,599      1,599       1,599         1,599        1,599        1,599      1,599      1,331      1,600       1,490       1,599
Notes. Panels A and B show treatment effect estimates relative to control. The dependent variables are indicated in the column title. Indices have been
coded so that more positive numbers are better. See Appendix for details on variable construction. In Panel A, “Any V” refers to the “Values only” and
“Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups, and “Any HL” refers to the “Health and Livelihood only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood”
treatment groups. Standard errors clustered by community are in parentheses. All regressions control for the respondent’s gender, marital status, and
education; the number of adults in the household; the number of children in the household; and the number of days between June 1, 2015 and the interview
date. The regressions in Panel A and the regressions estimating the VHL effect in Panel B control for community-pair fixed effects. The regressions
estimating the HL and V effects in Panel B control for ICM base fixed effects.
                                           TABLE IV
TREATMENT EFFECTS BY PREDICTED RELIGIOSITY WITHOUT V CURRICULUM, SIX-MONTH SURVEY
                                         Predicted religiosity             p-value of joint
                                    Low        Medium          High     equality across terciles
                                 Panel A: Pooled specification
 Composite religiosity index       0.152        0.146          0.074             0.101
                                  (0.040)      (0.039)       (0.035)
 Religion, list-randomized         -0.041       0.054          0.191             0.025
                                  (0.065)      (0.070)       (0.068)
 Monthly income                    421.8        318.5          407.3             0.912
                                  (226.3)      (188.4)       (255.9)
 Perceived relative economic       -0.164       -0.092         0.002             0.291
 status                           (0.080)      (0.090)       (0.085)
                       Panel B: Disaggregated specification, V vs. control
 Composite religiosity index       0.252        0.160          0.027             0.021
                                  (0.078)      (0.070)       (0.071)
 Religion, list-randomized         0.008        0.034          0.212             0.200
                                  (0.092)      (0.098)       (0.090)
 Monthly income                    880.6        471.7          408.3             0.607
                                  (420.2)      (298.8)       (518.0)
 Perceived relative economic       -0.050       -0.242        -0.054             0.624
 status                           (0.171)      (0.188)       (0.168)
                                Panel C: Summary information
 Mean composite religiosity        -0.123       -0.036         0.227
 index value in control and
 HL groups
Notes. Panel A shows “Any V” treatment effects on the variable in the left column, separately for each
tercile of predicted composite religiosity index value in the absence of the V curriculum. See Appendix for
details on variable construction. The composite religiosity index is the normalized sum of the intrinsic,
extrinsic, and general religion indices. The predictor variables are respondent age, gender, years of
education, literacy, and marital status; number of children in the household; and number of adults in the
household. Panel B shows treatment effects estimated by comparing the V group to the control group. All
regressions estimating treatment effects control for the respondent’s gender, marital status, and education;
the number of adults in the household; the number of children in the household; and the number of days
between June 1, 2015 and the interview date. The regressions in Panel A control for community-pair fixed
effects. The regressions in Panel B control for ICM base fixed effects. The sample is restricted to
observations where the survey respondent is the potential or actual Transform invitee. Standard errors
clustered by community are in parentheses.
                                            TABLE V
     TEST FOR EXISTENCE OF SOCIAL DESIRABILITY BIAS IN RESPONSES, SIX-MONTH SURVEY
                          I have made a                                           Someone in my
                             personal                                               household is
                         commitment to      I have read or        I wash my        experiencing
                        Jesus Christ that listened to the        hands after      physical abuse
                        is still important    Bible in the       going to the      (higher = less
                               to me           past week           bathroom            abuse)
                           Panel A: Presence of social desirability bias
 Received sensitive           -0.262             -0.217             -0.228             -0.093
 statement                    (0.023)           (0.024)             (0.021)           (0.045)
 Constant                      3.609              2.237              2.615             -1.577
                              (0.103)           (0.109)             (0.179)           (0.943)
 Observations                  6,276              6,276              6,262              1,447
                  Panel B: Interaction of social desirability bias with treatment
 Received sensitive           -0.286             -0.197             -0.261             -0.097
 statement                    (0.045)           (0.041)             (0.034)           (0.080)
 Sensitive statement           0.042              0.021              0.031              0.020
 × Any V                      (0.046)           (0.047)             (0.041)           (0.091)
 Sensitive statement           0.007             -0.059              0.037             -0.012
 × Any HL                     (0.047)           (0.048)             (0.042)           (0.091)
 Any V                         0.024              0.074              0.013             -0.101
                              (0.029)           (0.031)             (0.025)           (0.061)
 Any HL                       -0.001              0.037              0.006              0.032
                              (0.029)           (0.030)             (0.025)           (0.060)
 Constant                      3.608              2.200              2.605             -1.584
                              (0.106)           (0.110)             (0.181)           (0.909)
 Observations                  6,276              6,276              6,262              1,447
Notes. This table shows coefficients for regressions where the dependent variable is the number of
statements reported to be true in a list that includes the sensitive statement in the column label. (We use the
negative of this number for the physical abuse question.) For respondents who did not actually receive that
statement in their list, the dependent variable is the number of statements they reported to be true plus an
indicator for whether we impute that the sensitive statement is true for them based upon their response to a
direct question about it. The key explanatory variables are a dummy for having actually received the
sensitive statement in the list, treatment dummies, and interactions between sensitive statement receipt and
the treatment dummies. The regressions also control for respondent’s gender, marital status, and education;
the number of adults in the household; the number of children in the household; the number of days between
June 1, 2015 and the interview date; and community-pair fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by
community are in parentheses.
                                                                    TABLE VI
                                                        PRIMARY OUTCOMES, 30-MONTH SURVEY
                                (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)            (6)            (7)          (8)           (9)           (10)
                                          Primary religious outcomes                                              Primary economic outcomes
                                                                                                                                    Adult
                              Religion     Religion     General       Religion,       Monthly            Food       Monthly        weekly          Life        Perceived
                              intrinsic    extrinsic    religion         list-      consumption        security      income     labor supply   satisfaction     relative
                               index        index        index       randomized         (PHP)            index        (PHP)        (hours)        index       econ. status
                                                                      Panel A: Pooled specification
Any V                          -0.052       -0.008        -0.023        0.001           131.9           -0.014       -116.9         -0.8          -0.004         0.097
                              (0.025)      (0.026)       (0.025)       (0.040)          (88.2)         (0.024)      (189.0)        (1.1)         (0.022)        (0.044)
Any HL                          0.035        0.018        -0.047        0.021            -77.5          -0.050        246.1          0.8           0.036         0.019
                              (0.025)      (0.026)       (0.025)       (0.040)          (88.5)         (0.024)      (191.9)        (1.1)         (0.022)        (0.044)
FDR q-value, Any V              0.163        0.980         0.726        0.980           0.408            0.669        0.669        0.669           0.841         0.168
FWER p-value, Any V             0.163        1.000         1.000        1.000           0.680            1.000        1.000        1.000           1.000         0.168
p-value, Any V 6 vs. 30 mo.     0.000        0.000         0.002        0.370           0.235            0.309        0.012        0.227           0.755         0.000
                                                                   Panel B: Disaggregated specification
VHL                            -0.013       0.012         -0.069        0.019             56.2          -0.065       134.3          0.1           0.032          0.120
                              (0.030)      (0.033)       (0.031)       (0.055)         (115.5)         (0.037)      (287.6)        (1.6)         (0.026)        (0.062)
HL                              0.013       0.035         -0.027        0.083           254.6           -0.012       842.1          4.3           0.077          0.234
                              (0.067)      (0.074)       (0.063)       (0.055)         (195.5)         (0.052)      (393.9)        (2.1)         (0.052)        (0.109)
V                              -0.070       0.007         -0.004        0.052           481.4            0.024       501.2          2.8           0.044          0.340
                              (0.066)      (0.071)       (0.065)       (0.054)         (207.2)         (0.050)      (434.7)        (2.2)         (0.054)        (0.114)
FDR q-value, VHL = HL           0.954       0.954          0.954        0.914              --              --          --            --             --             --
FDR q-value, V = C              0.914       0.954          0.954        0.914           0.062            0.625       0.375         0.375          0.507          0.019
FWER p-value, VHL = HL          1.000       1.000          1.000        1.000              --              --          --            --             --             --
FWER p-value, V = C             1.000       1.000          1.000        1.000           0.104            0.844       0.795         0.795          0.844          0.019
p-value, V 6 vs. 30 month       0.017       0.032          0.470        0.827           0.005            0.601       0.864         0.958          0.313          0.002
                                                                  Panel C: Summary information
 Control mean                    0           0           0          0.347         6,378            0         8,162         67.8           0           3.662
 Control standard deviation      1           1           1            --          3,789            1        10,500         52.50          1           2.050
 # observations in VHL         1,441       1,441       1,441        1,441         1,441          1,440       1,441         1,441        1,441         1,440
 # observations in HL          1,366       1,366       1,366        1,366         1,366          1,365       1,366         1,366        1,366         1,365
 # observations in V           1,389       1,389       1,389        1,389         1,389          1,389       1,389         1,389        1,389         1,389
 # observations in C           1,481       1,481       1,481        1,481         1,481          1,479       1,481         1,481        1,481         1,480
Notes. Panels A and B show treatment effect estimates relative to control. The dependent variables are indicated in the column title. See Appendix and
Section V.B for details on variable construction. In Panel A, “Any V” refers to the “Values only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups,
and “Any HL” refers to the “Health and Livelihood only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups. Standard errors clustered by community
are in parentheses. In Panel B, we do not show VHL = HL q-values and FWER-adjusted p-values for primary economic outcomes because there is no
significant first-stage VHL versus HL difference in religiosity in the six-month survey. All regressions control for the respondent’s gender, marital status,
and education; the number of adults in the household; the number of children in the household; and the number of days between June 1, 2015 and the
interview date. The regressions in Panel A and the regressions estimating the VHL effect in Panel B control for community-pair fixed effects. The
regressions estimating the HL and V effects in Panel B control for ICM base fixed effects. When testing the null that the six- and 30-month treatment effects
are equal, we re-estimate the six-month treatment effects on the life satisfaction index using a variable definition that is harmonized with the 30-month
variable definition.
                                          TABLE VII
                           TREATMENT EFFECTS ON RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION
                                      6-month survey                              30-month survey
                           Catholic     Protestant       Other         Catholic      Protestant       Other
                                         Panel A: Pooled specification
 Any V                      -0.027        0.004          0.023          -0.036          0.023         0.013
                           (0.015)       (0.012)        (0.009)        (0.014)         (0.014)       (0.006)
 Any HL                     -0.004         -0.004         0.008          0.009          -0.001        -0.007
                           (0.015)        (0.013)        (0.009)        (0.015)        (0.014)       (0.006)
 p-value, Any V = C         0.064         0.765          0.008           0.014         0.102          0.025
                                      Panel B: Disaggregated specification
 VHL                        -0.032        0.000          0.031           -0.027         0.022         0.005
                           (0.020)       (0.016)        (0.012)         (0.018)        (0.018)       (0.007)
 HL                         0.007          -0.004         -0.004         0.006          0.013         -0.020
                           (0.039)        (0.035)        (0.019)        (0.040)        (0.039)       (0.012)
 V                          -0.017         0.003          0.014          -0.042         0.040         0.002
                           (0.038)        (0.032)        (0.021)        (0.038)        (0.036)       (0.015)
 p-value, VHL = HL          0.334           0.910         0.089           0.407         0.820          0.053
 p-value, V = C             0.654           0.920         0.517           0.273         0.264          0.911
                                          Panel C: Summary information
 Control mean               0.700           0.209         0.091           0.707         0.241          0.052
 # obs. in VHL              1,568           1,568         1,568           1,437         1,437          1,437
 # obs. in HL               1,537           1,537         1,537           1,364         1,364          1,364
 # obs. in V                1,539           1,539         1,539           1,385         1,385          1,385
 # obs. in C                1,585           1,585         1,585           1,477         1,477          1,477
Notes. Panels A and B show treatment effect estimates relative to control. The dependent variables are dummies
for identifying as a member of the denomination indicated in the column title. In Panel A, “Any V” refers to the
“Values only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups, and “Any HL” refers to the “Health and
Livelihood only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups. All regressions control for the
respondent’s gender, marital status, and education; the number of adults in the household; the number of children
in the household; and the number of days between June 1, 2015 and the interview date. The regressions in Panel
A and the regressions estimating the VHL effect in Panel B control for community-pair fixed effects. The
regressions estimating the HL and V effects in Panel B control for ICM base fixed effects. Standard errors
clustered by community are in parentheses.
                                                                          TABLE VIII
                                                                  MECHANISMS, 30-MONTH SURVEY
                                        (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)             (5)                 (6)                (7)                (8)
                                                     Social capital                              Locus of control               Optimism
                                                                        Community
                                                    Social safety        activities      Powerful         Locus of            Expectations                         Self-control
                                   Trust index       net index              index      others index     control index            index            Grit index          index
                                                                         Panel A: Pooled specification
 Any V                                 -0.021            0.038             -0.023          -0.047           -0.000                0.047              0.006             -0.014
                                      (0.023)           (0.019)           (0.023)         (0.024)          (0.021)               (0.022)            (0.020)           (0.018)
 Any HL                                -0.027            0.032             -0.012          -0.004           0.007                 0.016              -0.037            -0.017
                                      (0.022)           (0.019)           (0.023)         (0.024)          (0.021)               (0.022)            (0.020)           (0.018)
 p-value, Any V                        0.354             0.046             0.324           0.047            0.989                 0.034              0.761             0.458
 p-value, Any V 6 vs. 30 mo.           0.376             0.655             0.093           0.000            0.205                 0.010              0.215             0.437
                                                                      Panel B: Disaggregated specification
 VHL                                   -0.047            0.068             -0.035          -0.050           0.008                 0.062              -0.031            -0.031
                                      (0.030)           (0.026)           (0.031)         (0.031)          (0.030)               (0.028)            (0.028)           (0.026)
 HL                                    -0.083            0.035             -0.031          0.027            0.010                 0.073              -0.053            -0.107
                                      (0.057)           (0.047)           (0.053)         (0.069)          (0.058)               (0.049)            (0.059)           (0.063)
 V                                     -0.067            0.054             -0.042          -0.017           0.013                 0.116              -0.006            -0.101
                                      (0.048)           (0.047)           (0.055)         (0.069)          (0.056)               (0.053)            (0.063)           (0.065)
 p-value, VHL = HL                     0.528             0.495             0.939           0.247            0.979                 0.826              0.694             0.224
 p-value, V = C                        0.167             0.247             0.437           0.800            0.810                 0.029              0.921             0.119
 p-value, V 6 vs. 30 month             0.443             0.192             0.260           0.320            0.189                 0.033              0.562             0.200
                                                                        Panel C: Summary information
 Control mean                            0                0                   0               0                0                    0                  0                 0
 Control standard deviation              1                1                   1               1                1                    1                  1                 1
 # observations in VHL                 1,441            1,441              1,441           1,441            1,441                 1,440              1,441             1,441
 # observations in HL                  1,366            1,366              1,366           1,366            1,366                 1,365              1,366             1,366
 # observations in V                   1,389            1,389              1,389           1,389            1,389                 1,388              1,389             1,389
 # observations in C                   1,481            1,481              1,481           1,481            1,481                 1,479              1,481             1,481
Notes. Panels A and B show treatment effect estimates relative to control. The dependent variables are indicated in the column title. Indices have been coded so that more positive
numbers are better. See Appendix and Section V.B for details on variable construction. In Panel A, “Any V” refers to the “Values only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood”
treatment groups, and “Any HL” refers to the “Health and Livelihood only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups. Standard errors clustered by community are in
parentheses. All regressions control for the respondent’s gender, marital status, and education; the number of adults in the household; the number of children in the household; and
the number of days between June 1, 2015 and the interview date. The regressions in Panel A and the regressions estimating the VHL effect in Panel B control for community-pair
fixed effects. The regressions estimating the HL and V effects in Panel B control for ICM base fixed effects. When testing the null that the six- and 30-month treatment effects are
equal, we re-estimate the six-month treatment effects on the community activities index using a variable definition that is harmonized with the 30-month variable definition.
                                                                   TABLE IX
                                                      SECONDARY OUTCOMES, 30-MONTH SURVEY
                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)       (12)
                               Salvation                                      Hygiene                             Migration                  No        Child         #
                               by grace              Financial                  index,    Hygiene,                   and         No      domestic      labor     children
                                belief     Assets    inclusion   Health       non-list-      list        House    remittance   discord   violence,    supply     enrolled
                                 index     index       index       index      random.     random.        index      index       index    list-rand.   (hours)   in school
                                                                       Panel A: Pooled specification
 Any V                           0.085      0.013     0.039       -0.017         0.050      0.073        0.021      -0.021      -0.029    -0.042        0.0       -0.03
                                (0.020)    (0.024)   (0.023)     (0.022)       (0.022)     (0.041)      (0.024)    (0.023)     (0.020)   (0.039)      (0.1)      (0.01)
 Any HL                          0.009      0.018     0.057       -0.017        -0.008      0.019        0.037       0.028      -0.004    -0.059       -0.0       -0.02
                                (0.020)    (0.024)   (0.023)     (0.022)       (0.022)     (0.041)      (0.024)    (0.023)     (0.020)   (0.039)      (0.1)      (0.01)
 p-value, Any V                  0.000      0.590     0.090        0.452         0.025      0.079        0.401       0.352       0.146     0.287      0.813      0.062
 p-value, Any V 6 vs. 30 mo.     0.000      0.149     0.514        0.586         0.892      0.539        0.689       0.070       0.872     0.583      0.359      0.588
                                                                    Panel B: Disaggregated specification
 VHL                              0.093     0.031     0.096       -0.034         0.042      0.091        0.058      0.006       -0.034     -0.100       -0.0      -0.04
                                (0.028)    (0.039)   (0.033)     (0.032)       (0.033)     (0.058)      (0.034)    (0.031)     (0.027)    (0.053)      (0.2)     (0.02)
 HL                              -0.014     0.065     0.075       -0.022         0.038      0.002        0.086      0.046       -0.032     -0.078        0.3       0.02
                                (0.054)    (0.062)   (0.059)     (0.046)       (0.063)     (0.055)      (0.058)    (0.043)     (0.046)    (0.056)      (0.3)     (0.03)
 V                                0.066     0.059     0.059       -0.021         0.093      0.048        0.084      0.008       -0.047     -0.046        0.4       0.01
                                (0.053)    (0.063)   (0.054)     (0.050)       (0.058)     (0.063)      (0.050)    (0.053)     (0.043)    (0.055)      (0.3)     (0.03)
 p-value, VHL = HL                0.047     0.594     0.749        0.793         0.948      0.103        0.644      0.352        0.965      0.687      0.317     0.053
 p-value, V = C                   0.215     0.345     0.273        0.670         0.108      0.447        0.097      0.886        0.282      0.400      0.219     0.844
 p-value, V 6 vs. 30 mo.          0.056     0.501     0.240        0.705         0.475      0.401        0.408      0.465        0.979      0.373      0.557     0.467
                                                                      Panel C: Summary information
 Control mean                     0          0          0            0             0        0.405          0          0          0        0.939        1.1       1.68
 Control std. deviation           1          1          1            1             1          --           1          1          1          --         8.2       1.33
 # observations in VHL          1,441      1,441      1,441        1,441         1,441      1,441        1,441      1,441      1,441      1,441       1,441      1,441
 # observations in HL           1,366      1,366      1,366        1,366         1,366      1,366        1,366      1,366      1,366      1,366       1,366      1,366
 # observations in V            1,389      1,389      1,389        1,389         1,389      1,389        1,389      1,389      1,388      1,389       1,389      1,389
 # observations in C            1,481      1,481      1,481        1,481         1,481      1,481        1,481      1,481      1,481      1,481       1,481      1,481
Notes. Panels A and B show treatment effect estimates relative to control. The dependent variables are indicated in the column title. Indices have been coded so
that more positive numbers are better. See Appendix and Section V.B for details on variable construction. In Panel A, “Any V” refers to the “Values only” and
“Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment groups, and “Any HL” refers to the “Health and Livelihood only” and “Values, Health, and Livelihood” treatment
groups. Standard errors clustered by community are in parentheses. All regressions control for the respondent’s gender, marital status, and education; the number
of adults in the household; the number of children in the household; and the number of days between June 1, 2015 and the interview date. The regressions in Panel
A and the regressions estimating the VHL effect in Panel B control for community-pair fixed effects. The regressions estimating the HL and V effects in Panel B
control for ICM base fixed effects. When testing the null that the six- and 30-month treatment effects are equal, we re-estimate the six-month treatment effects on
the non-list-randomized hygiene index, the house index, and the migration and remittance index using variable definitions that are harmonized with the 30-month
variable definitions.
                                                           Religion Intrinsic Index
                                  0.4
            Any V minus No V
             (control std devs)   0.3

                                  0.2

                                  0.1

                                    0
                                         0   5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
                                                             Religion intrinsic index percentile



                                                           Religion Extrinsic Index
                                  0.5
          Any V minus No V
           (control std devs)




                                  0.4
                                  0.3
                                  0.2
                                  0.1
                                   0
                                         0   5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
                                                             Religion extrinsic index percentile



                                                            General Religion Index
                                  0.4
           Any V minus No V
            (control std devs)




                                  0.3
                                  0.2
                                  0.1
                                    0
                                  -0.1
                                         0   5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
                                                              General religion index percentile


                                                FIGURE I
Religiosity in VHL and V groups (“Any V”) minus religiosity in HL and control groups (“No V”) at each
                                percentile, six months after treatment.

We rank households who were invited to receive the Values curriculum by their religiosity index level at six months.
Define 𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖 to be the index level for the person whose percentile ranking is i. Similarly define 𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖 for those not invited
to receive the Values curriculum. Each graph plots 𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖 − 𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖 for 𝑖𝑖 ∈ {1,2, … , 100} for the religiosity index in the
graph’s title. The y-axis units are multiples of the control group’s standard deviation. The intrinsic and extrinsic indices
are discrete measures that can take on only a relatively small set of outcomes. A one-point difference in the intrinsic
index is 0.35 control standard deviations, and a one-point difference in the extrinsic index is 0.22 control standard
deviations. The top two graphs show that there is no percentile at which the difference between 𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖 and 𝑁𝑁𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖 is greater
than one point for the intrinsic index and two points for extrinsic index.
                          APPENDIX TABLE A.1. SIX-MONTH SURVEY OUTCOME VARIABLE CONSTRUCTION
Unless indicated otherwise in the table, the variable listed in the first column is created by summing its components listed in the
second column. Some components are made up of sub-components, which are shown to the right of the components.
     Variable             Components             Sub-components (if any)                      Details                            Possible answers
                                                               Panel A: Primary religious outcomes
 Religion           I enjoy thinking about my religion                      From Gorsuch and McPherson (1989).        1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
 intrinsic index    It is important to me to spend time in private thought Index formed by adding together            1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    and prayer                                              responses without first normalizing.
                    I have often had a strong sense of God’s presence                                                 1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    I try hard to live all my life according to my                                                    1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    religious beliefs
                    My whole approach to life is based on religion                                                    1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    Although I am religious, I don't let it affect my daily   This question not used in our main      1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                    life                                                      analysis
                    It doesn't much matter what I believe so long as I am     This question not used in our main      1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                    good                                                      analysis
                    Although I believe in my religion, many other things      This question not used in our main      1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                    are more important in life                                analysis
 Religion           I go to religious services because it helps me to         From Gorsuch and McPherson (1989).      1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
 extrinsic index    make friends                                              Index formed by adding together
                    I pray mainly to gain relief and protection               responses without first normalizing.    1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    What religion offers me most is comfort in times of                                               1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    trouble and sorrow
                    Prayer is for peace and happiness                                                                 1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    I go to religious services mostly to spend time with                                              1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    my friends
                    I go to religious services mainly because I enjoy                                                 1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                    seeing people there
 General religion   To what extent do you consider yourself a religious       From the Brief Multidimensional         1 Not religious at all - 4 Very religious
 index              person?                                                   Measure of Religiousness/Spirituality
                                                                              (Fetzer Institute 1999)
                    In the last month, have you tried to convince anyone      From ICM survey                         No = 0, Yes = 1
                    else to change the way they think about God?
                    How many people [have you tried to convince]?             Adapted from ICM survey                 Integer ≥ 0
    Variable            Components           Sub-components (if any)                     Details                                  Possible answers
                                                          Panel A: Primary religious outcomes
                  How often do you go to religious services?                                                           Daily = 365, More than once a week =
                                                                                                                       104, Once a week = 52, Once or twice
                                                                                                                       a month = 18, Every month or so = 9,
                                                                                                                       Once or twice a year = 1.5, Never = 0.
                  In how many of the past 7 days did you pray                                                          Integer 0 – 7
                  privately in places other than at a place of worship?
                  How satisfied are you with your spiritual life right     From ICM survey                             1 Not at all satisfied - 5 Very satisfied
                  now?
                  The Bible is accurate in all that it teaches             From ICM survey. These 3 responses are      1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                  I believe the Bible has decisive authority over what I   added together before standardizing, and    1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                  say and do                                               then given triple weight when averaging
                                                                           the components to construct the general
                  I believe the Christian God—Father, Son, and Holy                                                    1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                                                                           religion index. Asked only of Christians.
                  Spirit—is the only true God
Religion, list-   I have made a personal commitment to Jesus Christ        Adapted from ICM survey. Both               False = 0, True = 1
randomized        that is still important to me today                      questions elicited using list
                                                                           randomization. Outcome variable is          False = 0, True = 1
                  I have read or listened to the Bible in the past week
                                                                           average of two responses.
                                                           Panel B: Primary non-religious outcomes
Monthly           Food consumption in the last week                        Total amount spent in the last week on      Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
consumption                                                                viand, rice/corn/beans/etc.,                2015)
                                                                           bananas/cassava/potatoes/yams/starches/
                                                                           etc., fruits/vegetables, milk/eggs, non-
                                                                           alcoholic beverages. Multiplied by 30/7.
                  Non-food consumption in the last week                    Total amount spent in the last week on      Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                                                                           alcoholic beverages, cigarettes, phone      2015)
                                                                           credit, transportation, clothing/shoes,
                                                                           soaps/cosmetics, gifts. Multiplied by
                                                                           30/7.
                  Average monthly celebration spending in last six         Total amount spent on weddings,             Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                  months                                                   funerals, festivals, anniversaries, and     2015)
                                                                           birthdays in the last six months divided
                                                                           by 6
    Variable           Components             Sub-components (if any)                    Details                               Possible answers
                                                        Panel B: Primary non-religious outcomes
Food security    No household member has gone to bed hungry in          Constructed from question, “In the last 6   No = 1; Yes = 0; Yes, but during lean
index            last six months                                        months, did you or any other person in      season only = 0
                                                                        this household ever go to bed hungry        [Lean season in the Philippines is
                                                                        because there were not enough resources     usually July and August]
                                                                        for food?”
                 No household member has gone to bed hungry in          Constructed from question, “In the last 6   No = 1; Yes = 0; Yes, but during lean
                 last six months outside of lean season                 months, did you or any other person in      season only = 1
                                                                        this household ever go to bed hungry        [Lean season in the Philippines is
                                                                        because there were not enough resources     usually July and August]
                                                                        for food?”
                 Number of days where no household member has           Constructed as 7 minus the number of        Integer 0 – 7
                 gone to bed hungry in past seven days                  days a member of the household has gone
                                                                        to bed hungry in past seven days
Monthly income   Total household payments received for agricultural     Payments in the last 30 days                Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                 labor on behalf of non-household member                                                            2015)

                 Total household payments received for formal          Payments in the last 30 days                 Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                 employment                                                                                         2015)
                 Total household payments received for housework       Payments in the last 30 days                 Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                                                                                                                    2015)
                 Total household payments received for tending         Payments in the last 30 days                 Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                 animals in an outside household                                                                    2015)
                 Total household payments received for operating       Payments in the last 30 days                 Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                 business that is not the household’s                                                               2015)
                 Total household payments for daily labor              Payments in the last 30 days                 Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                                                                                                                    2015)
                 Total household payments received for other work      Payments in the last 30 days                 Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                 outside the household                                                                              2015)
                 Total profit from household businesses                In most recent month with normal sales       Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                                                                                                                    2015)
    Variable              Components             Sub-components (if any)                        Details                          Possible answers
                                                             Panel B: Primary non-religious outcomes
Adult weekly        Total hours spent in outside agricultural labor for      During past seven days, only household   Integer
labor supply        non-household member                                     members age ≥ 17
                    Total hours spent in formal employment                   During past seven days, only household   Integer
                                                                             members age ≥ 17
                    Total hours spent doing housework in an outside          During past seven days, only household   Integer
                    household                                                members age ≥ 17
                    Total hours spent tending animals in an outside          During past seven days, only household   Integer
                    household during past seven days                         members age ≥ 17
                    Total hours spent operating business that is not the     During past seven days, only household   Integer
                    household’s                                              members age ≥ 17
                    Total hours spent on daily labor                         During past seven days, only household   Integer
                                                                             members age ≥ 17
                    Total hours spent on other work outside the              During past seven days, only household   Integer
                    household                                                members age ≥ 17
Life satisfaction   Kessler K6 nonspecific       About how often during From Kessler et al. (2002). Index formed      1 All of the time - 5 none of the time
index               distress scale               the past 30 days did you by adding together responses without
                                                 feel nervous?               first normalizing.
                                                 About how often during                                               1 All of the time - 5 none of the time
                                                 the past 30 days did you
                                                 feel hopeless?
                                                 About how often during                                               1 All of the time - 5 none of the time
                                                 the past 30 days did you
                                                 feel restless or fidgety?
                                                 About how often during                                               1 All of the time - 5 none of the time
                                                 the past 30 days did you
                                                 feel so depressed that
                                                 nothing could you cheer
                                                 you up?
                                                 About how often during                                               1 All of the time - 5 none of the time
                                                 the past 30 days did you
                                                 feel that everything was
                                                 difficult?
                                                 About how often during                                               1 All of the time - 5 none of the time
                                                 the past 30 days did you
                                                 feel worthless?
    Variable            Components            Sub-components (if any)                     Details                      Possible answers
                                                         Panel B: Primary non-religious outcomes
                  Sum of 4 Gallup World       Did you experience                                            No = 0, Yes = 1
                  Poll questions              enjoyment during a lot
                                              of the day yesterday?
                                              Did you experience                                            No = 0, Yes = 1
                                              happiness during a lot of
                                              the day yesterday?
                                              Did you experience                                            No = 1, Yes = 0
                                              worry during a lot of the
                                              day yesterday?
                                              Did you experience                                            No = 1, Yes = 0
                                              sadness during a lot of
                                              the day yesterday?
                  Did you smile or laugh a lot yesterday?                From Gallup World Poll             No = 0, Yes = 1
                  How would you describe your satisfaction with life?     Elicited using Cantril’s ladder   1 Very dissatisfied - 10 Very satisfied
                  Taking all things together, would you say you are…      From World Values Survey          1 Not at all happy - 4 Very happy
Perceived         Where would you place your household on the             Elicited using Cantril’s ladder   1 Poorest individuals of your
relative          ladder in terms of economic status?                                                       community - 10 Best-off members of
economic status                                                                                             your community
                                                                  Panel C: Mechanisms
Trust index       In general, would you say that most people can be                                         Most people can’t be trusted = 0, Most
                  trusted or that most people cannot be trusted?                                            people can be trusted = 1
                  Do you think most people would try to take              From World Values Survey          Try to take advantage of you = 0, Try
                  advantage of you if they got a chance, or would they                                      to be fair = 1
                  try to be fair?
                  Would you say that most of the time people try to be    From General Social Survey        Looking out for themselves = 0, Try to
                  helpful, or that they are mostly just looking out for                                     be helpful = 1
                  themselves?
    Variable              Components              Sub-components (if any)                   Details                Possible answers
                                                                      Panel C: Mechanisms
Social safety net   In the case where someone in your household did                                      1 Very unlikely - 5 Very likely
index               not have 40 PHP available for an urgent need, how
                    likely is it that you could access this 40 PHP from a
                    source outside your household?
                    In the case where someone in your household did                                      1 Very unlikely - 5 Very likely
                    not have 1000 PHP available for an urgent need,
                    how likely is it that you could access this 1000 PHP
                    from a source outside your household?
                    Do you discuss personal issues with anyone outside                                   No = 0, Yes = 1
                    your close family?
                    How often do you usually speak to this person?                                       Daily = 365, A few times a week =
                                                                                                         104, Weekly = 52, A few times a
                                                                                                         month = 24, Monthly = 12, Every
                                                                                                         month or so = 9, A few times a year =
                                                                                                         6, Yearly = 1. If there is no such
                                                                                                         person, coded as 0.
                    Did anyone from the household receive any meals                                      No = 0, Yes = 1
                    from another household in your local community?
                    How many meals [were received]?                       Top-coded at 99th percentile   Integer
                    Did this household give any meals to anybody from                                    No = 0, Yes = 1
                    another household in your local community?
                    How many meals [were given]?                          Top-coded at 99th percentile   Integer
Community           Did you attend any village leaders meetings in the                                   No = 0, Yes = 1
activities index    last 6 months?
                    In the past 6 months, have you participated in any                                   No = 0, Yes = 1
                    community activities?
                    How frequently did you participate in community                                      Daily = 365, A few times a week =
                    activities?                                                                          104, Weekly = 52, A few times a
                                                                                                         month = 24, Monthly = 12, Every
                                                                                                         month or so = 9, A few times a year =
                                                                                                         6, Yearly = 1. If the respondent did
                                                                                                         not participate, coded as 0.
    Variable             Components             Sub-components (if any)                      Details                            Possible answers
                                                                    Panel C: Mechanisms
Perceived stress   How often have you felt that you were unable to        From Cohen et al. (1983). Index formed      1 Very Often - 5 Never
scale index        control the important things in your life?             by adding together responses without
                                                                          first normalizing.
                   How often have you felt confident about your ability                                               1 Never - 5 Very Often
                   to handle your personal problems?
                   How often have you felt that things were going your                                                1 Never - 5 Very Often
                   way?
                   How often have you felt difficulties were piling up                                                1 Very Often - 5 Never
                   so high that you could not overcome them?
Powerful others    I feel like what happens in my life is mostly          From Levenson (1981) Powerful Others        1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
index              determined by God                                      scale, modified to apply to God’s control
                   Although I might have good ability, I will not be      of one’s life. Index formed by adding       1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                   successful without appealing to God                    together responses without first
                                                                          normalizing.
                   My life is chiefly controlled by God                                                               1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                   Getting what I want requires pleasing God                                                          1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                   Whether or not I have an accident and hurt myself                                                  1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                   physically depends mostly on God
                   In order to have my plans work, I make sure that                                                   1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                   they fit with God’s plan for me
Locus of control   Internality subscale         Whether or not I am       From Levenson (1981). Index formed by       1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
index                                           successful depends        adding together responses without first
                                                mostly on my ability      normalizing.
                                              Whether or not I have an                                                1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                                              accident and hurt myself
                                              depends mostly on how
                                              careful I am on a daily
                                              basis
                                              When I make plans, I                                                    1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                                              am almost certain to
                                              make them work
                                              How many friends I                                                      1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                                              have depends on how
                                              nice a person I am
Variable        Components   Sub-components (if any)                      Details                            Possible answers
                                                   Panel C: Mechanisms
                             I can pretty much                                                     1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                             determine what will
                             happen in my life
                             I am usually able to                                                  1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                             protect my personal
                             interests
                             When I get what I want                                                1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                             it’s usually because I
                             worked hard for it
                             My life is determined by                                              1 Strongly disagree - 5 Strongly agree
                             my own actions
           Chance subscale   To a great extent my life From Levenson (1981). Index formed by       1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                             is controlled by            adding together responses without first
                             accidental happenings       normalizing.
                             Often there is no chance                                              1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                             of protecting my
                             personal interests from
                             bad luck happening
                             When I get what I want,                                               1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                             it is usually because I
                             am lucky
                             I have often found that                                               1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                             what is going to happen
                             will happen
                             Whether or not I get into                                             1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                             an accident and hurt
                             myself physically is
                             mostly a matter of luck
                             It is not wise for me to                                              1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                             plan too far ahead
                             because many things
                             turn out to be a matter of
                             good or bad fortune
    Variable             Components             Sub-components (if any)                        Details                              Possible answers
                                                                       Panel C: Mechanisms
                                                Whether or not I am                                                     1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                                                successful depends on
                                                whether I am lucky
                                                enough to be in the right
                                                place at the right time
                                                It is chiefly a matter of                                               1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
                                                fate whether or not I
                                                have a few friends or
                                                many friends
                   World Values Survey          Which comes closest to       From World Values Survey                   1 fate - 10 people
                   locus of control             your view on a scale on
                                                which (1) means
                                                “everything in life is
                                                determined by fate” and
                                                (10) means “people
                                                shape their fate
                                                themselves”?
Life orientation   In uncertain times, I usually expect the best             From the Life Orientation Test – Revised   1 I disagree a lot - 5 I agree a lot
index                                                                        index by Scheier et al. (1994). Index
                   If something can go wrong for me, it will                                                            1 I agree a lot - 5 I disagree a lot
                                                                             formed by adding together responses
                   I’m always optimistic about my future                     without first normalizing.                 1 I disagree a lot - 5 I agree a lot
                   I hardly ever expect things to go my way                                                             1 I agree a lot - 5 I disagree a lot
                   I rarely count on good things happening to me                                                        1 I agree a lot - 5 I disagree a lot
                   Overall, I expect more good things to happen to me                                                   1 I disagree a lot - 5 I agree a lot
                   than bad
Expectations       Which step [of the life satisfaction ladder] do you     Elicited using Cantril’s ladder              1 Very dissatisfied - 10 Very satisfied
index              believe you will be on in 5 years?
                   Where do you think you will be on this [relative        Elicited using Cantril’s ladder              1 Poorest individuals - 10 Best-off
                   economic status] ladder 5 years from now?                                                            members
    Variable           Components           Sub-components (if any)                      Details                                Possible answers
                                                                  Panel C: Mechanisms
Optimism index   How optimistic are you in general, on a scale of 1 to From Scale Optimism-Pessimism-2 by            1 Not at all optimistic - 7 Very
                 7?                                                     Kemper et al. (2015). Pessimism scale        optimistic
                                                                        shown to respondents had 1 be “not at all
                 How pessimistic are you in general, on a scale of 1                                                 1 Very pessimistic - 7 Not at all
                                                                        pessimistic” and 7 be “very pessimistic”
                 to 7?                                                                                               pessimistic
Grit index       New ideas and projects sometimes distract me from       From the Short Grit Scale (Duckworth        1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
                 previous ones                                           and Quinn 2009). Index formed by            at all
                                                                         adding together responses without first
                 Setbacks don’t discourage me                                                                        1 Not like me at all - 5 Very much like
                                                                         normalizing.
                                                                                                                     me
                 I have been obsessed with a certain idea or project                                                 1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
                 for a short time but later lost interest                                                            at all
                 I am a very hard worker                                                                             1 Not like me at all - 5 Very much like
                                                                                                                     me
                 I often set a goal but later choose to pursue a                                                     1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
                 different one                                                                                       at all
                 I have difficulty maintaining my focus on projects                                                  1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
                 that take more than a few months                                                                    at all
                 I finish whatever I begin                                                                           1 Not like me at all - 5 Very much like
                                                                                                                     me

                 I am diligent                                                                                       1 Not like me at all - 5 Very much like
                                                                                                                     me
Self-control     I have a hard time breaking bad habits                  Subset of the Brief Self-Control Scale by   1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
index                                                                    Tangney, Baumeister, and Boone (2004).      at all
                 I get distracted easily                                 Index formed by adding together             1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
                                                                         responses without first normalizing.        at all
                 I say inappropriate things                                                                          1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
                                                                                                                     at all
                 I refuse things that are bad for me, even if they are                                               1 Not like me at all - 5 Very much like
                 fun                                                                                                 me
                 People would say that I have very strong self-                                                      1 Not like me at all - 5 Very much like
                 discipline                                                                                          me
                 Pleasure and fun sometimes keep me from getting                                                     1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
                 work done                                                                                           at all
    Variable         Components            Sub-components (if any)                    Details                        Possible answers
                                                              Panel C: Mechanisms
               I’m good at resisting temptation                                                           1 Not like me at all - 5 Very much like
                                                                                                          me
               I do things that feel good in the moment but regret                                        1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
               later on                                                                                   at all
               Sometimes I can’t stop myself from doing                                                   1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
               something, even if I know it’s wrong                                                       at all
               I often act without thinking through all the                                               1 Very much like me - 5 Not like me
               alternatives                                                                               at all
                                                            Panel D: Secondary outcomes
Salvation by   If I am good enough, God will cleanse me of my         Question asked only of Christians   1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
grace belief   sins
index
               I follow God’s laws so that I can go to heaven        Question asked only of Christians    1 Strongly agree - 5 Strongly disagree
               Which of the following best describes your belief                                          There is no life after death = 0; I will
               about what happens after death?                                                            go to heaven because I tried my best
                                                                                                          to be a good person and to live a good
                                                                                                          life = 0; I will go to heaven because I
                                                                                                          tried to be involved in my religion,
                                                                                                          pray, and live the way I think God
                                                                                                          wants me to = 0; I will go to hell = 0;
                                                                                                          I’m not sure if I will go to heaven or
                                                                                                          hell = 0; I will be reincarnated = 0;
                                                                                                          My belief is not well-described by any
                                                                                                          of these choices = 0; I will go to
                                                                                                          heaven because I have accepted Jesus
                                                                                                          Christ as my personal savior = 1
Assets index   Chance that you, or someone in your household,                                             1 Very unlikely - 5 Very likely
               would have 40 PHP available for your use in this
               circumstance of urgent need?
               Chance that you, or someone in your household,                                             1 Very unlikely - 5 Very likely
               would have 1,000 PHP available for your use in this
               circumstance of urgent need?
Variable         Components          Sub-components (if any)                       Details                            Possible answers
                                                       Panel D: Secondary outcomes
           Number of productive assets acquired in last 6        Number of the following acquired in the    Integer ≥ 0
           months                                                last 6 months: tractors, sewing machines
                                                                 and farm tools. Top-coded at 99th
                                                                 percentile.
           Value of the productive assets in the household       Sum of the amount paid for the above       Value of assets in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45
           acquired in the last 6 months                         categories of assets. Top-coded at 99th    PHP in 2015)
                                                                 percentile.
           Number of house assets acquired in last 6 months      Number of the following acquired in the    Integer ≥ 0
                                                                 last 6 months: TV,
                                                                 VTR/VHS/VCD/DVD player,
                                                                 radio/transistor/stereo, electric fan,
                                                                 refrigerator/freezer, telephone/mobile
                                                                 phone, sala set, bicycle or pedicab ,
                                                                 motorcab or motorcycle, boat, washing
                                                                 machine, chair/stool, bed or cot, table,
                                                                 watch or clock, jewelry, gas stove. Top-
                                                                 coded at 99th percentile.
           Value of the house assets acquired in the last 6      Sum of the amount paid for the above       Value of assets in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45
           months                                                categories of assets. Top-coded at 99th    PHP in 2015)
                                                                 percentile.
           Number of productive assets (level)                   Number of tractors, sewing machines,       Integer ≥ 0
                                                                 and farm tools owned. Top-coded at 99th
                                                                 percentile.
           Value of productive assets (level)                    Sum of the amount paid for the above       Value of assets in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45
                                                                 assets. Top-coded at 99th percentile.      PHP in 2015)
           Number of house assets (level)                        Number of the following owned: TV,         Integer ≥ 0
                                                                 VTR/VHS/VCD/DVD player,
                                                                 radio/transistor/stereo, electric fan,
                                                                 refrigerator/freezer, telephone/mobile
                                                                 phone, sala set, bicycle or pedicab ,
                                                                 motorcab or motorcycle, boat, washing
                                                                 machine, chair/stool, bed or cot, table,
                                                                 watch or clock, jewelry, gas stove. Top-
                                                                 coded at 99th percentile.
    Variable            Components            Sub-components (if any)                  Details                                  Possible answers
                                                            Panel D: Secondary outcomes
                  Value of house assets (level)                       Sum of the amount paid for the above            Value of assets in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45
                                                                      assets. Top-coded at 99th percentile.           PHP in 2015)
                  How much money do you have set aside in savings?                                                    Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                                                                                                                      2015)
Financial         Do you or anyone in your household currently have                                                   No = 0, Yes = 1
inclusion index   money set aside as savings?
                  Do you—by yourself or with other people—                                                            No = 0, Yes = 1
                  currently have an account at a bank?
                  Have you made a deposit at a financial institution in                                               No = 0, Yes = 1
                  the past 6 months?
Health index      Number of serious health events in the household         We top-code at the 99th percentile and     Integer
                  (past 6 months)                                          multiply by -1
                  Total number of workdays missed by household             We top-code each household member at       Integer
                  members due to illness in past 30 days                   30 days and multiply by -1
                  Number of household members that have suffered           We code this as the negative of the        Integer
                  an illness that have kept them from working (last 30     response
                  days)
Hygiene index,    Own or lease animals that are not kept in a separate                                                No = 1, Yes = 0
non-list          stable
randomized        At least one household member practices open             Coded yes if primary latrine is forest,    No = 1, Yes = 0
                  defecation                                               bushes, fields, bodies of water, hanging
                                                                           latrine, uncovered pit latrine, open pit
Hygiene, list-    I treat my water before drinking it, for example by      Both questions elicited using list         No = 0, Yes = 1
randomized        using solar disinfection, boiling it, or using a water   randomization. Outcome variable is
                  filter                                                   average of two components’ responses
                  I wash my hands after going to the bathroom                                                         No = 0, Yes = 1
    Variable             Components             Sub-components (if any)                Details                                  Possible answers
                                                              Panel D: Secondary outcomes
House index        Are all rooms leak-free?                                                                           No = 0, Yes = 1
                   Are at least some rooms leak-free?                                                                 No = 0, Yes = 1
                   Are all rooms able to be safely locked?                                                            No = 0, Yes = 1
                   Are at least some rooms able to be safely locked?                                                  No = 0, Yes = 1
                   Primary source of energy for lighting is electricity                                               No = 0, Yes = 1
                   Primary latrine is inside the house                                                                No = 0, Yes = 1
Migration and      Number of migrators in the household                   Number of household members who have        Integer
remittance index                                                          slept outside the house for more than two
                                                                          consecutive nights for work in the past
                                                                          six months
                   Number of days migrators in the household were                                                     Integer
                   gone in the last six months
                   Number of migrators who sent remittances or                                                        Integer
                   brought money home to the household in the last six
                   months
                   Household had at least one migrator who sent                                                       No = 0, Yes = 1
                   remittances or brought cash home in the last six
                   months
                   Amount received in remittances or cash brought                                                     Amount in PHP (1 USD ≈ 45 PHP in
                   home by household migrators in the last six months                                                 2015)
No discord index   During the last one month, did you have any major                                                  No = 1, Yes = 0
                   arguments with your spouse or partner over
                   spending on major household items or assets?
                   During the last one month, did you have any major                                                  No = 1, Yes = 0
                   arguments with your spouse or partner over saving
                   decisions?
                   During the last one month, did you have any major                                                  No = 1, Yes = 0
                   arguments with your spouse or partner over the
                   behavior and disciplining of children?
    Variable           Components             Sub-components (if any)                Details                               Possible answers
                                                            Panel D: Secondary outcomes
                 During the last one month, did you have any major                                               No = 1, Yes = 0
                 arguments with your spouse or partner over
                 interactions with relatives?
                 During the last one month, did you have any major                                               No = 1, Yes = 0
                 arguments with your spouse or partner over alcohol
                 consumption?
                 During the last one month, did you have any major                                               No = 1, Yes = 0
                 arguments with your spouse or partner over any
                 other issues?
No domestic      Someone in my household is experiencing physical       Question elicited using list             No = 1, Yes = 0
violence, list   abuse                                                  randomization.
randomized
Child labor      Total hours spent in outside agricultural labor for    During past seven days, only household   Integer
supply           non-household member                                   members age ≤ 16
                 Total hours spent in formal employment                 During past seven days, only household   Integer
                                                                        members age ≤ 16
                 Total hours spent doing housework in an outside        During past seven days, only household   Integer
                 household                                              members age ≤ 16
                 Total hours spent tending animals in an outside        During past seven days, only household   Integer
                 household during past seven days                       members age ≤ 16
                 Total hours spent operating business that is not the   During past seven days, only household   Integer
                 household’s                                            members age ≤ 16
                 Total hours spent on daily labor                       During past seven days, only household   Integer
                                                                        members age ≤ 16
                 Total hours spent on other work outside the            During past seven days, only household   Integer
                 household                                              members age ≤ 16
# children                                                              Age ≤ 16                                 Integer
enrolled in
school
