                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               FEDERAL DEDUCTIBILITY AND
                                LOCAL PROPERTY TAX RATES




                                  Douglas Holtz-Eakin

                                     Harvey Rosen




                                Working Paper No. 2427




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 1987




We thank Ralph Braid, Amy Ellen Schwartz, Ronnie Lowenstein, seminar participants
at SUNY-Stony Brook and the University of Maryland, and a referee for valuable
comments. Dan Edelstein provided valuable assistance with the computations.
We are grateful to a grant from the Olin Foundation to Princeton University for
financial support. Support from the Ford Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #2427
                                                     November 1987




                 Federal Deductibility and Local Property Tax Rates




                                      ABSTRACT




       In current discussions of tax reform in the United States, there is con-

siderable controversy concerning the effects of allowing individuals to deduct

state and local taxes when calculating their federal income tax liability. Recent

econometric work has suggested that federal deductibility of state and local

taxes has raised the proportion of these taxes --   especially   property taxes -

- in   local budgets. This paper lends additional support to these earlier findings

by showing that one channel through which deductibility leads to higher local

property tax revenues is by increasing the rate of local property taxation. Specifically,

we find that if deductibility were eliminated, the mean property tax rate in

our sample of 82 comunities would fall by 0.00715 ($7.15 per thousand dollars

of assessed property), or 21.1 percent of the mean tax rate.




Douglas Holtz-Eakin                                   Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Columbia University                                   Princeton University
New york, NY 10027                                    Princeton, NJ 08544

(212) 280-3685                                        (609) 452-4022
1. Introduction
    Recent discussions of tax reform in the United States have

focused attention upon the relationship between fiscal policies
of the federal government and those of state and local
governments. In particular, there has been considerable
controversy concerning the effects of allowing individuals to

deduct state and local taxes when calculating their federal
income tax liability. Proponents of deductibility argue that it
is an essential feature of the revenue system of sub-federal
governments. Nevertheless, the U.S. Treasury (1984] proposed
complete elimination of this deduction, and the Tax Reform Act of

1986 removed the deductibility of state sales taxes.
     Does deductibility have an important impact on state and
local taxes and expenditures? The evidence is mixed. Hettich
and Winer [1984], Noto and Zimmerman [1984], and Inman [1985]
found that deductibility has little influence. More recently,
however, Feldstein and Metcalf [1986] estimated a large influence

of federal deductibility on sub-federal government behavior.
Their analysis of state-wide data for 1980 suggested that
removing deductibility would greatly reduce reliance on

deductible taxes, inter alia. However, this effect was measured
imprecisely in the sense that the relevant elasticity was small

relative to its standard error. Holtz-Eakin and Rosen [1987]

examined the same issue using a panel data set of individual
municipal governments over the period 1978-1980. They found that
deductibility had a statistically significant impact on the

                               —1—
amount of deductible taxes in the mix of local financing,

although the point estimate of the effect was smaller than that

suggested by Feldstein and Ivietcaif)-

     One issue that has not received much attention in previous
empirical studies is the mechanism by which deductibility affects
reliance on various revenue sources. As noted above, the focus
has been the impact of deductibility on tax revenues from various
sources. Tax revenues are the product of a tax rate and a tax

base. Do revenue adjustments in response to changes in
deductibility rules work through changes in the rate or the base?

This issue is particularly interesting in the case of the local

property tax, where policymakers have direct control only over

the statutory rate and the assessment ratio, not the base. It

would be quite surprising if revenue adjustments were entirely
the consequence of endogenous changes in the value of the tax

base. Put another way, the credibility of the view that
deductibility increases reliance on deductible revenue sources

would be strengthened if there were empirical evidence linking

deductibility with higher property tax rates.
     This is the issue addressed in the present paper. The
results suggest that federal deductibility of property tax
payments does indeed have a positive impact on the property tax
rate. Specifically, in our sample of municipalities
deductibility increased the mean property tax rate $7.15 per

thousand dollars of assessed property; a rise of 21.1 percent.
     The next section presents a model of property tax rate

                                 —2—
determination. Section 3 discusses the data used to estimate the

model and the econometric issues that arise in doing so. The
results are contained in Section 4. The final section is a

summary.



2. The Model
     This section develops a model of the determination of the

property tax rate in a community. We begin by considering the
individual's choice of an optimal property tax rate and then turn

to the question of how individual preferences are translated into

a community decision. Below, the various comparative static
results are motivated intuitively. See Holtz-Eakin [1987] for

complete derivations.
     Bef ore proceeding, it is useful to define carefully several
alternative notions of "the property tax rate". Let T be the
property taxes owed on a property, A the assessed value of the

property, b the market value of the property, and    the

individuals federal marginal tax rate. Then the ratio T/A will

be called the statutory property tax rate. The pretax effective
property tax rate, denote 8, is T/b. 8 differs from the
statutory rate if assessment is done at a rate different than
100%. Finally, for those who itemize deductions the after-tax
effective property tax rate is the ratio (1-t)T/b.



     2.1 The Individual Decision
     A community consists of N individuals indexed by i=1,..,N.

                               —3—
Each individual seeks to maximize an identical utility function

defined over a single private good, X, and a public service, S:


(2.1)            U[X,S].

Where not needed for clarity, we suppress the index i. We assume

that local financing of S is done entirely by taxing property at
the effective tax rate 8. Thus, the individual's property tax
liability is 8b, where b is the market value of the individual's
property. The supply of b is some function b[.] of the after-tax
effective property tax rate. Let s denote the individual's share

of the total community tax base, B. Holding federal marginal tax
rates constant, each individual's b depends on the effective
property rate. As a result, so does B; we denote this
relationship by the function BE.]. The individual's budget
constraint is then:


                 x =Y   - 8sBN1-5-r)8]      -   t(Y-88sB[(1-8t)8))
(2.2)
                   = Y(1—t) —   8sB[(l—ÔT)8](l—8t)

where Y is gross income, t      is   the marginal federal income tax

rate, and 8=1 if the individual is an itemizer and otherwise
    2

        Service flows to the individual, S, depend on total
municipal spending, E, and the degree to which the service is

subject to congestion. Specifically, following Bergstrom and
Goodman [1973], if the population is N, we posit a "congestion
function" C(N), and assume that SEC(N)E. If the service is a

                                      —4—
pure public good, C(N)1 at every population level and S=E. On
the other hand, if S has the characteristics of a pure private

good C(N)1/N and S=E/N.3 Finally, expenditures are the sum of
property taxes and lump-sum grants from outside sources, G:4


(2.3)              S = C(N)E =     c(N)(8B       + G)

or
                   8B =   (S/C(N))   - G
(2.3')


substituting (2.3') into (2.2), the individual's budget

constraint can be written:


(2.4)       Y(1—t) +      s(l-6T)G   = X + [s(1—5t)/C(NYIS.


Maximization of (2.1) subject to (2.4) leads to optimal values of
X and S; the property tax rate is then determined via the budget
constraint. Alternatively, we can define the individual's

problem so that 8 is the choice variable. This problem is to

maximize:


            V(8)     U[Y(1—r) —      0sB[.](l—5t),C(N)(8B[.]   + G)]
 (2.5)


for fixed values of Y, t,         5, N, G, and (B-b).5 The optimal 8
sets the individual's marginal rate of substitution between
public expenditure and the private good equal to the congestion-

adjusted "tax price" of the public service:


 (2.6)                      =   s(1—5t)IC(N)

where subscripts denote partial derivatives.6 Assuming that this

                                           —5—
first order condition can be solved for 8, it yields an

expression for the optimal property tax rate of the form:


(2.7)            8 =   8[(l—8t),Y(l—t),G,{b}1N]
where b) denotes the vector of property values of all other

individuals.
        From our point of view the key question is how 8 responds to

changes in T.     It   is straightforward to show that the sign of the

derivative dO/dc is ambiguous. This ambiguity arises because
changing c creates both an income effect and a substitution

effect. For example, raising i lowers disposable income, which
tends to reduce the desired amount of S (assuming S is a normal

good), and hence to lower 8. At this same time, a higher t

lowers the relative price of S. which tends to raise the desired
amount, and hence to increase the preferred level of 0.

        The other method by which federal fiscal policy affects

localities is via grant distributions, G. From the individual
perspective, lump sum increases in G are increases in total

resources out of which to finance X and S. Hence, only an income

effect is present and d8/dG is positive.




        2.2 The Community Decision
        We now turn to the question of how communities select tax
rates given the underlying preferences of their members. As is
well known, there is no definitive theoretical solution to this

                                    —6—
problem. (See Inrnan [forthcoming].) The model developed here is

simple and provides a convenient basis for empirical work.    The

basic assumption is that the property tax rate is set by a local

official who lacks perfect information about individual tastes in

the community. In order to maximize the possibility of re-
election, the official sets the property tax rate to maximize

expected votes:7

                      N
(2.8)            Max E{E v}
                        i=l



where v1=l is a vote for the official and v1=O is a vote against
the official. Individual voting behavior is given by:


                        r 1, if v(e)—v(8)   Rj
(2.9)            vj =
                          0, if otherwise

where V(8) is the utility of individual i at his preferred tax
rate, V(8) is utility at the tax rate selected by the official,

and R1 is the "reservation utility loss" for individual i.8 This
specification reflects the assumption that individuals reward
officials whose decisions are not "too far" from their own

choices. Otherwise people either vote for an opposing candidate
in the subsequent election or run for office themselves.
        As suggested earlier, the incumbent does not know the actual

pattern of R in the municipality. Instead, he maximizes
expected votes given his subjective distribution of the R.
Letting f(R) and F(R) be the density and cumulative distribution
                                   —7-.
function, respectively, the official's objective is to:


                          N
(2.10)         Max        E Pr(v1=l)
                         i=l

                         N
                     =    E
                         i=1
                               l -   F(v(e)-v(e))]

The optimal community property tax rate is found by solving the

associated first order condition,

               N
(2.11)         E f(v(e)-v(e))(dv/de) = 0.
              i=1


Note that this is simply a weighted average of individual first
order conditions (such as those which give the solution to
equation (2.5)) evaluated at a common 8.

     The important implication of equation (2.11) is that the
official's decision depends upon the tax price of each member of

the community. There is no single "decisive voter" as in the

median voter model.9 Unfortunately, equation (2.11) does not
provide much guidance with respect to just how the individuals'
tax prices should be weighted. The weights depend on the form of
the individuals' utility functions as well as the values of the

other variables that enter the first order conditions. For
convenience, we assume that each citizen's tax price receives an

equal weight. Hence, the community tax price is simply the
arithmetic average of the individuals' tax prices)-0 Under the
additional assumption that the community is composed of only two

                                       —8—
types of individuals --    itemizers   and non-itemizers --   the
community tax price is given by:


(2.12)            P = a(1—t) + (1—o)


where      is the proportion of itemizers in the population.
     A key empirical issue to be explored below is the effect on
the community property tax rate, 8, of an increase in the
community tax price, P. Notice that P may increase for two
reasons. First, the income tax rate may fall. How does this
affect 8? As shown in Holtz-Eakin [1987], an increase in t has
an ambiguous effect. For non-itemizers, there is a pure income
effect which lowers the demand for public services and, hence,
the property tax rate. Itemizers, on the other hand, have both

an income effect and an offsetting reduction in the price of
public services. The net result depends on the composition of
the population and the relative sizes of the income and

substitution effects.
        Changes in P may also be induced by changes in the

proportion of itemizers in the population, o.       When o decreases,

ceteris paribus, P increases, which lowers the demand f or public

services, and lowers 8. The upshot is that the relationship
between P and 8 is ultimately an empirical issue.
         Our model also allows us to investigate how 8 responds to

other changes in the economic environment. Assuming that S is a
 normal good, the property tax rate rises with a uniform increase

 in individuals! incomes because greater income increases the

                                   —9—
demand for public spending and, hence, the property tax rate. On

the other hand, an increase in grants results in a lower rate of
property taxation as outside resources are substituted for

internal resources in the financing of public spending.             An

increase in the population of the jurisdiction has an ambiguous
effect. On one hand, the ability to spread costs over a larger
population lowers individuals' price of public services, but the
increased congestion tends to raise the price. Since price
movements will be reflected in changes in the desired level of S,

8 will be affected accordingly.
     We now turn to the construction of an econometric model that
can be used to estimate the sizes of the various effects.



     2.3 The Estimating Equation
     The discussion leading up to equation (2.11) suggests that a
community's effective property tax rate (8) depends upon its

average tax price (P), per capita income (Y), grants from other
levels of governments (G), population (N), and other variables
that might affect community tastes for public goods and the
resources available to purchase these goods (a k-dimensional

vector X). Assuming a log-linear specification, we have:


 (2.13)   lflOj =   1O + 1-'ct      +   2-ct      +   3lnGct   + I34lnNct

                      k
                    + E (PjXjct +
                     j   =1
                                    c   +   5ct

where the 's and p's are parameters, c indexes communities, t

                                    —10—
indexes years, and            is an "individual effect". The individual

effect controls for unchanging characteristics of the community

that may affect its fiscal decisions. Examples include the
"political make-up", form of government, climate, etc..

     In order to estimate equation (2.13), take first differences

to eliminate fc:


(2.14)    Dlne =      iDlnPt        +   2-ct   +   3DlflGct   + I34DlnNct

                          k
                     + E (PjDXjct ÷ DCct
                      j   =1


where the operator D denotes taking the first-difference, i.e.,

DZctZctZct_1 for any variable Z.
     The first problem in implementing this framework is
constructing ct Clearly it would be desirable to compute the
tax price for each community on the basis of the tax situations

of its members. Data limitations preclude us from doing this in

a convincing way. Instead, we construct ct from data f or the
state in which the community is located, specifically, let t
be the average tax price of the state in which community c is

located. P is computed as a weighted average of 1 (one) and

         where -rg   is   the marginal federal income tax rate

applicable to average taxable income per itemized return in the
state. In general, we do not expect t and t to be equal. We
assume that the discrepancy between these two tax prices depends

primarily on the difference between the community's income, ''t

and the statewide income, Y. Then we can write:
                                        —11—
(2.15)          lnP =   lflP   + tt(lnYct1nYt) + gc

where gc is an individual effect that controls for the presence
of slow-changing characteristics of the community that might
affect its tax price. Since higher incomes are expected to lead
to a lower tax price, we expect ii. < 0.

      Taking first differences of equation (2.15) and substituting

into equation (2.14) yields:


(2.16)     Dineit = F31DlnPgt+   (2 lht)1ct + I331ct +
                                              k
                    4DlflNct -   i1tD1flYt   +E (PjDXjct + Dect.
                                              j=1


In   short, our use of the state tax price to "proxy" for the
community tax price requires that we include mean state income on

the right side of the equation and reinterpret the coefficient on

DiflYct.
      We next turn to the vector of variables, X. These are:

       SHARE   the state government's spending as a proportion of
       the total state and local government spending in the state;
      ASSETS = per capita real market value of beginning of fiscal
      year holdings of financial assets. These include federal
      securities, mortgages, bonds, cash, sinking funds, bond
      funds, etc.;
       DEBTS = per capita real market value of beginning of fiscal
       year long and short term debt outstanding.

       SHARE is included to reflect the fact that states differ in

the division of taxing and spending decisions between the state

government and communities. SHARE is a simple way suggested by

                                 —12—
Cates t1975] of controlling for such institutional differences.

ASSETS and DEBTS allow for intertemporal aspects of community
decision making. Communities can finance current expenditures by

drawing down accumulated assets or by borrowing, although the

capacity to do so may be limited by institutional constraints.



3. Estimating the Model
     3.1 Data
     The empirical investigation is based on data for a sample of

municipal governments over the years 1976 to 1980.11 The primary
data source is the Finance files of the Bureau of the Census'

Census of Governments in 1980 and the similar Annual Survey of

Governments for 1976 to 1979.12 A random sample was selected for
1979 and the records for each community matched for the other
years. Communities with missing or anomalous data for any year
were dropped. In addition, communities in the state of
Massachusetts were excluded because Massachusetts severely limits

the ability of local governments to enact changes in their
property tax rates. Finally, some communities were eliminated
because they experienced a general property reassessment during
the sample period. (The reasons for this exclusion are discussed
below.) Eighty two communities were included in the final

sample.
     The Census files provide comprehensive data on the amounts
and sources of revenue, expenditures by type and function, and
asset and debt holdings and transactions. However, they provide

                               —13—
no information on the economic and demographic characteristics of

the communities or on key "prices" such as property tax rates.

To obtain these variables, other sources were used.
      The statutory property tax rate (defined as dollars per

thousand dollars of assessed value) is computed as the ratio of

property taxes collected to assessed value, both taken from
Moody's Municipal and Government Manual. The statutory property
tax rate, of course, differs from the theoretically required
effective property tax rate, 9ct' by the ratio of assessed to
market value of the tax base. However, assessment ratios are not
available in the data. Are problems caused by the use of the
statutory rate in place of 8ct7 To examine this question, let
ct be the statutory tax rate in community c during year t and

act the associated assessment ratio. Then by definition:


(3.1)           ln8t = lnact +

Recall   from equation (2.16) that the property tax rate equation

is estimated in first differences. Hence the dependent variable

is:


 (3.2)      ln8ct-ln8ct.1 =    ct1'ct-l + 1ct-ct-1
Thus, if act is time invariant (i.e. lnact-lnact_iO), changes in
ct mirror changes in 8ct and the use of statutory property tax
rates is acceptable. Notice that ac may vary across communities
in any fashion. With our estimating procedure, variation across
communities in the assessment ratio is included in the

                                 —14—
"individual effect" for each community; hence there is no need to

measure it.
     Obviously, difficulties arise to the extent that the

assessment ratio changes over time. Two       factors   reduce problems

of this type. First, information on general reassessments is
contained in the Moody's document referred to above, and those
communities that experienced a general reassessment were excluded

from the analysis.
     For the remaining communities, short run changes in the
assessment ratio will largely result from changes in the market

value of properties. Fortunately, changes in market values may
be accurately proxied by changes in community income levels.
Since income changes are already included on the right hand side
of equation (2.16), our procedure will control for these
fluctuations in the assessment ratio. Of course, the
interpretation of the income coefficient is complicated by this

observation.
        We turn next to the construction of the state tax price,

Pg. As noted above, it is a weighted average:

(3 3)               pS — Sfl_tS
                     ctc'   C'    +   '   C


where ag    is   the proportion of itemizers in the state and r, is

the marginal federal tax rate for the average taxable income per

itemized return in the state. These are computed from the
Internal Revenue Service publication Statistics of Income.
        Our measure of community income is median "effective buying

                                   —15—
income" taken from Sales & Marketing Management magazine's Survey

of Buying Power and deflated to real (1977) dollars. This is the
only source of municipal data on income available on an annual

basis. For state income, we use per capita income converted to

1977 dollars.
    Grants are measured as real (1977) dollars per capita
received from federal, state, and other local governments.
Information on the mix of matching and non-matching grants in the
total is not available. However, as noted below, an instrumental
variables approach is used to control for endogeneity in the

determination of grants.
     Means of the data are shown in Table 1. The figures
indicate that the average value of ln(P5) in our sample is

—0.083; implying that property tax deductibility on average
lowered the after-tax effective price of property tax finance by
about eight percent. A general feature of the table worth noting
is the substantial across community variation in both the fiscal
and demographic data. The standard deviations of the means of
the logarithms imply large variations in the levels.
     Table 2 shows the means of the first differences of the

variables for 1979-1980. During this period, the statutory
property tax rate rose by about 0.35 percent and the real tax

price fell by about 0.52 percent. Note, however, the relatively
large standard deviations. As in the case of the levels, there
is substantial variation across jurisdictions, so one must be

cautious in thinking about the mean values as being "typical".

                              —16—
     3.2 Econometric Issues
    Several important econometric issues arise in connection

with the estimation of equation (2.16). First, the tax price may
be correlated with the error term. Imagine that community c has

an "unexpectedly high" preference for public spending which
results in a higher property tax rate. To the econometrician
this appears as a positive ct in equation (2.13). This positive
residual will be associated with both a greater propensity to
itemize deductions in community c and a lower federal marginal

tax rate (conditional on itemizing). Hence, there is probably a

correlation between       and Cct.3 When estimating the
parameters using a single cross section of data, this is likely

to be a serious problem. However, in the individual effects
model its severity is probably attenuated because the presence of

the individual effect, f in equation (2.13), controls for the
unobserved community preferences. Still, some correlation may
remain so we estimate the equation with two stage least squares,

using lagged values of the change in the tax price as

instrumental variables.
     Grant receipts may also be correlated with the error term

due to either matching rate provisions in the grant distribution
formulae or the possibility that communities with a preference

for larger public spending may be skilled at "grantsmanship".
Thus, we also treat the change in grants as endogenous and employ
lagged values of the change in grants as instrumental variables.

                                —17—
    Another set of issues arises in connection with the

econometric treatment of the individual effect,       in the

equation. If an individual effect is present, then to the extent

that it is correlated with right side variables, failure to
control for it will result in inconsistent parameter estimates.

As noted above, we deal with this problem by first-differencing
the data. First-differencing has several other advantages.
First, as mentioned above, it may help to control for measurement
problems with the effective tax rate, 8. Second, with first-
differencing the parameters are estimated by examining changes in
the property tax rate in response to changes in the tax price.

This type of variation corresponds more closely to the type of

variation produced by changes in federal deductibility rules than
does cross-community variation. As a result, the estimated
parameters are more likely to be reliable predictors of community
responses to tax reforms that affect deductibility.
     First differencing has drawbacks as well. To the extent
that measurement error is present in the right side variables,
the first-difference estimates will contain a larger bias toward
zero and will have larger standard errors than the corresponding
estimates using the data in levels. Thus, there is a tradeoff
between the advantage of controlling for individual effects and
the effects of measurement error.



4. Results
     The results for the first differenced specification of the

                              —18—
model, equation (2.16), are presented in Table 3•14 Our main
concern is the coefficient on the tax price. However, before
considering this, we briefly discuss some of the other parameter
estimates. Perhaps the most striking fact is that except f or the

tax price, none of the coefficients is statistically significant
at conventional levels. Nevertheless, it is interesting to
examine the point estimates. As predicted in the theoretical
model, the coefficients of the income and assets variables are
positive, indicating that greater resources increase the demand

f or public spending and, hence, the property tax rate)-5 For the
same reason, the negative coefficient on the debt variable is
expected. The coefficient on state income is -31rt (see equation

(2.16)), where    is the coefficient on the tax price and it.   is
the negative parameter from equation (2.15). Since      is

negative, we expect the coefficient of state income also to be

negative; which it is. Finally, the negative coefficients on
SHARE and population indicate that to the extent that states have

a greater responsibility for spending or there is a greater

population across which to spread costs, the property tax falls.

Only the coefficient on the change in grants, again

insignificant, is incorrectly signed.
     We now turn to our main concern: the coefficient on the tax
price variable. The coefficient estimate is -2.67 and it exceeds
its estimated standard error by a factor of about 2.1. In this

context it is important to emphasize that the first differences
specification provides a stringent test of the importance of

                               —19—
deductibility. Because of its focus on changes in variables over

time, this procedure reduces the possibility that the negative

coefficient is a consequence of unobserved cross-sectional
differences in preferences. Moreover, as noted above, one
expects that the standard errors will be biased upward as the

result of measurement error.   The fact that a statistically

significant coefficient nevertheless emerges seems strong

evidence that an effect is truly present.
     To assess the quantitative significance of this estimate,
consider it in the context of the debate over deductibility. The
mean tax price in the sample is 0.921; in the absence of
deductibility it would be 1.00. Using the fact that the
estimated coefficient of -2.67 is an elasticity, this percentage
change (-7.9%) induces local property tax rates to rise by

roughly 21.1%, or $7.15 dollars per $1000 dollars in assessed
value. Put differently, the presence of deductibility of
municipal property taxes raises the mean property tax rate from

.03389 to .04104, a substantial impact.
     Of course, no individual resident conforms to this average

and there are interesting distributional implications of this
result. Deductibility raises the average property tax rate,
local revenues, and presumably the level of services. For

itemizers, the net cost of property taxes falls and they consume
the higher level of services. For non-itemizers, however, taxes
and services are both increased, with unclear effects on welfare.
While these distributional concerns are important, our data do

                               —20—
not permit explicit calculation of the distributional effects of

changes in the property tax rate.
     It is useful to explore the implications of our results for
the relationship between property tax rates and property tax

revenues. This is especially important in light of Iriman's
[1985) recent finding that increases in local tax rates may

actually reduce revenues. To begin, note that revenues and rates

are linked by the identity:


(4.1)          T(P)      e(P)B[8(P)]

where T is total property tax revenue, 8 is the property tax

rate, and B is the property tax base. Equation (4.1) is written
to reflect that fact the property tax base depends on the rate of
property taxation, which in turn depends on the tax price.

Converting to elasticities, equation (4.1) implies:


(4.2)          T             + 1)


where T is the elasticity of property tax revenues with respect

the tax price, c8   is   the elasticity of the property tax rate with

respect to the tax price, and B is the elasticity of the
property tax base with respect to the property tax rate. In
previous research, Holtz-Eakin and Rosen [19871 estimated T to

be -1.24, and from Table            =   _2.666)6   Substituting these

 values into equation (4.2) yields B -0.53. An implication of
 this is that increases in 8 will reduce the local property tax

 base, but not enough to actually reduce property tax revenues.

                                    —21—
Thus, in contrast to the Inman results, we find that the

communities in our sample appear to be operating on the "right

side" of the Laffer curve.



5. Summary
     Recent econometric work has suggested that federal
deductibility of state and local taxes has raised the proportion

of these taxes --   especially   property taxes --   in   local budgets.

This paper lends additional support to these earlier findings by
showing that one channel through which deductibility leads to
higher local property tax revenues is by increasing the rate of
local property taxation. Specifically, we find that if
deductibility were eliminated, the mean property tax rate in our

sample would fall by 0.00715 ($7.15 per thousand dollars of
assessed property), or 21.1 percent of the mean tax rate.




                                   —22—
                                Table 1

                   Means of the Variables 1978_198dk




                    Variable                   Mean

           ln(8) (Property Tax Rate)           3.7145
                                              (0.5490)

           ln(PS) (Tax Price)                 —0.0828
                                              (0.0282)

           ln(Y) (Median Family Income)        9.5767
                                              (0. 2165)

           lfl(YS) (State Per Capita Income    1.9945
                                              (0. 1480)

           ln(G) (Per Capita Grants)           5.3659
                                              (0.5498)

           ln(N) (Population)                 10.5841
                                              (1. 1070)

           ln(Per Capita ASSETS)               4.9877
                                              (0.9531)

           ln(Per Capita DEBTS)                6. 1173
                                              (0.5913)

           SHARE                              44.3111
                                              (7. 3296)




*
    The standard error of each variable is shown in parentheses.

                                   —23—
                              Table 2

             Means of the First Differences 1979_1980*


                Variable               Mean

                Dln(e)               0.0035
                                    (0.1226)

                Dln(P5)            —0.0052
                                   (0.0227)

                Dln(Y)             —0.0283
                                    (0.0389)

                Dln(Y5)             —0.0125
                                    (0.0292)

                Dln(N)               0.0006
                                    (0.0391)

                Dln(GRANTS)         -0.0825
                                    (0. 2775)

                Dln(ASSETS)         -0.0883
                                    (0.6260)

                Dln(DEBTS)          -0.1268
                                    (0.2240)

                D(SHARE)             0.0233
                                    (0.0448)




*
    The standard error of each variable is shown in parentheses.

                                —24—
                             Table 3


       Parameter Estimates: First-Differences Specificatior


                               Parameter
          Variable             Estimate

           Intercept           -0.0024
                               (0.0238)

           Dln(P5)             —2.6660
                               (1.2422)

           Dln(Y)               0.0615
                               (0. 3955)

           Dlfl(YS)            —0.1918
                               (0.6902)

           Dln(G)               0.1429
                               (0.1906)

           Dln(N)              —0.1456
                               (0.2920)

           Dln(ASSETS)           0.0039
                                (0.0191)

           Dln(DEBTS)           -0.0420
                                (0.0533)

           SHARE                -0.0779
                                (0.3693)




*            technique is instrumental variables. Numbers in
    Estimation
parentheses are standard errors.

                                —25--
                            References


Bergstrom, T. and R. Goodman, "Private Demands f or Public Goods,"
     American Economic Review, June 1973, PP. 280-296.

Edwards, J. "Congestion Function Specification and the
     'Publicness' of Local Public Goods," unpublished, Tulane
     University, 1985.
Feldstein, M. and G. Metcalf, "The Effect of Federal Tax
     Deductibility on State and Local Taxes and Spending,"
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
     1791, January 1986.
Fisher, R. "Intergovernmental Tax Incentives and Local Fiscal
     Behavior," mirrteo, Michigan State University, April 1986.

Hettich, W. and S. Winer, "A Positive Model of Tax Structure,"
     Journal of Public Economics, 24, 1984, pp. 67-87.
Holtz-Eakin, D. "Unobserved Tastes and the Determination of
     Municipal Services," National Tax Journal, December 1986,
     pp. 527—532.
Holtz-Eakin, D. "Vote-Maximization and the Provision of Local
     Services," mimeo, Columbia University, May 1987.
Holtz-Eakin, D. and H. Rosen, "Tax Deductibility and Municipal
     Budget Structure," National Bureau of Economic Research,
     Working Paper No. 2224, 1987.
Inman, R. "Does Deductibility Influence Local Taxation?" National
     Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 1714, October
     1985.

Inrnan, R. "Markets, Government, and the 'New' Political Economy,"
     in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.), The Handbook of
     Public Economics, Volume 2, Amsterdam: North-Holland
     Publishing Company, forthcoming.
Noto, N. and D. Zimmerman, "Limiting State-Local Tax
     Deductibility: Effects Among the States," National Tax
     Journal, December 1984, pp. 539-550.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Tax Reform for Fairness,
     Simplicity, and Economic Growth, Vol. 2, November 1984.




                               —26—
</ref_section>
                               Notes


1. Feldstein and Metcalf's estimate of the elasticity of
deductible taxes with respect to the tax price was -2.36, while
Holtz-Eakin and Rosen found a value of -1.55.

2. For simplicity, we assume that the marginal tax rate is
constant within the relevant range. Also, we ignore the fact
that in some states "circuit breakers" and related state tax
policies may also influence the effective cost of property tax
finance. See Fisher [1986].
3. See Edwards [19853 for an empirical investigation of the
implications of a variety of specifications of CL).
4. This assumption is for simplicity only and can be relaxed to
accommodate both other revenue sources and grants with matching
components.
5. We hold population constant as a reasonable approximation to
reality in the short run. Clearly, long run population mobility
would alter the nature of the equilibrium described below.

6. It is straightforward to verify that V(8) is has a unique
maximum.
7. If the official does not seek re-election, we assume that he
sets the property tax rate in order to aid the success of his
political party.
8. Although we assume that all individuals share a common V(.)
function, heterogeneity is nevertheless present because of the
differing R.
 9. However, the median voter model is a special case in which
 the median voter is identifiable to the official and carries the
 only positive weight in equation (2.11).
10. Holtz-Eakifl [1987) contains conditions under which exact
aggregation is possible.
11. Holtz-Eakin [1986] provides a careful description of the
data set from which the sample is drawn.
12. Early years in the panel are used in first differencing and
as instrumental variables.
13. Note that the first effect tends to lower Pt, while the
latter tends to raise it. The sign of the bias is unclear.

                               —27—
14. As noted in Section 3.2, it is possible that first
differencing the data is not necessary and that the influence of
any measurement error is magnified in the process. To check for
this possibility, we also estimated equation (2.13) using cross
sectional data. Specifically, we pooled the data for 1979 and
1980 and then estimated the parameters using instrumental
variables. Of course, in such a model, one cannot rely on the
individual effect to control for slow-changing variables that may
affect the property tax rate. Therefore, we augmented the X
vector to include variables that accounted for: the number of
individuals aged 3 and older enrolled in school per capita; the
number of individuals below the poverty line per capita; the
number of individuals aged 65 or older per capita; the proportion
of the population that is non-white; the proportion of occupied
housing that is owner-occupied; and the proportions of families
with incomes in various ranges of the income distribution. We
found that such cross-sectional estimation led to implausible
results. The estimated coefficient on the tax price variable was
positive and significant. Further, income, grants, assets, and
debts had coefficients of the "wrong" sign and the latter two
were precisely estimated. We conclude that in our data failure
to account for individual effects can lead to serious biases.

15. As mentioned above, interpretation of the coefficient on the
income variable is complicated by the fact that income serves
also to control for short run variations in the assessment
ratio.
16. Essentially the same data was used in both studies. The
samples differ only in that the current analysis excludes: i)
municipalities in Massachusetts and ii) municipalities that
underwent a general reassessment during the sample period.




                              —28—
