NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF MULTI-PARTY TARIFF NEGOTIATIONS
Kyle Bagwell
Robert W. Staiger
Ali Yurukoglu
Working Paper 24273
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24273

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018

This research was funded under NSF Grant SES-1326940. We thank seminar participants at
Dartmouth, MIT, Northwestern, Penn, Princeton, Rochester, Sciences Po, Singapore
Management University, Stanford, UC Berkeley, UNC, UT Austin, and the University of
Wisconsin for many useful comments. Ohyun Kwon provided outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24273.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Kyle Bagwell, Robert W. Staiger, and Ali Yurukoglu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Quantitative Analysis of Multi-Party Tariff Negotiations
Kyle Bagwell, Robert W. Staiger, and Ali Yurukoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 24273
February 2018
JEL No. F11,F13,L4
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a model of international tariff negotiations to study the design of the
institutional rules of the GATT/WTO. We embed a multi-sector model of trade between multiple
countries into a model of inter-connected bilateral negotiations over tariffs. Using 1990 trade
flows and tariff outcomes from the Uruguay Round of GATT/WTO negotiations, we estimate
country-sector productivity levels, sector-level productivity dispersion, iceberg trade costs, and
country-pair bargaining parameters. We use the estimated model to simulate an alternative
institutional setting for multilateral tariff negotiations in which the most-favored-nation
requirement is abandoned. We find that abandonment of the most-favored-nation requirement
would result in inefficient over-liberalization of tariffs and a deterioration in world-wide welfare
relative to the negotiated outcomes in the presence of the most-favored-nation requirement.
Kyle Bagwell
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Economics Building
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
kbagwell@stanford.edu
Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu

Ali Yurukoglu
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
ayurukog@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Multilateral tariff bargaining is complicated. According to the terms-of-trade theory of
trade agreements, the central problem for a trade agreement to solve arises only when
foreign exporters bear some of the incidence of a country’s unilateral decision to raise its
tariffs. When the country’s tariffs induce these external effects, the consequences of any
negotiated changes in its tariffs will in general spill over to all its trading partners. In
this environment, a multilateral bargain, whereby all the trading countries of the world
bargain without restrictions over all the tariffs that affect them, would be fraught with
difficulty. But so too would be attempts to decentralize the bargaining into a collection
of bilateral negotiations: owing to the spillovers on third-parties typically implied by the
tariff changes negotiated within a given bilateral bargain, such a collection of bilateral
tariff bargains would amount to an environment of bilateral bargaining with externalities.
Within the World Trade Organization (WTO) and its predecessor GATT, orchestrating a single multilateral bargain for all of the tariffs of the 164 current WTO members
poses obvious challenges, and this would have been challenging even for the original 23
members of GATT. Perhaps for this reason, over its 70-year history the GATT/WTO has
made extensive use of a decentralized approach to tariff bargaining that relies on simultaneous bilateral bargains. This approach was featured in the first five GATT rounds of
multilateral tariff negotiations. It was used as a complement to multilateral bargaining
methods in the last three GATT rounds, as well as in the now-suspended WTO Doha
Round.1 A number of GATT’s key principles and norms – such as its non-discrimination
principle embodied in the most-favored-nation (MFN) rule, and its principal supplier and
reciprocity norms – are included in the GATT/WTO arguably in part to create a bargaining protocol that shapes and mitigates the externalities that stem from bilateral tariff
bargains in this environment.
In this paper we analyze bilateral tariff bargaining in a multi-country quantitative
trade model. Bagwell et al. (2017b) develop an equilibrium analysis of bilateral tariff
bargaining in a three-country trade model and show that, due to the distinct nature of
the externalities associated with non-discriminatory versus discriminatory tariffs, in the
presence of an MFN rule tariff bargaining typically leads to inefficient outcomes that can
1

As Bagwell et al. (2017a) explain, early GATT rounds allowed as well for a multilateral element, in

that negotiated offers could be re-balanced at the end of the round as necessary for multilateral reciprocity.
Among the last three GATT rounds, the Uruguay Round, for example, employed multilateral bargaining
methods that included “zero-for-zero” tariff commitments in specific sectors.

1

exhibit either over- or under-liberalization, while in the absence of an MFN rule tariff
bargaining always results in inefficient over-liberalization. Bagwell and Staiger (2005)
show that when each party in a bilateral bargain is restricted to making offers that satisfy
MFN and that also adhere to a strict form of reciprocity, the externalities associated
with bilateral tariff bargaining are eliminated. As Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2017) show
for multilateral tariff bargaining settings, however, the strict adherence to MFN and reciprocity that eliminates these externalities will itself impose constraints that lead to
under-liberalization and thus prevent countries from reaching the efficiency frontier, provided that countries are asymmetric in either their economic size or in the underlying
objectives of their governments.2 Bagwell et al. (2017a) examine in detail the bargaining
records associated with the GATT Torquay Round (1950-51). They unveil a set of stylized
facts from this bargaining data, and they argue that a number of these stylized facts can
be interpreted through the lens of the theoretical findings of Bagwell and Staiger (2017)
for tariff bargaining under MFN and reciprocity.
As these papers illustrate, theory can provide a useful guide to the implications of
different sets of rules for the outcomes of tariff bargaining, but theory alone cannot provide a ranking across bargaining protocols. Ossa (2014) and Ossa (2016) initiates the
examination of trade policy in a multi-country quantitative trade model. Ossa’s papers
compute Nash equilibrium tariffs and fully cooperative tariffs. Our paper models the specific structure of the bargaining system as a nexus of bilateral negotiations with extensions
to third parties via MFN.
We specify and estimate a quantitative trade model building from Eaton and Kortum
(2002) and Costinot et al. (2011). We use the estimated model to explore the properties of
changes to the tariff bargaining protocol for the GATT Uruguay Round (1986-1994), the
last completed GATT/WTO multilateral negotiating round. To this end, we extend the
model of Costinot et al. (2011) to include tariffs and to allow the parameter governing the
dispersion of productivity across varieties within a sector to vary by sector. Introducing
tariffs to the model is straightforward and of course necessary if we are to use the model to
explore alternative tariff bargaining protocols. Allowing for sector-specific productivitydispersion parameters in the model is important because, as is well-known in this model
(and in the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model from which it builds), trade elasticities – and
2

Bagwell and Staiger (2017) analyze a model of multilateral tariff bargaining in which each country’s

multilateral tariff proposal must satisfy MFN and multilateral reciprocity, and in this context they identify
bargaining outcomes that can be implemented using dominant strategy proposals for all countries.

2

with them the magnitude of the externalities imposed on trading partners by a country’s
unilateral tariff decisions – are governed by this parameter, and we wish to allow for the
possibility that these elasticities vary by sector.
To model bilateral tariff bargaining in this environment, we follow Bagwell et al.
(2017b) and adopt the solution concept of Horn and Wolinsky (1988). This solution concept, which is commonly employed by the Industrial Organization literature to characterize the division of surplus in bilateral oligopoly settings where externalities exist across
firms and agreements, is sometimes referred to as a “Nash-in-Nash” solution, because
it can be thought of as a Nash equilibrium between separate bilateral Nash bargaining
problems.3 According to this solution, each bilateral negotiation results in the Nash bargaining solution taking as given the outcomes of the other negotiations. As Bagwell et
al. discuss, the Nash-in-Nash approach is not without limitations when applied to tariff
bargaining, but it offers a simple means of characterizing simultaneous bilateral bargaining outcomes in settings with interdependent payoffs, and thereby makes the analysis of
bilateral tariff bargaining in the GATT/WTO context tractable in a quantitative trade
model.4
3

The Nash-in-Nash solution concept has been used by Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) and by Cra-

wford et al. (2017) to explore negotiations between cable television distributors and content creators,
and by Grennan (2013), Gowrisankaran et al. (2015), and Ho and Lee (2017) to consider negotiations
between hospitals and medical device manufacturers with health insurers. It is broadly related to the
pairwise-proof requirements that are indirectly implied under the requirement of passive beliefs in vertical
contracting models (McAfee and Schwartz (1994) and Hart and Tirole (1990)) and directly imposed in
contracting equilibria (Cremer and Riordan, 1987). See McAfee and Schwartz (1994) for further discussion. Micro-foundations for the Nash-in-Nash approach are developed by Collard-Wexler et al. (2016) in
the context of negotiations that concern bilateral surplus division. The trade application considered by
Bagwell et al. (2017b) and that we consider here is different, however, in that the negotiations focus on
tariffs (rather than lump-sum transfers) which have direct efficiency consequences.
4
As Bagwell et al. (2017b) observe, the most direct interpretation of the Nash-in-Nash approach is in
terms of a delegated agent model, where a player is involved in multiple bilateral negotiations while relying
on separate agents for each negotiation, and where agents are unable to communicate with one another
during the negotiation process. This interpretation has some obvious drawbacks in settings such as tariff
negotiations where within-negotiation communication between agents (trade negotiators) associated with
the same player (government) across different bilaterals are clearly feasible. Agents may also coordinate
at the end of a negotiation round, in order to ensure that the overall “package” is balanced. These
drawbacks are arguably mitigated, however, to the extent that opportunities for communication and
coordination across bilaterals are limited by bargaining frictions and arise only after bilateral bargaining
positions have hardened. On balance, we believe that the tractability advantages of the Nash-in-Nash
approach make it a potentially valuable tool, albeit only one such tool, for examining bilateral tariff

3

We first use data on trade flows, production, and tariffs at the country-sector level –
aggregated into 49 sectors and for the 25 largest countries by GDP in 1990, with the rest
of the world aggregated into five additional regions – together with data on a set of gravity
variables, to estimate the taste, productivity, and iceberg cost parameters that according
to the model would best match the data. More specifically, we estimate the parameters to
match trade shares by country-sector, value added by country, and inequality conditions
implied by the bargaining model. Given these estimates, we use the model to generate a
series of benchmark counterfactual outcomes, including welfare under autarky and in the
absence of any trade frictions.
We then use the model to calculate the Horn-Wolinsky bargaining solution beginning
from the 1990 tariffs under three institutional constraints reflected in the tariff-bargaining
environment of the Uruguay Round, namely, that countries (i) are restricted to bargain
over MFN tariffs, (ii) must respect existing GATT tariff commitments and not raise their
tariffs above these commitments, and (iii) abide by the principal supplier rule, which
guides each importing country to limit its negotiations on a given product to the exporting
country that is the largest supplier of that product to its market. We use our trade model
to identify viable pairs of negotiating countries under this bargaining protocol through the
principal supplier patterns that the model predicts.5 To account for important dimensions
of the Uruguay Round negotiations that went beyond tariff bargaining (to issues such as
agricultural subsidies, intellectual property, services, and possibly even national security
concerns and geopolitical affairs), we allow countries to make costly transfers as part of
their tariff negotiations. Using the tariff changes between 1990 and 2000 as our measure
of the tariff bargaining outcomes of the Uruguay Round, we solve our model for the
Horn-Wolinsky solution under different values of the cost of transfers and the bargaining
powers for each country in each of its bilaterals, and we select as our estimates of the
cost-of-transfers and bargaining parameters the set of parameters that generates the HornWolinsky solution within our model that best matches the tariff bargaining outcomes of
the Uruguay Round.
Our estimated bargaining parameters are of interest in their own right, as they reflect
the interplay of a number of forces in the model that together determine the slope of the
negotiations under various institutional constraints.
5
As we later discuss, while the main tariff bargains in the Uruguay Round proceeded according to the
tariff-line bilateral request-offer protocol that characterized the first five GATT rounds (see, e.g., Croome
(1995), pp. 185), there were also a number of sectoral bargains that proceeded under distinct protocols
(see, e.g., Preeg (1995), p. 191).

4

bargaining frontier and the disagreement point for each bilateral. Regarding the slope
of the bargaining frontier, our estimate of the cost of transfers implies that lump-sum
international transfers were not available to governments in the context of the Uruguay
Round. Hence, in our tariff-bargaining setting, utility is not transferable across countries,
as the countries in any bilateral use both costly transfers and tariff changes to transfer
utility between them, and the relative degree to which the incidence of each country’s
tariff changes falls on, and only on, its bilateral bargaining partner will have implications
for the slope of the bargaining frontier in that bilateral. We use our model to characterize
the slopes of the bilateral bargaining frontiers between pairs of bargaining countries in
the Uruguay Round, and we discuss how these slopes reflect features of the underlying
economic environment and factor into our estimated bargaining power parameters. Moreover, the disagreement point for each bilateral is endogenously determined under the
Horn-Wolinsky bargaining solution: a country could have strong bargaining power in each
of its bilaterals and nevertheless fare relatively poorly in the Uruguay Round when judged from its 1990 status quo payoff, if the outcomes from all other bilaterals have served
to disproportionately worsen this country’s disagreement payoff in each of its bilaterals.
We find that this possibility accords with the broad experience of Japan in the Uruguay
Round. According to our estimates, of all the countries engaged in tariff bargaining in the
Uruguay Round Japan had the greatest bargaining power; yet, its gains from the outcome
of the Uruguay Round relative to the 1990 status quo were only modestly higher than the
average gains that countries experienced from the Round.
Comparing the Horn-Wolinsky model solution under our representation of the Uruguay
Round bargaining protocol to the actual Uruguay Round tariff bargaining outcomes,
we can explain 57.86% of the variation in 190 country-sector tariff reductions. Also of
interest is how the Horn-Wolinsky solution of our model compares to a tariff bargain
that reached the efficiency frontier. Our model has no market imperfections and no
political economy forces, and so achieving free trade in all tariffs would place the world
on the efficiency frontier. But a comparison of our model outcomes to global free trade
is not particularly meaningful, both because our bargaining analysis is limited to tariffs
on non-agricultural products, and because according to our model under the principal
supplier rule not all countries engaged in tariff bargaining in the Uruguay Round. A more
meaningful free-trade benchmark with which to compare the Horn-Wolinsky solution of
our model is a bargain that sets to zero just the non-agricultural tariffs under negotiation
in the Uruguay Round according to our model. Compared to this free-trade benchmark,
5

and solving also for the non-cooperative Nash tariff equilibrium over the same set of
tariffs, our model indicates that the GATT rounds leading up to the Uruguay Round had
achieved roughly 40% of the potential aggregate world-wide welfare gains in moving from
the non-cooperative Nash to this free-trade benchmark, while our Horn-Wolinsky model
solution indicates that the Uruguay Round itself achieved roughly an additional 40% of
the potential world-wide welfare gains from the elimination of these tariffs. And compared
to a benchmark that sets these same tariffs equal to the levels that would maximize world
welfare in light of the existing distortions implied by the fixed levels of all other tariffs in
the world, our model indicates that the GATT rounds leading up to the Uruguay Round
and the Uruguay Round itself each achieved roughly a third of the potential aggregate
world-wide welfare gains in moving from the non-cooperative Nash to this world-welfare
maximizing benchmark, leaving roughly a third of the potential gains from negotiating
over this set of tariffs as “unfinished business.”
Not all countries gained from the Uruguay Round according to our model predictions,
with Switzerland and Turkey suffering small losses.6 As these two countries were not
among our bargaining pairs and hence in our model do not alter their own tariffs from
1990 levels as a result of commitments made in the Uruguay Round, the losses they suffer
as a result of the Uruguay Round reflect adverse terms-of-trade movements that were
generated according to our model by the negotiated MFN tariff cuts of others. There
is also an important possibility in Nash-in-Nash bargains that did not occur under the
Uruguay Round protocol according to our results: while according to the Nash-in-Nash
concept each bilateral negotiation must lead to an agreement over tariffs which, with
the outcomes of all other negotiations taken as given, benefits both negotiating parties,
the externalities across bargaining pairs raise the possibility that a country engaged in
bargaining could be made worse off as a result of the web of bilateral tariff bargains
6

Decision-making in the GATT/WTO system operates on a consensus basis, although provisions for

voting may apply when consensus fails. From this perspective, it may be expected that a country would
attempt to veto an agreement were it to anticipate a loss. As Posner and Sykes (2014) argue, related
concerns arose with the creation of the WTO in the Uruguay Round and a novel strategy was adopted
in response: “Holdout issues were significant, and some GATT members balked at some of the proposed
new commitments. In response, the major players agreed on a novel strategy – they would formally
withdraw from the GATT, and enter a new treaty creating the WTO. Any GATT member who wished
to retain the benefits of GATT membership in relation to the major players had to do the same even
if they did not like aspects of the new WTO regime. Some members complained that the process was
coercive, but they had little choice but to capitulate.”

6

negotiated in the multilateral round than it would have been if the round had never taken
place.7 Our results imply that this possibility did not arise in the Uruguay Round.
Armed with our trade-model, cost-of-transfers and bargaining-power parameters, we
then turn to the consideration of counterfactual bargaining protocols. As we have described, under our representation of the Uruguay Round bargaining protocol, our results
point to the existence of unfinished business with respect to the tariffs under negotiation
in the Uruguay Round; and we find that further reductions in average tariffs are required
to achieve the world-welfare maximizing benchmark, in line with the under-liberalization
possibility identified by Bagwell et al. (2017b) when negotiations proceed over MFN tariffs. This raises the possibility that changes to the protocol that stimulate further negotiated tariff liberalization could be attractive from the perspective of world welfare. To
evaluate this possibility, we consider an alternative bargaining protocol under which the
MFN requirement and the principal supplier rule are abandoned, and we solve for the
Horn-Wolinsky solution when countries can bargain over discriminatory tariff changes.
Our primary interest here is in how abandonment of the MFN requirement impacts tariff
bargaining; and as the principal supplier rule was introduced into the GATT bargaining
protocols in order to facilitate bilateral tariff bargaining in the presence of MFN, it is
natural to remove these two constraints at the same time.
We find that average tariffs drop further under discriminatory negotiations than under
MFN negotiations, as expected; but MFN negotiations are better for world welfare than
discriminatory negotiations.8 More specifically, we would expect from the findings of
Bagwell et al. (2017b) that in the absence of an MFN rule Nash-in-Nash tariff bargaining
always results in inefficient over-liberalization. But our findings indicate further that,
together with the costs of the trade diversion implied by discriminatory tariffs, the degree
of inefficient over-liberalization of these tariffs is quantitatively sufficiently important to
outweigh the inefficient under-liberalization that arises according to the model under
MFN, resulting in lower world welfare under discriminatory tariff bargaining than under
7

As we discuss further in the Conclusion, this possibility would not be expected to arise in a setting

where each party in a bilateral bargain is restricted to making offers that satisfy MFN and that also
adhere to a strict form of reciprocity, because as Bagwell and Staiger (2017) and Bagwell et al. (2017a)
argue in a two good general equilibrium model the externalities associated with bilateral tariff bargaining
are then eliminated.
8
Our analysis focuses on the economic benefits of the MFN rule and does not include other potential
benefits, including improved international relations (see, e.g., Hull (1948), and the discussion in Culbert
(1987)) and the enhanced participation by smaller countries that a rules-based system may encourage.

7

MFN tariff bargaining. Moreover, developing and emerging countries are among the
biggest losers from the abandonment of MFN, in some cases (e.g. China, India) faring
substantially worse than under the 1990 status quo. Among industrialized countries,
South Korea suffers the largest losses from the abandonment of MFN, experiencing a
large reduction in welfare relative to the 1990 status quo level, and the EU and Canada
also lose. By contrast, our results indicate that Japan would be the biggest gainer from
abandonment of MFN in the Uruguay round, due largely to its enhanced ability to exploit
its strong bargaining power when unconstrained by MFN, with the US and some of the
EU-member countries also enjoying small gains.
These findings are driven by and highlight an important difference across MFN and
discriminatory tariff bargaining that is quantified by our model: while we find that the
spillovers to third parties from tariff reductions negotiated in a bilateral are often large
in both the MFN and the discriminatory tariff bargaining settings, they are usually of
opposite signs, positive for MFN tariff bargaining and negative for discriminatory tariff
bargaining. As we show, the negative third-party externality associated with discriminatory tariff reductions and the implied transfer of surplus from third parties to bargaining
parties drives down the levels of the negotiated tariffs in the absence of the MFN constraint from what these levels would be under MFN; and this force is sufficiently strong to
result in substantial over-liberalization of these tariffs. Put differently, while the free-rider
issue and associated drag on tariff liberalization created by the positive third-party externality from the GATT/WTO’s MFN requirement is widely emphasized as a shortcoming
of the GATT/WTO approach, we find that the abandonment of MFN in tariff bargaining
would create negative third-party externalities that are even more powerful, and that
would ultimately lead to tariff bargaining outcomes that are worse from the perspective
of world welfare.
Our work is related to other studies of trade policy in multi-country quantitative
trade models. Work of this kind includes Ossa (2014) and Ossa (2016), as mentioned
previously, and also Caliendo et al. (2017), Caliendo and Parro (2015), and Spearot (2016).
By comparison, a key distinguishing feature of our work is that we explicitly model the
bargaining process. We are thereby able to use our quantitative model of trade and
tariff bargaining to compare outcomes under MFN and counterfactual discriminatory
negotiations.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section sets out our quantitative model of trade and tariff bargaining. Section 3 describes the data we use to estimate
8

the model, while section 4 describes our approach to estimation. Section 5 presents our
model estimates and computes a number of model benchmarks. Section 6 presents our
counterfactual. Section 7 concludes.

2

Model

Our model world economy consists of the multi-sector version of Eaton and Kortum
(2002) from Costinot et al. (2011), extended to include tariffs and to allow the parameter
governing the dispersion of productivity across varieties within a sector to vary by sector,
as in Caliendo and Parro (2015). The model world economy is then embedded into an
equilibrium model of tariff bargaining. In the next subsection, we describe the model
world economy, and in the following subsection we describe our approach to modeling
tariff bargaining.

2.1

Model World Economy

We consider a world economy with i = 1, ..., N countries and k = 1, ..., K sectors. Within
each sector k, there is a countably infinite number of varieties indexed by ω. We allow
each country to impose an import tariff (possibly discriminatory across trading partners)
in each sector k. Because our model world economy is a straightforward variant of the
models in Costinot et al. (2011) and Caliendo and Parro (2015), we provide only a minimal
description here, and refer readers to those papers for additional model details.
We begin by describing the supply side of the model. Each country has an immobileacross-countries labor endowment Li . Production of each variety in each sector is governed
by a constant-returns-to-scale technology requiring only labor. Furthermore, an infinite
number of firms, all with the same productivity parameter, exist to produce each variety
in each sector, ensuring perfect competition.
The production technology for each variety is drawn from a Frèchet distribution with
CDF given by

Fik (z)




z −θk
= exp −( k )
,
zi

where zik is country i’s sector-k level productivity parameter and θk is a sector-specific
productivity shape parameter. We will reference specific draws from these distributions as
9

zik (ω), that is, country i’s productivity in variety ω in sector k. While the first and second
moments of the distribution of productivity depend on both the z and the θ parameters,
the ratio of expected variety productivity for the same sector between two countries is
equal to the ratio of their zk parameters in sector k. Higher values of θk imply lower
heterogeneity in within-sector productivity, and more responsiveness of trade flows with
respect to changes in fundamentals (and hence higher trade elasticities) as a result.
Producers face iceberg trading costs and potentially tariffs when serving other countries. We parameterize iceberg costs to depend on an origin effect, a destination effect,
a sector-specific border effect, a sector-specific distance effect, and whether the origin
and destination share a common language, a physical border, or have a preferential trade
agreement (PTA). It is often noted that the so-called “Quad” countries of the US, the
(at the time) 10 member-countries of the EU, Canada and Japan had an outsized impact
on the shape of the Uruguay Round due to their status as major traders and special
trading relationships with each other. We attempt to capture this with inclusion of an
effect, common across sectors, for shipments between each of the Quad-country pairs.
Our parameterization of iceberg trade costs is then given by:

log dkji = αj + γi + β0k + β1k distji + β2k P T Aji + β3 langji + β4 borderji +

X

β5n Quadn,ji

n∈Q

with dkji denoting the iceberg trade costs for country j’s sector-k exports to country i, and
with dkii = 1∀k. The variable distji is the distance between countries j and i, P T Aji is an
indicator variable that takes the value 1 if countries j and i are members of a common
PTA and 0 otherwise, langji is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if countries
j and i share a common language and 0 otherwise, borderji is an indicator variable that
takes the value 1 if countries j and i share a common physical border and 0 otherwise,
and Q is the set of pairs of the members of the “Quad,” i.e., the US, the EU, Canada
and Japan, and Quadn,ji is equal to one whenever countries j and i make up the pair n.
With perfect competition in each country-sector-variety, the price of each variety in each
country is equal to:

pki (ω) =

wj k
dji (1
k
j∈1,...,N zj (ω)
min

10

+ tkji )

where wj is the wage of labor in country j and tkji is equal to the ad valorem tariff levied
by country i on sector-k imports from country j.9
We now turn to the demand side of the model and describe the consumer demand
system. A representative consumer in each country chooses consumption levels of each
variety in each sector to maximize the following utility function that is CES across varieties
within a sector with a Cobb-Douglas aggregator across sectors:

k

k αi
ui = ΠK
k=1 (Ci )
∞
X
σ
σ−1
k
Ci = (
ck (ω) σ ) σ−1 ,
ω=1

where αik are country i’s taste parameters for sector k, and σ is a within-sector constant
elasticity of substitution across varieties. Consumers take prices for each variety as given.
They choose consumption to maximize this utility function subject to their budget constraint that total expenditure must be weakly less than their country’s labor income plus
tariff revenue.
We can now describe the equilibrium of the model given a set of tariffs. An equilibrium
consists of a vector of wages wi and a vector of national incomes Ei (wage income plus
tariff revenue) such that labor markets clear, trade is balanced, and consumers and firms
are behaving optimally.10

2.2

Tariff Bargaining

We assume that in a multilateral round of tariff negotiations, countries negotiate bilaterally and simultaneously over tariff vectors. As we discussed in the Introduction, this
bargaining structure was featured in the first five GATT rounds of multilateral tariff negotiations, and it was used as a complement to multilateral bargaining methods in the
last three GATT rounds, including the Uruguay Round, as well as in the now-suspended
9

With this specification we are assuming that the ad valorem tariff is applied to the delivered price

of the import good at the importing country’s border.
10
Countries do run trade deficits in the data which we can not rationalize in our static model. As
discussed in Ossa (2016), an ideal solution would involve a dynamic model of saving and borrowing which
is outside the scope of this paper. Ossa (2016) also discusses an alternative approach which partially
accounts for trade deficits by considering the trade surplus as fixed additional income to a country. We
instead simply abstract away from the issue of trade deficits and work in a setting of balanced trade.

11

WTO Doha Round. Moreover, as we also discussed in the Introduction, we will allow
countries to make use of costly transfers in their bargains, in order to capture the broader
set of issues beyond tariff bargaining that the Uruguay Round negotiations encompassed.
But for the moment we assume that bargaining takes place only over tariffs, and we postpone our description of the introduction of transfers into the model until after we have
described the basic tariffs-only bargaining structure.
As all tariffs affect all countries through the trade equilibrium in our model, the
payoffs from each bilateral negotiation depend on the outcomes of the other bilateral
negotiations. We follow Bagwell et al. (2017b) and apply the solution concept of Horn
and Wolinsky (1988) to this tariff bargaining problem. According to this solution, each
pair of negotiating countries maximizes its Nash product given the actions of the other
pairs.
Let πi (t) be the welfare of country i when the world vector of tariffs is given by t. We
measure a country’s welfare by its real national income level. When country i negotiates
with county j, they select the tariffs τ that they negotiate so as to maximize their Nash
product:

npij (τ, t−ij ) = (πi (τ, t−ij ) − πi (τ0 , t−ij ))ζij (πj (τ, t−ij ) − πj (τ0 , t−ij ))1−ζij
where ζij is the bargaining power parameter of country i in its bilateral bargain with
country j and where we have partitioned the set of tariffs into those being negotiated
by i and j and all other tariffs as (τ, t−ij ). τ0 represents the level for the tariffs under
negotiation between i and j that will prevail if i and j fail to reach an agreement. We
set these to be the levels of these tariffs in place when the negotiating parties entered the
round.
We further parameterize the pairwise bargaining powers. Specifically, each country has
a bargaining ability parameter ai . When countries i and j meet, the pairwise bargaining
parameter is equal to

ζij =

exp (ai )
.
exp (ai ) + exp (aj )

We now define the Horn and Wolinsky (1988) tariff bargaining equilibrium for our
model:
12

Definition 1 (Tariff Bargaining Equilibrium) An equilibrium in tariffs consists of a
vector of tariffs such that for each pair ij the tariffs negotiated by this pair maximizes npij
given the other tariffs in the vector.
The key assumption in the Horn and Wolinsky (1988) bargaining equilibrium is that,
when evaluating a candidate τ , the pair ij holds the vector t−ij fixed. In other words, if
ij were to not reach agreement, or were to deviate from a tariff vector specified by the
equilibrium, then the other tariffs do not adjust. As we discussed in the Introduction,
this equilibrium notion is sometimes referred to as “Nash-in-Nash,” because it is the
Nash equilibrium to the synthetic game where each pair constitutes a player, the payoff
function is the pair’s Nash bargaining product, and the strategies of each player are the
tariffs being negotiated by the pair associated with that player.
To reflect the tariff bargaining environment of the Uruguay Round, we introduce three
institutional constraints to our tariff bargaining solution11 First, we assume that countries
are restricted to bargain over MFN tariffs and cannot engage in bilateral bargains over
discriminatory tariffs.12 Second, we assume that countries are not allowed to make tariff
offers in any bilateral that would violate their existing GATT tariff bindings by exceeding
their bound (legal maximum) levels.13 And third, in line with the principal supplier rule
of GATT/WTO tariff negotiations, we assume that only the largest supplier of good k
into country i prior to the round can negotiate with country i over country i’s MFN tariff
n 14
in sector k, tmf
ik .
11

Omitted from the institutional constraints that we impose on tariff bargaining is the GATT/WTO

norm of reciprocity. In the Conclusion, we discuss the possibility of augmenting our representation of the
Uruguay Round tariff bargaining protocol with the addition of a reciprocity norm.
12
GATT members can and do engage in bilateral bargains over discriminatory tariffs when they negotiate preferential trade agreements, which under the GATT/WTO rules contained in GATT Article
XXIV are permissible provided that the negotiating countries eliminate tariffs on substantially all trade
between them. And as Bagwell et al. (2017a) describe, in some of the early GATT rounds, the reach
of some of the bilaterals was expanded beyond negotiations over MFN tariffs to include discriminatory
(preferential) tariffs as well. But in the more recent GATT multilateral rounds, including the Uruguay
Round which is our focus here, negotiations were restricted to MFN tariffs.
13
In fact, under Article XXVIII of GATT, countries can engage in the renegotiation of their existing
tariff bindings and either modify in an upward direction or even withdraw these bindings. However, in
the multilateral rounds that are our focus here, which occur under Article XXVIIIbis, the purpose of
negotiations is to achieve reductions in the levels of tariff bindings, and tariff offers that violate existing
bindings would instead have to occur in the context of an Article XXVIII renegotiation and include the
bargaining partner with which the original tariff concession was negotiated.
14
In their examination of the bargaining data from the GATT Torquay Round, Bagwell et al. (2017a)

13

We now describe how we augment our model of tariff bargaining to include the possibility of costly international transfers. As discussed in the Introduction, there were a
number of important dimensions of the Uruguay Round negotiations that went beyond
tariff bargaining to specific issues such as agricultural subsidies, intellectual property,
services, and possibly even to broader non-economic issues covering national security
concerns and geopolitical affairs. To allow our model to reflect some of these broader
dimensions in the simplest way, we allow countries to make costly transfers as part of
their tariff negotiations. Let Πi (t, m) be the welfare of country i when the world vector
of tariffs is given by t and the world vector of net transfers is given by m. We continue to
measure each country’s welfare by its real national income level, but now augmented by
the net international transfer it receives. We model this as a direct utility transfer rather
than an income transfer, with no general equilibrium effects as a result: we think of this
as capturing the non-economic issues beyond the market access concerns associated with
tariff commitments that may have been at play during the negotiations.15
In this augmented setting, when country i negotiates with county j, the two countries
select the tariffs τ that they negotiate and the net transfer µij that country i pays to country j so as to maximize their Nash product, which we denote by N Pij (τ, t−ij , µij , m−ij ),
and which is given by:

(Πi (τ, t−ij , µij , m−ij ) − Πi (τ0 , t−ij , µ0 , m−ij ))ζij (Πj (τ, t−ij , µij , m−ij ) − Πj (τ0 , t−ij , µ0 , m−ij ))1−ζij
where, as before, ζij is the bargaining power parameter of country i in its bilateral bargain
with country j and the set of tariffs has been partitioned into those being negotiated by
i and j and all other tariffs, (τ, t−ij ), and where we now similarly partition the sets of
find that the average number of exporting countries bargaining with an importing country over a given
tariff was 1.25, suggesting that our assumption is a reasonable approximation. A potential caveat is that
the findings of Bagwell et al. (2017a) apply at the 6-digit HS level of trade, whereas here we are operating
at a more aggregate sectoral level; we return to this point in the Conclusion.
15
An alternative (and possibly complementary) approach to introducing transfers into our model would
be to allow international transfers of income. Transfers of this form would enter the budget constraint
of each country and have general equilibrium impacts, and this might better capture the economic issues
addressed during the Uruguay Round negotiations that went beyond tariff bargaining. Our approach is
simpler, and seems appropriate as a way to capture the non-economic issues described above that may also
have been at play in the Round. We leave to future research a more complete exploration of the various
ways that international transfers might be introduced into quantitative models of tariff bargaining.

14

transfers for countries i and j into those being negotiated by i and j and all other transfers,
(µij , m−ij ). As before, τ0 represents the level for the tariffs under negotiation between
i and j that will prevail if i and j fail to reach an agreement, and we set these to be
the levels of these tariffs in place when the negotiating parties entered the round. And
similarly, µ0 represents the level of the transfer between i and j that will prevail if they
fail to reach agreement, which we set to zero.
Finally, to allow for the possibility of a non-zero cost of transfers, we assume that if
P
country i makes a positive net transfer to its bargaining partners in total (i.e., if j µij >
0), then country i suffers an additional utility cost associated with orchestrating this level
P
of transfer equal to κ( j µij )2 . We treat the cost-of-transfers parameter κ as a parameter
to be estimated along with the bargaining power parameters of the model, and we estimate
as well the net transfers µij .
We then define the Horn and Wolinsky (1988) tariff-and-transfer bargaining equilibrium for our model:
Definition 2 (Tariff-and-Transfer Bargaining Equilibrium) An equilibrium in tariffs and transfers consists of a vector of tariffs and transfers such that for each pair ij
the tariffs and transfer negotiated by this pair maximizes N Pij given the other tariffs and
transfers in the vector.
As noted above, to reflect the principal supplier rule of GATT/WTO tariff negotiations, we assume that only the principal supplier of good k into country i prior to the round
n
can negotiate with country i over country i’s MFN tariff in sector k, tmf
ik . In the absence

of transfers, this in turn requires that a “double coincidence of wants” exists between any
viable pair of bargaining partners, in the sense that each country in the bargaining pair
must be a principal supplier of at least one good to the other country in the pair. With
the introduction of (costly) transfers, the requirement of a double coincidence of wants is
relaxed, in principle allowing more bargaining pairs to form; for example, if country A is
a principal supplier of good 1 into country B’s market, and country B is not a principal
supplier of any good into country A’s market, there could still be a viable bilateral between countries A and B, in which country B offers to cut its tariff on good 1 in exchange
for a transfer from country A. For simplicity we do not allow the introduction of transfers
to expand the possible set of bilateral bargaining pairs in this way; in the Conclusion we
return to discuss how this added impact of the availability of transfers might affect our
results.
15

It is worth pausing here to consider how our estimation can pin down bargaining-power
parameters and the cost of transfers. If the Uruguay Round agreed tariffs correspond
closely to what according to our model would be the joint surplus maximizing tariffs for
each bilateral, then bargaining powers would be reflected in the transfers (which we don’t
observe) rather than the agreed tariffs, and we would have large standard errors on our
bargaining parameter estimates together with a low estimated cost of transfers. To the
extent that the Uruguay Round agreed tariffs do not correspond to what according to
our model would be the joint surplus maximizing tariffs for each bilateral, our estimation
will search for the combination of positive cost-of-transfers and bargaining powers that
generates predicted tariffs as close as possible to the Uruguay Round agreed tariffs.

3

Data

To operationalize our model, we require data on trade flows, production and value added,
and tariffs, all at the country-sector level. To quantify iceberg trade costs, we combine
these data with a set of data on gravity variables: distances between countries, whether
countries share a common language, and whether countries are members of a common
PTA. Details of the data cleaning and aggregation are contained in Appendix A. Table 1
provides summary statistics.
To represent the world economy, we include the twenty five largest countries by GDP
in 1990, and aggregate the rest of the world into one of five “not-elsewhere-specified”
(NES) regional entities: Americas, Asia-Oceania, Middle East-North Africa (MENA),
Africa, and Europe. We treat each regional entity as a sovereign individual country in
the estimation. We aggregate trade flows into 49 sectors. We began with SITC2 two-digit
codes, and then further combine several related sectors to arrive at a total of 49 traded
sectors.

3.1

Trade Flow, Production, and Value Added Data

The starting point for our data is the NBER world trade flows data from Feenstra et al.
(2005) for the year 1990. We compute the gross value in 1990 dollars of each country’s
imports from each other country at the sector level according to our country and sector
definitions. The NBER data do not provide information on a country’s production or
consumption. We impute each country’s sector-level production by extracting the ratio

16

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mnfctring
1990
1990 Trade
2000
2000 Trade
V.A. per
Import Average
Weighted
Average
Weighted
Country Pop(M) capita(000)
ratio
Tariffs
Tariffs
Tariffs
Tariffs
USA
249.6
4258.8
0.187
0.045
0.048
0.032
0.043
Argentina
32.6
768.9
0.017
0.115
0.099
0.142
0.118
Australia
17.1
2546.9
0.096
0.136
0.109
0.069
0.054
Austria
7.7
3265.8
0.503
0.061
0.066
0.033
0.034
Belgium
10.0
3428.3
0.386
0.061
0.054
0.033
0.028
Brazil
149.4
742.1
0.019
0.259
0.169
0.136
0.094
Canada
27.8
3138.7
0.336
0.080
0.081
0.041
0.030
China
1140.9
72.1
0.084
0.102
0.111
0.076
0.071
Denmark
5.1
3596.6
0.213
0.061
0.057
0.033
0.029
France
56.7
2315.9
0.241
0.061
0.059
0.033
0.030
Germany
79.4
5421.1
0.228
0.061
0.062
0.033
0.032
India
849.5
23.8
0.038
0.772
0.576
0.323
0.238
Indonesia
178.2
61.6
0.058
0.196
0.133
0.076
0.052
Italy
56.7
2051.8
0.259
0.061
0.052
0.033
0.027
Japan
123.5
5804.5
0.122
0.053
0.027
0.035
0.019
Mexico
83.2
226.5
0.081
0.118
0.110
0.149
0.124
Netherlands
15.0
2425.4
0.240
0.061
0.057
0.033
0.028
Russia
148.3
236.1
0.128
0.087
0.056
0.104
0.076
S. Korea
42.9
1875.7
0.176
0.109
0.089
0.083
0.049
Spain
38.8
1815.3
0.410
0.061
0.054
0.033
0.027
Sweden
8.6
3731.1
0.383
0.061
0.061
0.033
0.030
Switzerland
6.7
6255.8
0.299
0.199
0.113
0.063
0.033
Thailand
54.6
408.7
0.091
0.397
0.317
0.136
0.096
Turkey
56.2
413.3
0.134
0.079
0.067
0.052
0.034
UK
57.6
3541.4
0.305
0.061
0.061
0.033
0.031
America NES
183.1
243.9
0.077
0.119
0.100
0.107
0.087
AsiaPac NES
671.3
104.7
0.207
0.129
0.108
0.068
0.049
MENA NES
207.5
181.9
0.140
0.167
0.151
0.192
0.136
Africa NES
480.8
48.1
0.041
0.153
0.136
0.118
0.106
Europe NES
207.5
608.7
0.273
0.075
0.059
0.074
0.055
Notes: Trade and tariff summary statistics at the level aggregation used for the analysis.

17

Largest
Trading
Partner
Canada
USA
Japan
Germany
Germany
USA
USA
USA
Germany
Germany
France
MENA NES
Japan
Germany
USA
USA
Germany
Europe NES
USA
France
Germany
Germany
Japan
Germany
Germany
USA
USA
Japan
USA
Germany

of exports to total production at the country-sector level from the Global Trade Analysis
Project (GTAP) database, and we complement these data with manufacturing value added
data by country from UNIDO. Our measure of sector-level consumption by country is then
given by the difference between production and net exports.

3.2

Tariff Data

We obtain country-sector tariff equivalent applied MFN tariffs from the UNCTAD Trains
database on tariffs for 1990 and 2000. We use the 1990 applied tariffs as the pre-Uruguay
Round tariffs, and the 2000 applied tariffs as the negotiated outcomes from the Uruguay
Round.
There is an important distinction between the tariffs that countries actually apply to
imports into their markets, and the tariff bindings that they negotiate in the GATT/WTO.16 While introducing this distinction into a quantitative trade model would be a
very worthwhile project in its own right, it is well beyond the scope and focus of our
paper. In addition, as is well-known, the results of GATT/WTO tariff negotiating rounds
are typically phased in over an implementation period that can last a number of years. In
this regard the Uruguay Round was no exception, with phase-in periods ranging across
countries and sectors up to a maximum of roughly a decade. With the implementation
period of the Uruguay Round commencing on January 1 1995, our decision to use the difference between the applied tariffs in place in 1990 and the applied tariffs in place in 2000
as a measure of the negotiating outcomes of the round represents an attempt to capture
these complex features in a way that maintains the tractability of our quantitative model
and its use for studying tariff bargaining.
Finally, while we will estimate the parameters of our trade model utilizing data on
trade flows, production and value added, and tariffs for the full coverage of products, for
our bargaining analysis we focus attention on bargaining over tariffs for non-agricultural
16

A tariff binding represents a legal cap on the tariff that a country agrees not to exceed when it applies

its tariff; the tariff it applies may be at the cap, but it may also be below the cap. For most industrialized
countries, the vast majority of applied tariffs are at the cap (Australia is a notable exception), but for
many emerging and especially developing countries, applied tariffs are often well below the cap (China
is a notable exception). A recent literature has begun to explore the value of tariff bindings that are set
above applied tariffs, and this literature finds that the reduction in uncertainty about worst-case (i.e.,
high-tariff) scenarios that such a binding implies can have large trade effects, e.g. Handley (2014) and
Handley and Limao (2015).

18

products (product categories 10-11 and 13-49 as defined in Table 9).17

3.3

Gravity Data

We use data on distances between countries, existence of preferential trading arrangements, and a common language indicator from the Geography module of the CEPII
Gravity Dataset (Head and Mayer, 2014). This data set constructs distances between
countries based on distances between pairs of large cities and the population shares of
those cities. For the regional entities, we construct the distance with a partner as the
average distance between the countries forming the regional entity and the partner in
question. For two regional entities, we use the average distance across all pairs formed
with one country from each regional entity.

4

Estimation

We estimate the model in two steps. First, we estimate the taste, productivity, and iceberg cost parameters. Given these estimates, we then estimate the cost-of-transfers and
bargaining parameters. The reason for splitting the estimation process into two steps
is because the bargaining model is computationally much more intensive than the trade
model, as solving the bargaining model once involves potentially thousands of computations of a trade equilibrium at differing tariff levels. Because the trade model has several
thousand parameters, joint estimation with the bargaining model is prohibitively expensive. For feasibility, we thus sacrifice some efficiency by not jointly estimating the trade
and bargaining/cost-of-transfers parameters. We do, however, allow the Uruguay Round
bargaining outcomes to inform our trade model estimates along one dimension: we include inequality moments in the trade model estimation reflecting the implication that
each bargaining pair in the Uruguay Round (based on the product-level principal supplier
status in our trade data) should generate a higher joint surplus with its observed Uruguay
Round agreed tariffs than if the pair had remained at its pre-Uruguay-Round tariff levels.
17

The reason for not analyzing agricultural tariff changes is that many of the agricultural tariffs were

specific rather than ad-valorem. To operationalize the model, we require ad valorem tariffs. However, ad
valorem equivalents of specific agricultural tariffs display large fluctuations in levels due to world price
movements rather than tariff changes.

19

4.1

Non-linear least squares estimation of trade parameters

We estimate the model to minimize the distance between the data and the model’s predictions for (i) the ratio of each country’s imports from each other country in each sector
to the country’s total consumption in that sector, (ii) relative total value added across
countries, and (iii) for each bargaining pair, the difference between the pair’s joint surplus
at the observed post-Uruguay-Round tariffs and at the pre-Uruguay-Round tariffs on the
goods that are principally supplied by one member of the pair to the other member.
More specifically, the parameters to estimate consist of a vector of taste parameters
(α), a vector of productivity parameters (z), a vector of dispersion of productivity parameters (θ), and a vector of iceberg cost parameters (β). Given the Cobb-Douglas preference
structure, the vector of taste parameters α can be inferred from the data directly as the
share of expenditure on each sector over total expenditure. Given these α estimates, we
then choose the remaining parameters to minimize the following criterion:
 k

x
x̂k (z,θ,β)
P ij k − P ij k
i xij
i x̂ij (z,θ,β)
 P

P
k
k


x
G(z, θ, β) =  P j,kk ij − P j,kkx̂ij (z,θ,β)

x̂
(z,θ,β)
 j,k xU SA,j

j,k U SA,j
P OST
0
min (JSij (τij
) − JSij (τij ), 0)
min G(z, θ, β)0 W G(z, θ, β)
z,θ,β

where JSij (τijP OST ) is the joint surplus of the negotiating pair of countries i and j evaluated at the observed post-Uruguay-Round tariffs, and JSij (τij0 ) is the same joint surplus
evaluated at the observed post-Uruguay-Round tariffs for all tariffs other than those being
negotiated between the pair ij together with the pre-Uruguay-Round tariffs for the tariffs being negotiated between the pair ij. The inequality moments associated with JSij
are implied by the Horn-Wolinsky bargaining equilibrium concept: if it were the case
that JSij (τijP OST ) − JSij (τij0 ) < 0, then the pair ij would have been better off with no
agreement. Evaluating the bargaining conditions increases the computational cost of the
estimation as it requires solving for equilibrium at several different tariff vectors. For this
reason, we include a subset of pairs motivated by size, trade flow patterns, and principal supplier relationships: US-EU, US-Japan, Canada-EU, Japan-EU, and Japan-South
Korea.18
18

We construct the weighting matrix W as follows. The weights on the trade shares are 1. The trade

share difference between observed and reality can vary from -1 to 1, though most differences are on the

20

4.2

Discussion of Estimation and Data Variation

The non-linear mapping between trade shares, relative value added, and bilateral tariff
agreements that generate positive surplus into model parameters is difficult to characterize formally. However, we now discuss the patterns in the data that help identify the
model’s parameters. We also compare our estimation approach to alternative estimation
approaches from the previous literature.
The sector level θk parameters govern the responsiveness of trade flows to changes in
the environment such as tariffs or productivities. Previous literature, such as Costinot
et al. (2011) and Caliendo and Parro (2015), derive linear estimating equations where
the left-hand-side variable is a non-linear transformation of bilateral trade flows at the
country pair-sector-direction level and the right-hand-side variable is a non-linear transformation of either productivities (Costinot et al. (2011)) or tariffs (Caliendo and Parro
(2015)). The parameter θk is the coefficient on the right-hand-side variable in these formulations.19 With these linear estimating equations, these papers pay special attention to
the identifying variation on the right hand side. Costinot et al. (2011) use an instrumental variables approach with additional data on productivities, while Caliendo and Parro
(2015) use a rich set of fixed effects to isolate variation in tariffs that is within countrysector, and thus requires some countries to have discriminatory tariffs. These approaches
do have the benefit of clear attribution of the identifying variation being used to estimate θ. That said, the log transformation of the left-hand-side variable entails dropping
pairs of countries which have zero trade flows from the estimation as discussed in Silva
and Tenreyro (2006). This approach also attributes idiosyncratic differences in a country
pair’s trade flows to iceberg costs and eliminates any role of measurement error in trade
flows.
The non-linear least squares approach that we employ uses the information conveyed
by pairs of countries which do not trade in a sector and allows for measurement error.
Furthermore, it delivers, in one step, estimates of iceberg costs and country-sector level
productivities that can be assessed against outside data sources and can be used to comorder 0.01 or smaller. There are N*N*K=44100 of these. We weight the relative value added by 10.
There are 29 of these. Their scale can be arbitrarily large, but at the estimates, the differences are also
around 0.01 and smaller. Finally, we weight the five bargaining conditions by 105 . Recall that these are
in utility units, and absent weighting are on the order of 10−4 .
19
Caliendo and Parro (2015) allow for θ to vary at the sector level, while Costinot et al. (2011) restrict
θ to be constant across all sectors.

21

pute any counterfactual outcome in the domain of the model.20 The disadvantage of the
non-linear method is that it obscures the identifying variation being used to estimate θk
and does not lend itself to straightforward instrumental variable techniques. That said,
our estimation relies on patterns in the data which are similar to those relied on by the
previous literature, such as, conditional on observable components specified in the iceberg
costs, the covariance of trade shares with tariffs. The iceberg cost specification we employ
has separate origin, destination, and sector fixed effects, but not destination-sector fixed
effects. Therefore, identification does not hinge on observing discriminatory tariffs within
importing country-sector; instead, identification is achieved since MFN tariffs vary across
destinations for given sectors.
The bargaining conditions help ensure that the trade model parameters that we estimate are compatible with the observed tariff concessions from the Uruguay Round. In
this sense, we are using bargaining outcomes to help estimate the trade model parameters
such as the θk parameters. The trade model is point identified without these conditions,
and thus remains point identified after adding these inequalities to the criterion function.
The conditions we employ on the joint surplus are true for any bargaining power parameters. These conditions also have the potential to help allay concerns, were the model
to be mis-specified, about unobserved factors affecting import shares that are also correlated with tariffs. To the extent that negotiations reflected beliefs about the world that
are supported by unbiased estimates of trade elasticities, then including the bargaining
conditions allows our estimates to incorporate that information.

4.3

Non-linear least squares estimation of cost-of-transfers and
bargaining parameters

With estimates of the trade model in hand, we estimate the cost-of-transfers parameter
and the bargaining parameters between pairs of countries in a second step. We again
employ non-linear least squares. Using the estimated trade parameters, we can solve
the bargaining model for predicted tariffs and net transfers given any cost-of-transfers
parameter and vector of bargaining parameters. We numerically search over the costof-transfers parameter and bargaining parameters to minimize the distance between the
20

Papers using the linear estimating equation approach are still able to run counterfactuals by using

the exact-hat algebra as in Dekle et al. (2008). This method allows one to estimate certain types of
counterfactual outcomes knowing only some aggregates rather than all of the model primitives.

22

observed tariff outcomes of the Uruguay Round and the tariff bargaining outcomes predicted by our model. In other words, we estimate the cost-of-transfers and bargaining
parameters by solving the following:
min Σi,k (τ̂ik (κ̂, â) − τik )2
κ̂,â

where τ̂ik (κ, a) is the model’s prediction for country i’s MFN tariff in sector k for a
candidate cost-of-transfers parameter κ and vector of bargaining parameters a, and τik is
the observed MFN tariff of country i in sector k in the year 2000.

5

Model Estimates

5.1

Trade Parameter Estimates

Table 2 presents the within-country dispersion of productivity parameter estimates by
sector, ordered by descending θk (descending trade elasticity). Our estimates of θk display
substantial heterogeneity across sectors. According to our estimates, the three highest-θk
sectors are Live animals (40.87), Miscellaneous edible products and preparations (24.44)
and Petroleum (22.38), while the three lowest-θk sectors are Pharmaceuticals (4.36), Metal
Ores (4.13) and Textile fibres (3.98). Our average θ across sectors is 10.77.
The range of estimates in the literature is arguably quite wide and comparison from
paper to paper is difficult due to different degrees of product or geographical aggregation.
That said, the Eaton and Kortum (2002) estimate of θ across sectors is 8.28. Costinot
et al. (2011) estimate 6.53. Caliendo and Parro (2015) estimates an aggregate θ of 4.55
with a range from 50.01 (Petroleum) to 0.37 (Other transport). Ossa (2014) estimates a
mean of 3.42 with a range from 10.07 (Wheat) to 1.19 (Other animal products). Overall,
the θ values we estimate tend to be somewhat higher than the current consensus in the
literature, a feature that is driven partly by including conditions from the bargaining
model in estimating the trade model parameters. In particular, we find that while the
bargaining conditions are not binding at the estimated parameters, there is another set of
parameters that would deliver a lower objective function value if one ignores the bargaining
conditions. This other parameter vector features θ estimates which are 34% lower on
average than the estimates with the bargaining conditions in place, and which are closer
to the estimates in the literature. However, at these estimates, the bargaining model does
not predict tariff changes well for any bargaining parameters.
23

The estimated average iceberg cost across all sectors and country-pairs is 109.0%. The
average-across-sectors incurred iceberg cost is 75.3% as lower iceberg cost country pairs
trade with each other more. These iceberg costs estimates are smaller than other estimates
in the literature. For example, Novy (2013) finds an average iceberg cost of 108% for a
group of developed countries in 1990. For the same countries, our estimates indicate an
average unweighted iceberg cost of 69.2%. The lower estimated levels of iceberg costs
that we find relative to the literature is consistent with our finding as well of higher θ
estimates relative to the literature, in that observed levels of trade can be matched by
modifying θ or iceberg costs. That is, if for example the model is under-estimating the
amount of trade relative to the data, one can decrease iceberg costs or decrease θ.
Table 2: θ Estimates by Industry.
Sector
θ̂
SE
Sector
θ̂
Live animals 40.87
2.10
Footwear 8.50
Misc. Edible 24.44 10.75
Chemical 8.32
Petroleum 22.38 11.31 Non-metallic mineral manufactures 8.31
Dairy 21.77 10.22
Crude rubber 8.09
All others 18.45
9.45
Office machines 8.02
Cereals 17.16
5.86
Specialized Machinery 7.82
Feeding stuff 16.94
7.19
Pulp and waste paper 7.77
Plumbing, heating and lighting 15.86
6.18
Crude materials,n.e.s. 7.74
Furniture and parts thereof 15.03
7.75
Travel goods and bags 7.67
Paper manufactures 11.98 10.67
Road vehicles 7.51
Electrical machinery 11.91
3.91
Meat 7.50
Wood manufactures 11.82
6.63
Non-ferrous metals 7.42
Vegetables and fruit 11.78
8.01
Fertilizers 7.32
Beverages 11.73
1.71
Tobacco 7.15
Misc manufactures 10.92
4.28
Fabrics 7.07
Rubber manufactures 10.81
5.49
Organic chemicals 6.99
Animal oils and fats 10.63
3.29
Iron and steel 6.94
Coffee, Tea, Spices 10.46 10.30
Scientific instruments 6.91
Power generating machinery 10.23
4.99
Other transport equipment 6.42
Inorganic chemicals 10.19
5.42
Seafood 5.67
Hides and skins
9.44
4.59
Coal 5.38
Sugar
9.35
3.52
Pharmaceutical 4.36
Cork and wood
9.07
5.63
Metal Ores 4.13
Resins
8.94
4.97
Textile fibres 3.98
Dyeing and tanning
8.78
4.85
Notes: Non-linear least squares estimates of θ by sector in descending order of estimate.

SE
5.12
5.03
8.00
4.73
3.42
4.15
2.10
3.31
3.80
4.03
3.64
3.89
4.91
4.31
4.36
5.25
5.87
3.63
4.13
3.83
1.65
1.29
0.92
0.98

With regard to cross-country fundamental productivity levels, Figure 1 plots the distribution of estimated productivity levels for each country. Productivity levels are positively
correlated across sectors, so the higher productivity countries in agriculture also tend to
be the higher productivity countries in manufacturing.
24

As a test of the model, we compare the estimated wage levels across countries to wage
data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics International Labor Comparisons (ILC) program
for 1997. For the 19 countries we could match to these data, a regression of the model’s
predicted relative wage on the relative wage in the data produces a coefficient estimate
of 0.933 with associated standard error of 0.157. The estimated R2 for this regression is
0.674. While we did not use any wage data in estimating the model, the implied estimated
wage rates are not systematically biased estimates and can account for about two-thirds
of the cross-country variation.

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
United States
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
China
Denmark
France
Germany
India
Indonesia
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Netherlands
Russia
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
United Kingdom
America NES
Asia/Oceania NES
MENA NES
Africa NES
Europe NES

Estimated Productivity

Figure 1: Productivity Distributions by Country

Notes: For each country, the target is the median estimated productivity across sectors. The box represents
the interquartile range. The line represents the full range. Each sector in the US is normalized to a
productivity level one.

5.2

Model Benchmarks

We compute various benchmarks implied by the 1990-based estimated trade model. Table
3 reports the results. We begin with the first and second columns of Table 3, which report
respectively the changes in welfare that would result if, with regard to all products, the
world reverted to autarky, or if all iceberg costs (including tariffs) were removed. These
25

Table 3: Model Benchmarks

Country
United States
EU
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
China
India
Indonesia
Japan
Mexico
Russia
South Korea
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
America NES
Asia/Oceania NES
MENA NES
Africa NES
Europe NES
Total Welfare

Autarky
-1.76%
-5.44%
-10.20%
-17.05%
-5.19%
-4.98%
-2.86%
-5.07%
-11.74%
-6.42%
-8.92%
-4.61%
-1.20%
-3.31%
-1.14%
-6.88%
-2.41%
-2.44%
-2.35%
-1.81%
-2.67%
-3.52%
-5.11%
-5.78%
-4.98%
-3.43%
-3.88%
-5.58%
-5.45%
-2.20%
-5.46%
-3.42%

Zero
Iceberg
Costs
18.82%
47.28%
58.09%
79.49%
90.64%
64.75%
29.75%
44.12%
85.97%
62.85%
51.38%
36.92%
107.26%
103.94%
86.00%
51.62%
52.99%
89.39%
76.23%
23.45%
59.80%
75.16%
54.65%
60.00%
152.18%
59.62%
119.63%
58.74%
94.58%
55.41%
43.00%
47.26%

Free
Trade
0.03%
0.00%
0.00%
-0.04%
-0.02%
-0.01%
-0.06%
-0.05%
0.05%
0.02%
0.00%
0.15%
0.11%
0.20%
0.10%
0.07%
0.60%
0.53%
0.34%
0.20%
0.01%
0.21%
0.42%
-0.05%
0.70%
-0.12%
0.28%
0.77%
0.29%
0.13%
0.92%
0.17%

Total
Welfare
Maximizing
-1.13%
-1.62%
-2.01%
-1.63%
-1.47%
-1.08%
-2.10%
-2.08%
-1.77%
-1.79%
-1.78%
-0.86%
0.66%
1.67%
1.52%
0.35%
1.27%
3.16%
0.67%
0.85%
0.32%
0.83%
1.45%
-0.12%
2.86%
-0.15%
6.55%
2.39%
1.13%
2.58%
2.95%
0.25%

Nash
-0.21%
-0.01%
-0.02%
0.00%
-0.01%
-0.02%
0.03%
0.00%
-0.02%
0.01%
-0.06%
-0.07%
-0.08%
0.09%
-0.08%
-0.21%
-0.01%
0.12%
-0.07%
0.06%
-0.06%
-0.49%
-0.03%
0.01%
0.04%
0.05%
-0.29%
-0.41%
-0.90%
-0.19%
-0.61%
-0.10%

Notes: Estimated model’s predicted percentage change in national welfare from estimated 1990 status quo
for benchmark scenarios. In column 1, we set iceberg costs for all countries in all sectors to 5000%,
effectively shutting down trade across countries. In column 2, we set iceberg costs to zero for all countries
in all sectors. In column 3, we set all non-agricultural tariffs for the US, Australia, EU, Japan, and
South Korea to zero. These four countries and the EU make up the set of negotiating countries based
on principal supplier status according to our estimates. In column 4, we solve for the total welfare
maximizing levels of non-agricultural tariffs for the five negotiating countries. In column 5, we compute
a Nash equilibrium in non-agricultural tariffs for the five negotiating countries. Tariffs in columns 4 and
5 are non-discriminatory.

26

are standard benchmarks in the quantitative trade modeling literature, and are useful for
positioning the broad predictions from our quantitative trade model within that literature.
We find that, relative to welfare under the status-quo 1990 tariffs, moving to autarky
would reduce total world welfare by 3.42%, while eliminating iceberg costs would raise
total world welfare by 47.26%. For the US, moving to autarky reduces country welfare by
1.76% which is somewhat larger than the 0.7% to 1.4% range computed by Arkolakis et al.
(2012) under the assumption of a single trade elasticity in the range of 5 to 10 applied
to all sectors. This number is lower, however, than the 13.5% estimated in Ossa (2015),
despite the fact that our model also features heterogeneity in θ across sectors. Several
features account for the difference between our predictions and Ossa’s. Ossa’s estimates
are based on a model with 251 sectors for the base year 2007 whereas our model has 49
sectors and is estimated using data from the base year 1990 (Ossa reports an estimate
for the US of 8.9% based on a more aggregated 28 sector calculation). Ossa also reports
a trade-weighted cross-industry average trade elasticity of 2.94, substantially lower than
that implied by our θ estimates.
We will also be interested in how the Horn-Wolinsky solution of our model compares
to a benchmark tariff bargain that reached the efficiency frontier. There are no market
imperfections or political economy forces in our model, and so achieving free trade in
all tariffs would place the world on the efficiency frontier. But as a benchmark with
which to compare our model outcomes, global free trade is not particularly meaningful,
both because our bargaining analysis is limited to tariffs on non-agricultural products, and
because according to our model under the principal supplier rule not all countries engaged
in tariff bargaining in the Uruguay Round. A more meaningful free-trade benchmark with
which to compare the Horn-Wolinsky solution of our model is a bargain that sets to zero
just the non-agricultural tariffs under negotiation in the Uruguay Round according to
our model. It is also meaningful to consider an alternative benchmark that sets these
same tariffs equal to the levels that would maximize world welfare in light of the existing
distortions implied by the fixed levels of all other tariffs in the world. Similarly, for
assessing how the Horn-Wolinsky solution of our model compares to a benchmark Nash
tariff war, we solve for the non-cooperative Nash tariff equilibrium over this same set of
tariffs, holding all other tariffs fixed at their 1990 levels.
The third, fourth and fifth columns of Table 3 report benchmark welfare effects under these free-trade, world-welfare maximizing and Nash benchmarks, respectively. In
particular, for the benchmark results reported in these three columns, we limit the tariff
27

changes to those tariffs on non-agricultural products that were imposed by the set of
negotiating countries in the Uruguay Round, defined as the set of countries that by their
principal supplier status in 1990 according to our model had at least one viable bilateral
bargaining partner in the Uruguay Round (i.e., a partnership where each country was the
principal supplier of at least one product into the other country’s market). We refer to
the resulting set of tariffs as the set of tariffs that were “under negotiation in the Uruguay
Round.”
The third column of Table 3 reports the welfare results from reducing all the tariffs
that were under negotiation at the Uruguay Round from their 1990 levels to zero, with
all other tariffs held fixed at their 1990 levels. World welfare rises by 0.17%, an amount
that is smaller than the findings in Ossa (2014)) who predicts a rise in total welfare of
0.5%. However, Ossa’s prediction reflects the impact of eliminating all tariffs, whereas as
we have noted above our prediction is about the impact of eliminating only the subset of
(non-agricultural) tariffs that were under negotiation in the Uruguay Round based on the
set of viable bilateral bargaining partners given principal supplier patterns in 1990.
The fourth column of Table 3 reports results when we solve for the levels of the tariffs
negotiated in the Uruguay Round that would maximize total world welfare, corresponding
to the utilitarian/Benthamite point on the (constrained) efficiency frontier. World welfare
under these tariff levels is higher than world welfare under our free trade benchmark for
two reasons. First, there are pre-existing distortions associated with the tariffs not under
negotiation at Uruguay which remain fixed at their 1990 levels under both exercises,
and in the presence of these pre-existing distortions some deviation from free trade for
the remaining tariffs is optimal from the perspective of world welfare: in particular,
we find that on average the world-welfare maximizing benchmark entails further tariff
liberalization than the free trade benchmark (i.e., on average, import subsidies are needed
to offset the trade restricting effects of the tariffs not under negotiation at Uruguay).21
And second, the terms of trade effects of utilitarian tariffs redistribute income towards
higher marginal utility of income countries.22
21

This finding may be interpreted using the Lerner symmetry theorem. Specifically, given the pre-

existing distortions associated with import tariffs not under negotiation in the Uruguay Round, an efficient
outcome could be achieved if export policies were available so that each country could offset the effects
of foreign import tariffs with appropriately selected export subsidies. We do not allow countries to use
export policies in our model; however, due to the Lerner symmetry theorem, a country can similarly
offset the effects of foreign import tariffs with appropriately selected import subsidies.
22
At equal wages, the marginal utility of income is higher in countries with lower price indices. All

28

The fifth column of Table 3 reports the welfare results from increasing all the tariffs
that were under negotiation in the Uruguay Round from their 1990 levels to their Nash
equilibrium levels, with all other tariffs held fixed at their 1990 levels. Here we find that
total welfare decreases for most countries relative to their welfare under status-quo tariffs,
but a few countries would enjoy small gains due to favorable terms-of-trade movements
as a result of the Nash trade war. In aggregate the decrease in total welfare amounts to
0.1%. This reflects the fact that our estimated losses from a move to autarky are relatively
modest (as is true for much of the quantitative trade modeling literature), that the move
to Nash tariffs is only allowed for products that were under negotiation in the Uruguay
Round, and that the Nash tariffs are sizable but far from prohibitive. US tariffs rise on
average from 4.44% to 9.4%. EU tariffs rise on average from 5.82% to 11.31%. Japanese
tariffs rise from 5.03% to 12.6%. Ossa (2014)) finds Nash tariffs averaging 63% and an
aggregate loss of 2.9% from a trade war relative to status-quo tariffs. In addition to the
fact that our Nash calculations refer to only those tariffs that were under negotiation
in the Uruguay Round whereas Ossa’s Nash calculations cover all tariffs, the differences
between our Nash results and Ossa’s also reflect differing estimated trade elasticities, with
Ossa’s estimates again indicating less responsiveness of trade to tariffs on average than
our estimates. The estimates of Markusen and Wigle (1989), who find Nash tariff rates
for the US and Canada of 18% and 6% respectively and small losses from a trade war
relative to free trade, are more in line with our numbers.
Together our estimates in the third and fifth columns of Table 3 suggest that, beginning from Nash tariffs, the GATT rounds up to but not including the Uruguay Round
had achieved by 1990 roughly 40% of the potential aggregate world-wide gains from the
complete elimination of the tariffs that were under negotiation in the Uruguay Round.
Compared to a benchmark that sets these same tariffs equal to the levels that would
maximize world welfare in light of the existing distortions implied by the fixed levels of
all other tariffs in the world as of 1990, the fourth and fifth columns of Table 3 suggest
that, beginning from Nash tariffs, the GATT rounds leading up to the Uruguay Round
achieved roughly a third of the aggregate world-wide welfare gains that were possible with
changes to the tariffs under negotiation in the Uruguay Round.
else equal, larger and/or more centrally located countries thus may be expected to have higher marginal
utilities of income. Since in our model countries do not have sufficient policy instruments with which to
effect lump-sum transfers, the utilitarian calculus balances the benefits of such redistribution against the
associated distortion costs.

29

5.3

Cost-of-Transfers and Bargaining Parameter Estimates

We now turn to our second step and estimate the cost-of-transfers and bargaining parameters. As described above, our approach is to use our trade model to solve for the
Horn-Wolinsky bargaining outcomes beginning from 1990 tariff bindings and respecting
MFN and the principal supplier rule, and to search over cost-of-transfers and bargainingpower parameters to minimize the distance between the observed tariff outcomes of the
Uruguay Round and the tariff bargaining outcomes predicted by our model. We let the
model predictions regarding principal supplier status guide our set of bilateral bargains.
For reference, the top panel of Table 4 displays the observed pattern of principal
supplier status at the level of product aggregation in our data. For this table, we have
combined the (at the time of the Uruguay Round) 10 EU member countries into the
EU, because these countries negotiated their (common external) GATT Uruguay Round
tariff commitments as a bloc; and to focus on the major traders, we have omitted from
the table the 5 regional NES entities. Also, in defining the principal suppliers relevant
for Uruguay Round negotiations, for the numbers in this table we have netted out trade
with fellow PTA members (e.g., US exports to Canada are excluded when calculating the
identity of principal suppliers into Canada). For each cell in the table, the first entry
gives the number of products for which the column country is the principal supplier into
the row country, and the second entry gives the number of products for which the row
country is the principal supplier into the column country. The top panel of Table 4
records 12 country-pairs where both entries are non-zero (highlighted in the table with
square brackets around those entries), reflecting the double coincidence of wants that can
support a bilateral tariff negotiation between the pair. The 12 pairings involve 6 countries:
the 4 Quad members – the US, the EU, Canada and Japan – and two additional countries,
Australia and South Korea.
According to our trade model estimates, the predicted pattern of principal supplier
status for the same set of countries is displayed in the bottom panel of Table 4. As
the bottom panel of Table 4 reflects, the principal supplier relations predicted by our
model capture 7 of the 12 pairings in the data and involve 5 of the 6 countries: three of
the four Quad members, US, EU and Japan, and the two additional countries Australia
and South Korea. This seems to capture the main bilaterals in the Uruguay Round
(US-EU, US-Japan, EU-Japan, Japan-South Korea) but misses some others that are
potentially important (e.g., EU-Canada). Overall, our current set of bargaining countries
includes the 14 major industrialized countries that were arguably the key actors in the
30

31

17,0
[20,1]
[30,24]
9,0
0,0
3,0
3,0
2,0
[28,9]
0,0
3,0
4,0
1,0
3,0
1,0

12,0
[11,2]
[25,26]
9,0
0,0
4,0
8,0
6,0
[18,5]
35,0
0,0
[13,2]
0,0
7,0
3,0
US

US

0,0
0,17
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0

0,1
0,11
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
Argentina

Argentina

0,7
0,0
1,0
2,0
1,0
4,0
0,8
2,0
0,0
[2,2]
0,0
2,0
0,0

[1,21]
0,0
[1,1]
2,0
1,0
4,0
[3,3]
0,0
1,0
[2,1]
0,0
0,0
0,0
Australia

Australia

17,0
27,0
19,0
25,0
19,0
[7,3]
28,0
32,0
[16,2]
37,0
21,0
36,0

11,0
[30,3]
15,0
21,0
12,0
[13,3]
2,0
33,0
[4,2]
39,0
13,0
34,0
EU

EU

0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0

0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
Brazil

Brazil

0,0
0,0
0,0
0,5
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0

1,0
0,0
0,0
0,3
0,0
1,0
0,1
0,0
0,0
0,0
Canada

Canada

0,0
0,0
0,11
0,0
0,0
0,2
0,0
0,0
0,0

0,0
0,0
0,12
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,1
0,0
0,0
China

China

0,0
0,2
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0

0,0
0,2
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
India

India

0,8
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0

0,10
0,0
0,0
0,2
0,0
0,0
0,0
Indonesia

Indonesia

1,0
0,0
[14,2]
0,0
7,0
0,0

0,0
0,0
[17,4]
0,1
14,0
0,0
Japan

Japan

0,0
0,1
0,0
0,0
0,0

0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
Mexico

Mexico

0,1
0,0
0,0
0,0

0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
Russia

Russia

0,0
0,0
0,0

0,0
2,0
1,0
Korea

Korea

0,0
0,0

0,0
0,0
Switzerland

Switzerland

0,0

0,0
Thailand

Thailand

Notes: The top panel presents principal supplier relationships according to the data. The bottom panel represents principal supplier relationships
according to the trade model at the estimated parameter vector. For each cell in the table, the first entry gives the number of products for which the
column country is the principal supplier into the row country, and the second entry gives the number of products for which the row country is the
principal supplier into the column country. For the numbers in this table, trade with fellow PTA members has been netted out. Square brackets
indicate the bilateral relationships where both entries are positive.

USA
Argentina
Australia
Europe
Brazil
Canada
China
India
Indonesia
Japan
Mexico
Russia
Korea
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey

US
Argentina
Australia
EU
Brazil
Canada
China
India
Indonesia
Japan
Mexico
Russia
Korea
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey

Table 4: Principal Supplier Relationships

tariff negotiations of the Uruguay Round (the exclusion of Canada from this set being
potentially the most important omission, mitigated to some degree by the fact that the
US and Canada did not engage in bilateral negotiations over MFN tariffs in the Uruguay
Round due to the existence of the US-Canada FTA and subsequently NAFTA).23
Table 5 displays the bargaining parameter estimates for each of the negotiating countries,24 as well as the estimated cost-of-transfers parameter κ. Two points are clear from
Table 5.
Table 5: Bargaining Model Parameter Estimates
Country
USA
Australia
EU
Japan
South Korea
Cost of Transfers Coefficient

Bargaining Parameter
0
-10.981
-12.017
6.841
-3.349
Parameter
277.613

SE
0.174
0.224
0.453
0.928
SE
0.928

Notes: Estimated bargaining parameters (ai ) and coefficient on quadratic transfer cost. The parameter
for the US is normalized to 0.

First, transfers were possible in the Uruguay Round, but they were not costless. The
point estimate of κ reported in Table 5 translates into an average cost of transfers amounting to 84.68% when evaluated at the mean level of net transfers paid by countries who
made positive net transfers. That is, according to our estimates, on average a country
wishing to transfer 1 unit of utility to a bargaining partner in the Uruguay Round gave
up 1.8468 units of utility to do so. And averaged across those countries making positive
net transfers, the marginal cost of the last unit of utility transferred rises to 129.06%.
The second point that is clear from Table 5 is the relative ranking of bargaining powers,
with Japan the strongest bargainer followed in descending order by the US, South Korea,
Australia and the EU. As we describe further in the next subsection, Japan’s strong
23

As we noted earlier, we do not allow the possibility of (costly) transfers to relax the requirement of a

principal-supplier-based “double coincidence of wants” for each viable bargaining pair. But a comparison
of the entries in the top and bottom panels of Table 4 suggests that allowing this expanded definition
of viable bargaining pairs might improve the match between the set of bilateral bargaining partners in
the model and those suggested by the principal supplier relationships in the data. We return in the
Conclusion to discuss this as a possible direction for future research.
24
Because the same constant could be added to each bargaining parameter without changing predictions, we normalize the US bargaining parameter to zero.

32

bargaining position manifests itself in our model as Japan receiving large tariff concessions
from its bargaining partners while making tariff concessions and non-tariff transfers that
were small in comparison to the benefits it received. The EU’s weak bargaining position
leads it to agree to both relatively large tariff cuts and positive transfers in its bilaterals.
Interpreting the estimates in Table 5 requires some caution. A naive interpretation of
the bargaining parameters as relative “power” between the pairs can be misleading. These
parameters reflect how the two negotiating countries split the marginal surplus that can
be obtained by their agreement conditional on all other bilateral negotiation outcomes.
Here we are relying heavily on the Horn-Wolinsky bargaining solution structure, which
pins down the particular disagreement point from which the marginal surplus of a bilateral agreement is defined. A country could have strong bargaining power in each of its
bilaterals and nevertheless fare poorly in the Uruguay Round relative to the 1990 status
quo if the outcomes from all other bilaterals have served to disproportionately worsen this
country’s disagreement payoff in each of its bilaterals. Alternatively, a country could fare
well as a result of the Uruguay Round outcomes relative to its welfare in the 1990 status
quo, and yet be revealed to have very weak bargaining power in a given bilateral where
the disagreement payoff had moved strongly in its favor.25
While the bargaining parameter estimates do reflect how evenly the surplus from the
bilateral tariff bargain is split between the two parties, in our tariff-bargaining setting
these parameters also reflect an additional feature, namely, the slope of the bilateral
bargaining frontier. Our cost-of-transfers estimate indicates that countries did not have
access to lump-sum transfers in the Uruguay Round, and so utility is not transferable
across countries and the slopes of the bilateral bargaining frontiers will typically not be
equal to −1. Instead, with the countries in any bilateral using tariff changes combined
with costly transfers to transfer utility between them, the slope of the bargaining frontier
in any given bilateral will reflect the cost of transfers and the relative degree to which the
incidence of each country’s tariff changes falls on, and only on, its bilateral bargaining
partner.26
25

Of course, if the actual disagreement point in a bilateral deviates significantly from that under the

Horn-Wolinsky bargaining solution, the implied split and hence the implied bargaining parameters could
be different.
26
If countries were bargaining over a sufficiently complete set of trade taxes, they would be able to use
adjustments in these trade taxes to transfer surplus between them in a lump-sum manner. For example, in
a two-good two-country general equilibrium setting, Mayer (1981) shows that adjustments in the import
tariff in each country that preserve the equality of the relative price in each country can effect lump-sum

33

Figure 3: EU and Japan Welfare
Frontier

EU Welfare

EU Welfare

Figure 2: US and EU Welfare Frontier

Disagreement Point

Negotiated Agreement
Disagreement Point

Negotiated Agreement

US Welfare

Japan Welfare

Notes: These curves represents the frontier of feasible welfare pairs for the US-EU bilateral (left panel)
and Japan-EU bilateral (right panel) negotiations holding the other pairs fixed at the equilibrium outcomes.
The dashed line has slope equal to minus one.

Figures 2 and 3 illustrate this feature for the US-EU and Japan-EU bilaterals. The
bilateral bargaining frontier in each figure is constructed by optimally adjusting the tariffs
under negotiation in that bilateral and the costly transfer between the two negotiating
countries, holding all other tariffs and transfers fixed at their predicted agreement levels,
to shift surplus between the two countries. As Figure 2 depicts, the slope of the bargaining
frontier between the US and the EU is essentially linear but steeper than -1 throughout
the relevant range, indicating that the tariffs (and transfer) negotiated in this bilateral
were more effective at shifting surplus from the US to the EU than in the other direction.
This means in turn that for any given bargaining parameter for the US-EU bilateral, the
division of the surplus under the Nash bargaining solution will be shifted in the direction
of the EU relative to what it would be if the slope of the bilateral bargaining frontier
were -1 throughout. Figure 3 reveals that the bargaining frontier between Japan and the
EU is more clearly concave over the relevant range, and takes on a slope of -1 at a point
that favors the EU relative to Japan, indicating that in the Japan-EU bilateral, the tariffs
under negotiation were more effective at shifting surplus from Japan to the EU.
In Table 6, we present evidence suggesting that asymmetries in market power, the
position of the initial tariffs relative to their best-response levels, and the spillovers to
third parties are all factors in understanding the slopes of the bilateral bargaining frontiers.
transfers across countries. This is infeasible in the bilaterals under study in the present setting, because
the set of import tariffs under negotiation do not constitute a sufficiently complete set of trade taxes.

34

Consider for example, the first two rows of this table, which relate to the US-Australia
bilateral. With all other tariffs positioned at their agreed levels as predicted by our
model, the first three columns of Table 6 report that, beginning from the US-Australia
negotiated agreement tariffs as predicted by our model, when the US lowers its tariffs
under negotiation in this bilateral by an amount that reduces its welfare by 1 unit, it
increases the surplus of all other countries by 6.271 units, with Australia receiving 2.677
units and third parties receiving the remaining 3.594 units. By contrast, beginning from
these same tariffs, when Australia lowers its tariffs under negotiation in this bilateral by
an amount that reduces its welfare by 1 unit, it increases the surplus of all other countries
by 0.467 units, with the US receiving 0.083 units and third parties receiving the remaining
0.384 units.
Table 6: Spillover Benefits to Third Parties (MFN Negotiations)

Country 1

Country 2

Reducing
Country

US
US
US
US
US
US
Aus
Aus
EU
EU
EU
EU
Japan
Japan

Aus
Aus
EU
EU
Japan
Japan
Korea
Korea
Japan
Japan
Korea
Korea
Korea
Korea

US
Aus
US
EU
US
Japan
Aus
Korea
EU
Japan
EU
Korea
Japan
Korea

Tariff Reduction from Agreement
∆ Welfare ∆ Welfare
∆ Welfare
Country 1 Country 2 3rd Parties
(1)
(2)
(3)
-1.000
2.677
3.594
0.083
-1.000
0.384
-1.000
1.557
1.231
0.335
-1.000
1.410
-1.000
1.166
0.712
0.501
-1.000
0.460
-1.000
0.731
3.909
0.786
-1.000
1.015
-1.000
0.609
0.677
0.739
-1.000
0.573
-1.000
0.513
4.766
0.783
-1.000
1.972
-1.000
0.826
1.555
0.991
-1.000
1.275

Tariff Reduction from Binding
∆ Welfare ∆ Welfare
∆ Welfare
Country 1 Country 2 3rd Parties
(4)
(5)
(6)
-1.000
3.285
4.520
0.090
-1.000
0.398
-1.000
2.516
2.144
0.405
-1.000
1.728
-1.000
2.240
1.347
0.576
-1.000
0.564
1.000
0.048
0.240
0.725
-1.000
1.134
-1.000
15.438
19.550
1.495
-1.000
1.382
1.000
0.160
1.361
0.928
-1.000
2.658
1.000
0.629
1.103
5.723
1.000
8.413

Notes: Each row corresponds to a unilateral marginal decrease in tariffs by the “reducing country.” The
reducing country reduces tariffs on all goods that it negotiates with the partner country in that row. The
welfare changes are normalized so that the reducing country has an absolute welfare change equal to one.
The first set of welfare columns presents changes in welfare when all tariffs begin from the negotiated
agreement. The second set of welfare columns presents changes in welfare when all tariffs begin from
1990 levels.

These asymmetric effects reflect a combination of factors. The feature that the US
tariff cuts generate substantially more surplus gains for the rest of the world overall
than do Australia’s tariff cuts when Australia and the US make the above-described
tariff cuts reflects in part the differences across these two countries in import volumes and
35

market power over world prices with respect to the products on which they are bargaining.
Another factor is the relative distance of the agreed tariffs from best-response levels for
the tariffs over which these two countries bargain; this factor governs the magnitude of the
described tariff cuts.27 And the feature that Australia captures a greater portion of the
rest-of-world gains generated by the US’s tariff cuts (roughly 43%) than is captured by the
US when Australia makes the described tariff cuts (roughly 18%) reflects asymmetries in
the degree of dominance that each country’s principal suppliers play in serving the other
country’s markets.
The last three columns of Table 6 report analogous measures, but do so beginning from
the bargaining pairs’ disagreement (1990) tariffs rather than from the pairs’ negotiated
agreement tariffs (with all other tariffs also positioned at their 1990 levels). Similar
asymmetric effects arise from this starting point and have similar interpretations, but
now it is possible that unilateral tariff reductions can increase a country’s welfare (if the
1990 levels for the tariffs it negotiates in this bilateral are above its best-response levels
in light of the 1990 levels of all other tariffs) and, because these calculations do not begin
from a point on the bilateral bargaining frontier, could (but need not) increase the welfare
of all countries.
Notably, the third-party spillovers reported in both columns 3 and 6 of Table 6 are
uniformly positive. While the overall surplus gain for the rest of the world generated by
an importing country’s MFN tariff cuts is expected to be positive due to the induced
terms-of-trade effects, the sign of the spillovers to individual countries is not guaranteed
to be positive, and depends on trade patterns. That is, while the sum of the impacts on
the bargaining partner and third parties should be positive when an importing country
reduces its import tariffs as part of a bilateral bargain, the impact on third parties taken
as a group could be positive or negative and is ultimately an empirical question for which
columns 3 and 6 of Table 6 provide an answer.28
This point was emphasized by an early study commissioned by GATT which became
known as the Haberler Report. Written by a Panel of Experts that included Roberto de
Oliveira Campos, Gottfried Haberler, James Meade and Jan Tinbergen, the purpose of the
27

For example, if a country’s agreed tariffs were at their best-response levels, then an envelope argu-

ment ensures that small tariff reductions would have no first-order effect on that country’s welfare. This
suggests that a country may need to make larger tariff cuts to generate a 1 unit welfare reduction when
that country’s tariffs are positioned closer to their best-response levels.
28
In fact, even the overall impact could in principle be of either sign in a multi-product environment,
depending on the signs and strengths of the interactions across products.

36

report was to investigate the prevalence of agricultural protectionism and “...the failure
of the export trade of the under-developed countries to expand at a rate commensurate
with their growing import needs.” (Campos et al., 1958). The issue of spillovers was
explained by the Report in these terms:
The problem of the interests of different primary producing countries outside
industrialized Western Europe and North America is ... not only a question
which of the other countries would gain by a moderation of agricultural protectionism in these two great industrialized regions; there are undoubtedly
cases in which an increase in agricultural protectionism in these two regions,
while it would be to the disadvantage of some of the unindustrialized countries,
would actually be to the advantage of others. ... An increased stimulus to the
production of wheat in any of the countries of North America or of Western
Europe by increasing the exportable surplus of North America and decreasing
the import requirements of Western Europe would depress the world market for wheat. This might mean that a country like India or Japan would
obtain cheaper imports of wheat (either because of a fall in the world price or
because of a development of special sales or gifts for the disposal of surplus
wheat by the United States), but a country like Australia or the Argentine
which competed in the world export market for wheat would be damaged. ...
In general, if one considers any particular agricultural product, a protective
stimulus to its production in any one country by increasing supplies relatively
to the demand for that product will tend to depress the world market for that
product. This will damage the interests of other countries which are exporters
of the product on the world market. But it will be to the national interest of
countries which import the product from world markets. Whether the initial
protective stimulus confers a net benefit or a net damage to all other countries
concerned depends, therefore, upon whether the country giving the protective
stimulus to its own production is an exporter or an importer of the product;
if it is an exporter it is conferring a benefit on the world by giving its supplies
away at a cheap price; if it is an importer it is damaging the rest of the world
by refusing to take their supplies. (Campos et al. (1958), footnotes omitted).
In the context of bilateral MFN tariff bargaining, the general principle described by
the Haberler Report describes well the pattern of externalities that each bilateral bargain
37

has to confront. Based on this principle, we would expect the overall surplus gain for the
rest of the world generated by an importing country’s MFN tariff cuts to be positive, and
this is confirmed in the results reported in Table 6. What is also confirmed by the results
in Table 6 is that both the bargaining partner, and third parties as a group, each gain
from the importing-country MFN tariff cuts being negotiated in the Uruguay Round.

5.4

MFN Tariff Bargaining in the Uruguay Round

Comparing our Horn-Wolinsky model solution to the actual Uruguay Round tariff
bargaining outcomes, we find that we can explain 57.86% of the variation in 190 tariffs
under negotiation in the Uruguay Round using our cost-of-transfers parameter and four
bargaining parameters. The welfare impacts of the Round’s MFN tariff bargaining as
predicted by our model are presented in the first and second columns of Table 7. The first
column reports the impact of the negotiated tariff cuts predicted by our model, while the
second column includes as well the impacts of the net transfers negotiated according to
our model as part of the Round.29
The total world welfare gain from the Round reported in Table 7 is small in magnitude,
which is not surprising in light of our benchmark findings presented in columns 3 and 4 of
Table 3 that, beginning from their 1990 levels, the gains in world welfare are small from
eliminating all tariffs under negotiation in the Uruguay Round or from setting these tariffs
at their world welfare maximizing levels (0.17% and 0.25% respectively). That said, our
Horn-Wolinsky model solution indicates that in increasing total world welfare by 0.11%,
the Uruguay Round achieved roughly 40% of the potential aggregate world-wide welfare
gains in moving from the non-cooperative Nash tariff levels to this free-trade benchmark,
and it achieved roughly a third of the world-wide welfare gains beginning from Nash that
would have been possible under world-welfare maximizing levels of these tariffs. Overall,
and recalling that our focus is on the tariffs under negotiation in the Uruguay Round,
our model indicates that the GATT rounds leading up to the Uruguay Round and the
Uruguay Round itself together achieved roughly two thirds of the potential aggregate
world-wide welfare gains in moving from the non-cooperative Nash to the world-welfare
maximizing benchmark, leaving roughly a third of the potential world welfare gains from
29

Transfers are determined at the aggregate level for the EU. For the purposes of Table 7, we allocate

transfers to member countries of the EU directly in proportion to population.

38

Table 7: Estimated Uruguay Round and Counterfactual Outcomes
MFN

No MFN
Tariffs

Average Tariffs
Weighted Average Tariffs

United States
EU
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
China
India
Indonesia
Japan
Mexico
Russia
South Korea
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
America NES
Asia/Oceania NES
MENA NES
Africa NES
Europe NES
Total Welfare

-46.95%
-54.50%
Country
with
transfers
0.00%
0.04%
0.04%
0.02%
0.07%
0.05%
0.01%
0.00%
0.02%
0.00%
0.03%
0.00%
0.00%
-0.01%
0.02%
-0.02%
0.05%
0.03%
0.07%
0.02%
0.06%
0.04%
0.14%
0.12%
0.05%
0.05%
0.08%
0.04%
0.05%
0.05%
0.00%
0.00%
0.35%
0.35%
0.31%
0.31%
0.14%
0.14%
0.21%
0.20%
0.00%
0.00%
0.07%
0.07%
0.47%
0.43%
-0.04%
-0.04%
0.42%
0.42%
-0.08%
-0.08%
0.11%
0.11%
0.36%
0.36%
0.06%
0.06%
0.05%
0.05%
0.40%
0.40%
0.12%
0.11%

-47.43%
-48.96%
Welfare

0.03%
-0.03%
-0.02%
0.00%
-0.04%
0.05%
-0.09%
0.01%
0.02%
-0.07%
0.02%
-0.03%
-0.02%
0.22%
-0.02%
-0.10%
-0.10%
-0.06%
-0.05%
0.29%
-0.04%
-0.04%
-1.86%
-0.07%
-0.07%
-0.06%
0.02%
-0.16%
-0.08%
-0.02%
-0.12%
0.00%

with
transfers
0.09%
-0.05%
-0.04%
-0.01%
-0.05%
0.03%
-0.10%
-0.02%
0.01%
-0.10%
0.00%
-0.04%
-0.02%
-0.03%
-0.02%
-0.10%
-0.10%
-0.06%
-0.05%
0.28%
-0.04%
-0.04%
-2.02%
-0.07%
-0.07%
-0.06%
0.02%
-0.16%
-0.08%
-0.02%
-0.12%
-0.01%

Notes: Each column represents changes in the row relative to the pre-Uruguay tariff levels. The first
set of columns represents the Horn-Wolinsky MFN solution at the estimated bargaining parameters. The
second set of columns represents the Horn-Wolinsky discriminatory solution at the estimated bargaining
parameters.

39

negotiating over this set of tariffs as “unfinished business.”30
The first two columns of Table 7 also reveal that there is significant variation in the
gains from the Uruguay Round’s MFN tariff bargaining across the member countries, with
substantially higher than average gains going to a number of emerging and developing
countries and smaller gains going to some of the industrialized countries. Among the
emerging and developing economies with especially high gains are China (who was not
a GATT member at the time of the Uruguay Round but enjoyed MFN treatment from
the EU and the US), India, Thailand and the regional entities in Asia/Oceana NES and
Europe NES. These countries were not among our bargaining pairs and hence these gains
reflect favorable terms-of-trade movements as a result of the Round. Turning to the
industrialized countries, the US gains are relatively small, amounting to a little less than
half of the average gains experienced by countries as a result of the Round, while the EU
gains are even smaller once the EU net transfers to bargaining partners are accounted
for. And Australia’s gains are comparable to those of the US, once its large net transfer
payments to bargaining partners are taken into account. Japan enjoys above average
gains, but it is South Korea that enjoys the largest gains of any country from the Round.
Of special interest are the results for Japan reported in Table 7. Japan’s gains from
the Round are above-average, but they are substantially smaller than those of South
Korea, despite the fact that as we observed earlier our bargaining parameter estimates
indicate that Japan is the strongest bargainer, with South Korea only possessing moderate
bargaining power. This apparent contradiction is resolved by noting that here we are
comparing how countries fared in the Uruguay Round relative to their 1990 welfare levels,
while the bargaining power parameters reflect how well a country does in each of its
bilateral bargains relative to the Horn-Wolinsky disagreement point for that bilateral.
Evidently, Japan’s strong bargaining position is reflected in the fact that it did extremely
well in its bargains relative to the Horn-Wolinksy disagreement points for those bargains,
but the Horn-Wolinsky disagreement points moved in an unfavorable direction for Japan
relative to the 1990 status quo.
It is interesting to note that, according to our model predictions, not all countries
gained from the Uruguay Round. In particular, we find that Switzerland and Turkey
30

It is also interesting to note from a comparison of column 2 of Table 7 and column 4 of Table 3 that,

under the world welfare maximizing benchmark, much of the increased gains relative to the negotiated
MFN tariff cuts would go to developing and emerging economies, as might be expected given that these
countries were not among the bargaining pairs in the Uruguay Round and hence their interests were not
directly represented in those bilateral bargains.

40

suffer losses. As these two countries were not among our bargaining pairs and hence do
not alter their own tariffs from 1990 levels, the losses they suffer as a result of the Uruguay
Round reflect adverse terms-of-trade movements that resulted according to our model
from the negotiated MFN tariff cuts of others. This illustrates the point highlighted in
the Haberler Report and discussed above, that the MFN tariff reductions of each country
are expected to generate positive effects for the rest of the world taken as a whole, but
need not lead to positive effects for every country in the rest of the world.
Also interesting are losses that are theoretically possible but that we do not find.
While under Nash-in-Nash bargains each bilateral negotiation must lead to an agreement
which, with the outcomes of all other negotiations taken as given, benefits both negotiating parties, the externalities across bargaining pairs raise the possibility that a country
engaged in bargaining could nevertheless be made worse off as a result of the web of bilateral tariff bargains negotiated in the multilateral round than it would have been if the
round had never taken place. That said, all the bargaining parties in our representation
of the Uruguay Round did benefit from the negotiations, as the second column of Table 7
reflects. Some EU member countries were slightly worse off, but the EU as a whole enjoys
a small welfare improvement, as we have noted.

6

Counterfactual

As we have described above, under our representation of the Uruguay Round bargaining
protocol, our results point to the existence of unfinished business in tariff liberalization
with respect to the tariffs under negotiation in the Uruguay Round, in line with the underliberalization possibility identified by Bagwell et al. (2017b) when negotiations proceed
over MFN tariffs. This raises the possibility that changes to the protocol that stimulate
further negotiated tariff liberalization could be attractive from the perspective of world
welfare. In particular, in light of the potential drag on tariff liberalization generated
by the positive third-party externalities associated with MFN tariff cuts as reported in
Table 6, could the abandonment of MFN have allowed countries to achieve greater tariff
liberalization than occurred under the MFN restriction, and in so doing have allowed the
Uruguay Round to achieve greater gains in world welfare? And would the distribution of
the gains from the Uruguay Round across countries have been impacted in a substantial
way had the MFN requirement not been in place? We now turn to these and other
counterfactual questions, by comparing the outcomes from the Uruguay Round with the
41

outcomes that would be predicted by our model had the Uruguay Round negotiations
occurred under a bargaining protocol that abandons the MFN requirement.
To this end, recall that, in addition to allowing countries to make costly transfers
as part of their tariff negotiations, we have represented the Uruguay Round bargaining
protocol with three institutional constraints, namely, that countries (i) are restricted
to bargain over MFN tariffs, (ii) must respect existing GATT tariff commitments and
not raise their tariffs above these commitments, and (iii) abide by the principal supplier
rule, which guides each importing country to limit its negotiations on a given product
to the exporting country that is the largest supplier of that product to its market. We
now consider an alternative bargaining protocol under which the first and third of these
constraints are removed and countries can negotiate discriminatory tariff bargains. Our
primary interest is in how relaxation of the MFN requirement impacts tariff bargaining,
and as the principal supplier rule was introduced into the GATT bargaining protocols
in order to facilitate bilateral tariff bargaining in the presence of MFN, it is natural to
consider removing these two constraints at the same time. Because the model does not
perfectly predict tariffs under our representation of the Uruguay Round protocol, we
compare simulated outcomes under the counterfactual protocol to simulated outcomes
under our representation of the Uruguay Round protocol rather than to the observed
post-Uruguay tariffs.
To predict outcomes under discriminatory negotiations, we again solve for a bargaining equilibrium with our estimated bargaining parameters. In the discriminatory case,
however, each pair negotiates only over tariffs that they will apply to each other. These
bilateral tariff bargains still affect the welfare of third countries because they affect production and consumption patterns in the trade equilibrium, but they lack the direct effect
of altering tariffs on third countries automatically through MFN, and so the third-party
effects will be different from the MFN case. More specifically, while we would expect and
Table 6 confirms that the overall rest-of-world effect of a unilateral MFN tariff reduction
is positive, and while as Table 6 confirms we also find a positive third-party effect from a
country’s unilateral MFN tariff reductions agreed within a bilateral, the third-party effect
of an analogous unilateral discriminatory tariff reduction agreed within a bilateral is likely
to be negative, and the implied transfer of surplus from third parties to bargaining parties
is then likely to drive down the levels of these negotiated tariffs in the absence of the MFN
constraint from what the negotiated levels of these tariffs would be under MFN, even as
the liberalizing impact of the resulting tariff reductions are not automatically broadened
42

by extension to apply to other trading partners under the MFN requirement.31
To isolate the intensive-margin impact that the third-party effects of discriminatory
tariff reductions have on tariff bargaining outcomes in our model, we consider a counterfactual in which, for each country, the set of its tariffs being negotiated is constrained to
include only the sectors that were negotiated by that country in the Uruguay Round, and
the set of countries negotiating on these tariffs is constrained to include only the countries
that it negotiated with in the Uruguay Round. That is, if county A was negotiating an
MFN tariff cut on sector j imports with the principal supplier of sector-j exports into
its market, then in our counterfactual country A is allowed to negotiate a discriminatory
tariff cut on sector-j imports with each of the countries that it bargained with in the
Uruguay Round and that also export sector-j goods to its market. But we do not allow
additional extensive margin effects on the pattern of bargaining.
The third and fourth columns of Table 7 present the results of this counterfactual,
with the third column presenting the welfare implications associated with the negotiated
discriminatory tariff changes and the fourth column presenting the welfare implications
once the negotiated transfers are also included. In the absence of MFN the average
tariff under negotiation drops by 47.43% while under MFN it drops by 46.95%. This
comparison, however, masks the degree to which countries are incentivized to negotiate
deeper tariff cuts when those cuts can be discriminatory. The added inducement to
negotiate tariff cuts when MFN is abandoned is brought into sharp relief when the NoMFN averages are calculated over only the product-and-country pairs that were also in
play under MFN: as expected, under this calculation, the average tariff under negotiation
when MFN is abandoned drops by 107.35% as compared to a drop of 46.95% when MFN is
in place. But a comparison across the first two columns (MFN) and the third and fourth
columns (No MFN) of Table 7 also reveals that the MFN negotiations are better for
world welfare than discriminatory negotiations. More specifically, we would expect from
the findings of Bagwell et al. (2017b) that in the absence of an MFN rule Nash-in-Nash
tariff bargaining always results in inefficient over-liberalization, but what the findings
in Table 7 indicate is that the degree of inefficient over-liberalization according to our
model is sufficiently important to outweigh the inefficient under-liberalization that arises
31

Intuitively, negotiated tariffs are likely to be lower in the absence of the MFN constraint than in

the presence of the MFN constraint for the following reason: starting at their negotiated MFN tariffs,
if two countries were allowed to use discriminatory tariffs, then they could jointly gain from exchanging
(perhaps small) discriminatory tariff cuts with each other, since they thereby could enjoy a transfer of
surplus from third parties due to the implied world-price movements.

43

according to the model under MFN, resulting in worse outcomes for total world welfare
under discriminatory tariff bargaining than under MFN tariff bargaining. In fact, as the
third and fourth columns of Table 7 indicate, our findings suggest that discriminatory
tariff bargaining would have wiped out all the gains in total world welfare associated with
MFN tariff bargaining, leaving total world welfare essentially at its 1990 level.
In principle, both the over-liberalization of tariffs and any additional tariff discrimination that results from discriminatory tariff bargaining could play a role in the poor
performance of this bargaining protocol when judged on the basis of world welfare.32 To
assess quantitatively the roles played by these two features for our findings reported in
Table 7, we recalculate the trade equilibrium at two sets of tariffs which vary the degree
of discrimination while maintaining average levels of tariffs. First, setting the MFN tariffs
of the negotiating countries in each sector equal to the average negotiated discriminatory
tariff for that country and sector, and thereby eliminating any tariff discrimination that
arose as a result of the discriminatory tariff bargaining, we find that world welfare would
increase by 0.04%. And second, in a similar vein, setting the discriminatory tariffs that
the negotiating countries apply to other negotiating countries in each sector equal to the
average negotiated discriminatory tariff among the negotiating countries in that country
and sector, and thereby eliminating tariff discrimination among the negotiating countries
that arose as a result of the discriminatory tariff bargaining, we find that total world
welfare would increase by 0.03%. Both of these calculations result in gains that are lower
than those under the MFN negotiations reported in Table 7 (0.11%) and higher than those
under the discriminatory negotiations reported in Table 7 (-0.01%), and the calculations
suggest that roughly one third of the poor performance of the discriminatory tariff bargaining protocol is attributable to the tariff discrimination that results from bargaining,
with the remaining two thirds attributable to over-liberalization.
Turning to the impact of the abandonment of MFN on the distribution of gains across
countries, Table 7 shows that developing and emerging countries are among the biggest
losers from the abandonment of MFN, in some cases (e.g. China, India, Asia/Oceana
NES and Europe NES) faring substantially worse than under the 1990 status quo. Among
industrialized countries, South Korea suffers the largest losses from the abandonment of
32

For example, it is possible that discriminatory tariff bargaining could lead to inefficient over-

liberalization with no tariff discrimination in equilibrium, if all countries were symmetric along the
relevant dimensions, but with various asymmetries it is natural to expect that both over-liberalization
and tariff discrimination would contribute to the poor performance of a discriminatory-tariff bargaining
protocol.

44

MFN, experiencing a 2.02% reduction in welfare relative to the 1990 status quo level, and
the EU and Canada also lose. By contrast, the US and some of the EU-member countries
enjoy small gains from the abandonment of MFN, but our results indicate that Japan
would be by far the biggest gainer.
In fact, Japan’s large welfare gain from the abandonment of MFN and South Korea’s large welfare loss are linked, with South Korea’s welfare loss heavily influenced by
Japanese outcomes: re-running the discriminatory counterfactual, but excluding Japan
from all negotiations, we find that South Korea’s welfare loss would be only 0.4%. This
Japan-South Korea linkage reflects two key features. Japan has high bargaining power,
and Japan shares strong similarities to South Korea in geographic location and industry
specialization. In particular, with regard to the first feature, as we have observed, our
estimates indicate that Japan was the strongest bargainer among negotiating partners
at the Uruguay Round, and this translates into an ability to extract deep MFN tariff
cuts from its bargaining partners in the presence of MFN, and deep discriminatory tariff cuts from its bargaining partners when MFN is abandoned. Japan’s large gain from
the abandonment of MFN stems in part from its enhanced ability to exploit its strong
bargaining power when the constraint of MFN is lifted. With regard to the second feature mentioned above, the estimated sector productivity parameters for Japan and South
Korea have a correlation of 0.79 whereas the mean, across countries, correlation is 0.5;
and South Korea is the most correlated country for Japan and Japan is the second most
correlated country, after China, for South Korea. Thus, Japan’s strong bargaining power
leads to low tariffs for South Korean exporters under MFN, as South Korean exporters
compete closely with Japanese exporters for the same markets and therefore enjoy the
same low MFN tariffs; and with the abandonment of MFN, Japan’s strong bargaining
power leads to favorable discriminatory outcomes for Japan which now hurt South Korea
exporters.
Table 8 provides analogous information to Table 6 but now for the counterfactual case
of discriminatory tariff bargaining. The most striking difference across the two tables is
in the spillovers to third parties, which for MFN tariff bargaining are uniformly positive
as we have noted but which for discriminatory tariff bargaining are now almost always
negative.33 It is this negative third-party externality that is driving down the levels of the
33

There are two exceptions to the pattern of negative third-party externalities displayed in Table 6:

beginning from the 1990 tariff bindings, in its bargain with the US when Australia offers discriminatory
tariff cuts there is a small positive impact on third parties (in addition to the positive impact on the US),

45

negotiated tariffs in the absence of the MFN constraint from what the negotiated levels
of these tariffs would be under MFN.
Table 8: Spillover Benefits to Third Parties (Discriminatory Negotiations)

Country 1

Country 2

Reducing
Country

US
US
US
US
US
US
Aus
Aus
EU
EU
EU
EU
Japan
Japan

Aus
Aus
EU
EU
Japan
Japan
Korea
Korea
Japan
Japan
Korea
Korea
Korea
Korea

US
Aus
US
EU
US
Japan
Aus
Korea
EU
Japan
EU
Korea
Japan
Korea

Tariff Reduction from Agreement
∆ Welfare ∆ Welfare
∆ Welfare
Country 1 Country 2 3rd Parties
(1)
(2)
(3)
-1.000
2.138
-0.270
0.201
-1.000
-0.004
-1.000
1.450
-0.538
0.521
-1.000
-0.060
-1.000
1.397
-0.197
0.608
-1.000
-0.120
-1.000
0.729
-0.720
1.805
-1.000
-0.345
-1.000
0.941
-0.016
0.944
-1.000
-0.267
-1.000
0.716
-0.294
1.026
-1.000
-0.985
-1.000
1.101
-0.712
0.936
-1.000
-0.374

Tariff Reduction from Binding
∆ Welfare ∆ Welfare
∆ Welfare
Country 1 Country 2 3rd Parties
(4)
(5)
(6)
-1.000
11.018
-1.598
0.312
-1.000
0.011
-1.000
4.588
-1.136
1.717
-1.000
-0.180
-1.000
3.619
-0.633
1.004
-1.000
-0.066
1.000
1.672
-1.060
8.255
-1.000
-1.635
-1.000
4.635
-0.327
1.596
-1.000
-0.079
-1.000
2.873
0.436
20.792
-1.000
-2.628
-1.000
9.263
-3.009
89.785
1.000
-8.289

Notes: Each row corresponds to a unilateral marginal decrease in tariffs by the “reducing country.” The
reducing country reduces tariffs on all goods that it negotiates with the partner country in that row. The
welfare changes are normalized so that the reducing country has an absolute welfare change equal to
one. The first set of welfare columns presents changes in welfare from a discriminatory reduction when
all tariffs begin from the negotiated agreement. The second set of welfare columns presents changes in
welfare from a discriminatory reduction when all tariffs begin from 1990 levels.

More broadly, the results of our counterfactual point to an important conclusion.
While the free-rider issue and associated drag on tariff liberalization created by the positive third-party externality from the GATT/WTO’s MFN requirement is widely emphasized as a shortcoming of the GATT/WTO approach, in our model the abandonment
of MFN in tariff bargaining would create negative third-party externalities that are even
and in its bargain with the South Korea when the EU offers discriminatory tariff cuts there is a positive
impact on third parties (in addition to the positive impact on the South Korea). These cases can be
understood by examining the particulars of the trade patterns in each case. For example, the positive
third-party impact of the EU’s discriminatory tariff reductions on imports from South Korea is driven by
a large positive impact for Russia, and is associated with an induced rise in the world price of products
in our industry 22 (SITC 33 and 34) – Petroleum, petroleum products and related; Gas, natural and
manufactured materials – where Russia is a large exporter, a world price rise that stems from the EU’s
stimulated demand for these products as a result of the tariff preference on these products that the EU
offers to South Korea.

46

more powerful, and ultimately lead to tariff bargaining outcomes that are worse from the
perspective of world welfare.

7

Conclusion

This paper embeds a quantitative model of world trade into a model of bilateral bargaining
over tariffs to examine the welfare effects of the most-favored-nation (MFN) requirement
that characterizes negotiations at the GATT/WTO. We estimate the model using trade
flows from 1990 and tariff outcomes from the Uruguay Round of GATT/WTO negotiations. As emphasized in the theoretical literature, the welfare effect of imposing MFN
and thereby ruling out discriminatory tariff bargaining is ambiguous and depends on trade
patterns. In a trade model whose parameters are estimated to match observed trade flows,
we quantify a free-rider issue and associated drag on tariff liberalization that is created by
the positive third-party externality from the MFN requirement and that leads to under
liberalization relative to efficient outcomes, but our results indicate that the abandonment
of MFN in tariff bargaining would create negative third-party externalities that are even
more powerful and that would lead to substantial over liberalization. On balance we find
that MFN tariff negotiations are superior to discriminatory tariff negotiations in terms of
increasing world-wide welfare for this reason.
There are several promising avenues for future research. An obvious direction is to
expand the current framework to allow for more products, that is, to handle a more disaggregated product classification. While this is essentially a computational challenge, it
is an important extension, as actual tariff negotiations occur at a much more disaggregate
level than the (essentially 2 digit) level that we have modeled here, and greater disaggregation could have important impacts on the principal supplier status that is central
in shaping the bargaining patterns of the Round and associated externalities. Relatedly,
as we noted above, while we allow bargaining partners to exchange costly transfers as
part of their bilateral tariff negotiations, we do not allow this exchange of transfers to
relax the double-coincidence-of-wants requirement that bargaining only over tariffs would
imply. Allowing the presence of costly transfers to have this extensive-margin impact on
bargaining could have important impacts on the bargaining outcomes.
Also important is to consider the possibility that countries bargained under an additional constraint in the Uruguay Round, namely, that of reciprocity. Bagwell et al.
(2017a) review historical and institutional evidence that reciprocity was a significant con47

straint in GATT tariff negotiating rounds, and they identify a number of the stylized
facts emerging from the GATT Torquay Round bargaining data that can be interpreted
as consistent with bilateral tariff bargaining under a reciprocity constraint (and MFN).
There is also specific evidence that the tariff negotiating outcomes of the Uruguay Round
were consistent with reciprocity.34 As we have noted above, the imposition of a reciprocity constraint can reduce and even eliminate third-party externalities from MFN tariff
bargaining, implying potentially important impacts on the bargaining outcomes relative
to those predicted under the Horn-Wolinsky MFN tariff bargaining protocol that we have
considered here. For example, in helping to eliminate the third-party externalities of MFN
tariff cuts, could the introduction of a reciprocity constraint ensure that no country would
have lost from the Uruguay Round?
Our modeling framework highlights bilateral tariff negotiations, which were a central
feature of the Uruguay Round. The Round also featured multilateral elements as well,
however, such as “zero-for-zero” tariff negotiations in certain sectors and agreements concerning intellectual property. Capturing these multilateral elements would require extensions of our framework along various dimensions. For example, a bilateral disagreement
concerning a multilateral issue could have implications that are not well captured by
our transfer specification, since a breakdown for one negotiating pair might then impact
transfers as well for other parties. An interesting and important direction for future work
is to build on the model of bilateral negotiations considered here to include additional
multilateral elements.
More broadly, the framework used here could be paired with a coalition formation
model to examine how tariff negotiations and regional trade agreements co-evolve. And
liberalization in the GATT/WTO has occurred over eight rounds (plus the now-suspended
ninth Doha Round), creating the potential for inter-temporal linkages across rounds.
34

For example, focusing on U.S. tariff cuts in the Uruguay Round and constructing a measure of

market-access concessions while instrumenting to address the potential endogeneity issues, Limão (2006)
and Limão (2007) find evidence consistent with reciprocity, reporting that a decrease in the tariff of a
U.S. trading partner that exports a given product leads to a decrease in the U.S. tariff on that product
and that a significant determinant of cross-product variation in U.S. tariff liberalization is the degree to
which the United States received reciprocal market-access concessions from the corresponding exporting
countries. Karacaovali and Limão (2008) perform a similar exercise for the EU tariff cutting behavior
in the Uruguay Round. They find analogous support for the importance of reciprocity in explaining
the pattern of EU tariff cuts, in that EU tariff reductions were largest for those products exported by
countries who themselves granted large reductions in tariffs.

48

The static framework here could be embedded into a larger model that examines how
the GATT/WTO affected world trade on a longer term basis. We leave this and other
ambitious extensions for future work.

49

References
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012). New trade models, same old
gains? American Economic Review 102 (1), 94–130.
Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger (1999). An economic theory of GATT. American Economic
Review 89 (1), 215–248.
Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger (2005). Multilateral trade negotiations, bilateral opportunism and the rules of GATT/WTO. Journal of International Economics 67 (2), 268–94.
Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger (2017). Multilateral trade bargaining and dominant strategies. Forthcoming International Economic Review .
Bagwell, K., R. W. Staiger, and A. Yurukoglu (2017a). Multilateral trade bargaining: A
first look at the GATT bargaining records.
Bagwell, K., R. W. Staiger, and A. Yurukoglu (2017b). “Nash-in-Nash” tariff bargaining
with and without MFN. Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Caliendo, L., R. C. Feenstra, J. Romalis, and A. M. Taylor (2017). Tariff reductions,
entry, and welfare: Theory and evidence for the last two decades.
Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015). Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of nafta. The
Review of Economic Studies 82 (1), 1–44.
Campos, R. d. O., G. Haberler, J. Meade, and J. Tinbergen (1958). Trends in international
trade. A Report by a Panel of Experts, GATT, Geneva, October .
Collard-Wexler, A., G. Gowrisankaran, and R. S. Lee (2016). “Nash-in-Nash” bargaining:
A microfoundation for applied work. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and I. Komunjer (2011). What goods do countries trade?
a quantitative exploration of Ricardo’s ideas. The Review of Economic Studies 79 (2),
581–608.
Crawford, G. S., R. S. Lee, M. D. Whinston, and A. Yurukoglu (2017). The welfare effects
of vertical integration in multichannel television markets. Forthcoming Econometrica.

50

Crawford, G. S. and A. Yurukoglu (2012). The welfare effects of bundling in multichannel
television markets. American Economic Review 102 (2), 643–685.
Cremer, J. and M. H. Riordan (1987). On governing multilateral transactions with bilateral contracts. The RAND Journal of Economics, 436–451.
Croome, J. (1995). Reshaping the world trading system: a history of the Uruguay Round.
World Trade Organization.
Culbert, J. (1987). War-time anglo-american talks and the making of the gatt. The World
Economy 10 (4), 381–399.
Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum (2008). Global rebalancing with gravity: measuring
the burden of adjustment. IMF Economic Review 55 (3), 511–540.
Dimaranan, B. V. and R. A. McDougall (2002). Global Trade, Assistance, and Production:
the GTAP5 Database. Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica 70 (5),
1741–1779.
Feenstra, R. C., R. E. Lipsey, H. Deng, A. C. Ma, and H. Mo (2005). World trade flows:
1962-2000. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gowrisankaran, G., A. Nevo, and R. Town (2015). Mergers when prices are negotiated:
Evidence from the hospital industry. American Economic Review 105 (1), 172–203.
Grennan, M. (2013). Price discrimination and bargaining: Empirical evidence from medical devices. American Economic Review 103 (1), 145–177.
Handley, K. (2014). Exporting under trade policy uncertainty: theory and evidence.
Journal of International Economics 94 (1), 50–66.
Handley, K. and N. Limao (2015). Trade and investment under policy uncertainty: theory
and firm evidence. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (4), 189–222.
Hart, O. and J. Tirole (1990). Vertical integration and market foreclosure. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, 205–286.
Head, K. and T. Mayer (2014). Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook.
Handbook of International Economics 4, 131.
51

Ho, K. and R. S. Lee (2017). Insurer competition in health care markets. Econometrica 85 (2), 379–417.
Horn, H. and A. Wolinsky (1988). Bilateral monopolies and incentives for merger. The
RAND Journal of Economics, 408–419.
Hull, C. (1948). The memoirs of cordell hull: Vol. 1.
Karacaovali, B. and N. Limão (2008). The clash of liberalizations: Preferential vs. multilateral trade liberalization in the European Union. Journal of International Economics 74 (2), 299 – 327.
Limão, N. (2006). Preferential trade agreements as stumbling blocks for multilateral
trade liberalization: Evidence for the united states. American Economic Review 96 (3),
896–914.
Limão, N. (2007). Are preferential trade agreements with non-trade objectives a stumbling
block for multilateral liberalization? The Review of Economic Studies 74 (3), 821.
Markusen, J. R. and R. M. Wigle (1989). Nash equilibrium tariffs for the United States
and Canada: The roles of country size, scale economies, and capital mobility. Journal
of Political Economy 97 (2), 368–386.
Mayer, T. and S. Zignago (2011). Notes on cepii’s distances measures: The geodist
database.
Mayer, W. (1981). Theoretical considerations on negotiated tariff adjustments. Oxford
Economic Papers 33 (1), 135–153.
McAfee, R. P. and M. Schwartz (1994). Opportunism in multilateral vertical contracting:
Nondiscrimination, exclusivity, and uniformity. American Economic Review , 210–230.
Novy, D. (2013). Gravity redux: measuring international trade costs with panel data.
Economic inquiry 51 (1), 101–121.
Ossa, R. (2014).

Trade wars and trade talks with data.

American Economic Re-

view 104 (12), 4104–46.
Ossa, R. (2015). Why trade matters after all. Journal of International Economics 97 (2),
266–277.
52

Ossa, R. (2016). Quantitative models of commercial policy. Handbook of Commercial
Policy 1, 207–259.
Posner, E. A. and A. O. Sykes (2014). Voting rules in international organizations. Chicago
Journal of International Law 15, 195.
Preeg, E. H. (1995). Traders in a brave new world: The Uruguay Round and the future
of the international trading system. University of Chicago Press.
Silva, J. S. and S. Tenreyro (2006). The log of gravity. The Review of Economics and
Statistics 88 (4), 641–658.
Spearot, A. (2016). Unpacking the long-run effects of tariff shocks: New structural implications from firm heterogeneity models. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 8 (2), 128–167.

53

A

Data Appendix

Trade Data
The main source of trade data is NBER-United Nations Trade Data 1962-200035 . We
supplement the 1995 Russian import data and the 2000 Indian import data with the
Comtrade data. We aggregate the trade data up to the level of regional and product
category used in the text. Our 49 product categories are defined in Table 9. Our first 13
product categories cover agriculture, with product categories 14-49 covering manufactures.
Tariff Data
The tariff data is from the TRAINS data accessed through WITS36 . We use the MFN
Applied rate throughout the analysis. If the tariff data is not available for any of the year
1990, 1995 and 2000, we borrow it from the closest year available. We then calculate the
trade-weighted import tariff by the importing country (region) and the product category.
For European countries, we calculate the euro-zone common import tariffs and apply
to each country product-wise. For a given importing country (region) and a product
category, if the import tariff is missing for a particular partner, we simply assume that
the MFN tariff is applied to this partner.
Export Ratio
Export ratio is calculated using the GTAP 5 data (Dimaranan and McDougall, 2002),
which provides the total production and the export for each country and sector in 1997.
We then match the GTAP industries with our product classification to derive the export
ratio by each product category.
Gravity Data & Preferential Trade Agreements
Gravity variables and the PTA relations between countries are from CEPII (Mayer and
Zignago, 2011). For gravity variables, we use information on distance, GDP, population
and common language. For distance between regions, we apply population weighted
distance.
Domestic Value-Added
The domestic value-added is from INDSTAT 2 (2016), ISIC Revision 3.37 We calculate
the total manufacturing value-added by region.

35

http://cid.econ.ucdavis.edu/nberus.html

36

http://wits.worldbank.org/

37

https://stat.unido.org/

54

Table 9: Product Classification
Product Category
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Corresponding SITC rev.2
0
1
2
3
4
5,22
6
7
8
9
11
12
21,61

14
15
16
17
18

23
24
25
26
27,55,56,57

19
20
21
22

28
29
32
33,34

23

41,42,43

24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

51
52
53
54
58
59
62
63
64
65
66
67
68,69
71
72,73,74

39

75,76

40
41
42
43
44
45

77
78
79
81
82
83,84

46
47

85
87,88

48
49

89
90,91,93,94,95,96,97

Description
Live animals chiefly for food
Meat and meat preparations
Dairy products and birds’eggs
Fish,crustaceans,mollucs,preparations thereof
Cereals and cereal preparations
Vegetables and fruit; Oil seeds and oleaginous fruit
Sugar,sugar preparations and honey
Coffee,tea,cocoa,spices,manufactures thereof
Feeding stuff for animals,not incl.unmil.cereals
Miscel.edible products and preparations
Beverages
Tobacco and tobacco manufactures
Hides,skins and furskins,raw; Leather, leather manuf.,
n.e.s.and dressed furskisg
Crude rubber (including synthetic and reclaimed)
Cork and wood
Pulp and waste paper
Textile fibres (except wool tops) and their wastes
Crude materials; Essential oils & perfume mat.;toiletcleansing mat; Fertilizers; Pyrotechnic products
Metalliferous ores and metal scrap
Crude animal and vegetable materials,n.e.s.
Coal,coke and briquettes
Petroleum,petroleum
products
and
related;
Gas,natural and manufactured materials
Animal oils and fats; Fixed vegetable oils and fats;
Animal-vegetable oils-fats,processed,and waxes
Organic chemicals
Inorganic chemicals
Dyeing,tanning and colouring materials
Medicinal and pharmaceutical products
Artif.resins,plastic mat.,cellulose esters/ethers
Chemical materials and products,n.e.s.
Rubber manufactures,n.e.s.
Cork and wood manufactures (excl.furniture)
Paper,paperboard,artic.of paper,paper-pulp/board
Textile yarn,fabrics,made-upart.,related products
Non-metallic mineral manufactures,n.e.s.
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals; Manufactures of metal,n.e.s.
Power generating machinery and equipment
Machinery specialized for particular industries; Metalworking machinery; General industrial machinery
& equipment,and parts
Office machines & automatic data processing; Telecommunications & sound recording apparatus equip.
Electrical machinery,apparatus & appliances n.e.s.
Road vehicles (incl. air cushion vehicles
Other transport equipment
Sanitary,plumbing,heating and lighting fixtures
Furniture and parts thereof
Travel goods,handbags and similair containers; Articles of apparel and clothing accessories
Footwear
Professional,scientific & controling instruments ; Photographic apparatus,optical goods,watches
Miscellaneous manufactured articles,n.e.s.
Others

55

