                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DOES E-CIGARETTE ADVERTISING ENCOURAGE ADULT SMOKERS TO QUIT?

                                        Dhaval M. Dave
                                         Daniel Dench
                                       Michael Grossman
                                       Donald S. Kenkel
                                         Henry Saffer

                                      Working Paper 24277
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24277


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




This paper was presented at a session sponsored by the Health Economics Research Organization
(HERO) at the 2018 Meetings Conference of the Allied Social Science Associations in
Philadelphia, PA, January 5-7, 2018; the 87th Annual Meetings of the Southern Economic
Association in Tampa, FL, November 17-19, 2017; the Eleventh World Congress of the
International Health Economics Association in Boston, MA, July 8-11, 2017; and the 43rd
Annual Conference of the Eastern Economic Association in New York, NY, February 23-26,
2017. The paper also was presented at seminars at IZA in Bonn, Germany, November 7, 2017
and at Auburn University in Auburn, Alabama, December 1, 2017. We are grateful to
participants in those forums, especially Kitt Carpenter, Hope Corman, Thomas Dohmen, David
Jaeger, Robert Kaestner, Ji Yan, and Aaron Yellowitz, for helpful comments and suggestions.
Research for this paper was supported by grant 1R01DA039968A1 from the National Institute on
Drug Abuse to the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Dhaval M. Dave, Daniel Dench, Michael Grossman, Donald S. Kenkel, and Henry
Saffer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does E-Cigarette Advertising Encourage Adult Smokers to Quit?
Dhaval M. Dave, Daniel Dench, Michael Grossman, Donald S. Kenkel, and Henry Saffer
NBER Working Paper No. 24277
February 2018
JEL No. I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Only recently introduced into the U.S. market, e-cigarettes have been aggressively promoted, and
use is increasing rapidly among both adults and youths. At the heart of the regulatory debate are
fundamental questions regarding whether e-cigarettes will draw cigarette smokers away from a
dangerous habit or lure new initiates into tobacco use. We provide some of the first causal
evidence on whether e-cigarette advertising on television and in magazines (which comprise
about 90% of total media spending on e-cigarettes) encourage adult smokers to quit. We find that
the answer to this question is a yes for TV advertising but no for magazine advertising. Our
results indicate that a policy to ban TV advertising of e-cigarettes would have reduced the
number of smokers who quit in the recent past by approximately 3%, resulting in roughly
105,000 fewer quitters in that period. On the other hand, if the FDA were not considering
regulations and mandates that would likely eliminate many e-cigarette producers during our
sample period, e-cigarette ads might have reached the number of nicotine replacement therapy
TV ads during that period. That would have increased the number of smokers who quit by
around 10%, resulting in an additional 350,000 quitters.

Dhaval M. Dave                                   Donald S. Kenkel
Bentley University                               Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Department of Economics                          College of Human Ecology
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                       Cornell University
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                           Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
and NBER                                         Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
and also IZA                                     and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu                                dsk10@cornell.edu

Daniel Dench                                     Henry Saffer
City University of New York Graduate Center      National Bureau of Economic Research
365 Fifth Avenue                                 5 Hanover Square, 16th Floor
New York, NY 10016                               Suite 1602
ddench@gc.cuny.edu                               New York, NY 10004-2630
                                                 hsaffer@gc.cuny.edu
Michael Grossman
National Bureau of Economic Research
5 Hanover Square, 16th Floor, Suite 1602
New York, NY 10004-2630
and City University of New York Graduate Center
and also IZA
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
                                              I.       Introduction

         Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems (ENDS), of which electronic cigarettes (e-

cigarettes) constitute the most common sub-product, are a non-combustible alternative to

smoking. As opposed to smoking cigarettes, the use of ENDS, termed vaping, delivers nicotine

to the user without exposing that person to tar—the substance in cigarette smoke responsible for

most of its harm. In all ENDS products (referred to as e-cigarettes or e-cigs from now on), a

liquid containing nicotine is vaporized by a battery powered heating device. The use of e-

cigarettes has increased dramatically since they were first introduced in the US in 2007.

According to the upper portion of Figure 1, participation among adults grew from 0.3 percent in

2010 to 6.9 percent in 2014. Participation by 18-24 year olds approximately doubled that of

adults of all ages, over the years in which data for the former group are available. The upper

portion of Figure 2 depicts similar trends for youth. Past-month participation in e-cigarettes by

youths in grades 6 through 12 increased from 1.0 percent in 2011 to 11.3 percent in 2015.

         Concurrent with the surge in e-cigarette use, there has been a substantial increase in

advertising from $3.6 million in 2010 to $112 million in 2014, with the vast majority of spending

devoted to magazines (59 percent) and television (27 percent) with national reach (Kim, Arnold,

and Makarenko 2014; U.S. Surgeon General 2016). Figure 3 depicts these trends in more detail.

There was virtually no advertising before 2012, followed by a sharp increase through 2014.

Advertising decreased in 2015 but increased again in 2016. 1 Almost 48 percent of adults have

been exposed to e-cigarette marketing (Kim, Arnold, and Makarenko 2014) and youth exposure

to TV ads increased over 250 percent between 2011 and 2013 (Duke et al. 2014).



1
  Mickle (2015) attributes the reduction in advertising in 2015 to inventory backlogs, new state laws, and uncertainty
concerning final rules regarding the regulation of e-cigarettes by the Food and Drug Administration. These
regulations were announced in May 2016 (see below).

                                                          1
        E-cigarette use and advertising have surged during an extremely contentious policy

debate. At the heart of this regulatory debate are fundamental questions regarding whether e-

cigarettes will draw cigarette smokers away from a dangerous habit or lure new initiates into

tobacco use and lead to a new generation of nicotine addicts. On one side of the debate is the

argument that e-cigarettes constitute a tobacco harm reduction strategy. E-cigs are less

dangerous than cigarettes because the vapor does not contain the toxins contained in the smoke

of conventional cigarettes (Goniewicz; et al. 2013; Czogala et al. 2014 U.S. Food and Drug

Administration 2016b; U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse 2016). While e-cigarettes are not

a completely safe alternative to cigarettes, in April 2016 the Royal College of Physicians in

Great Britain issued a report urging smokers to switch to e-cigarettes (Royal College of

Physicians 2016). That echoed advice some physicians had started giving to their patients who

smoked (Kandra et al. 2014).

        The recent trends in U.S. smoking rates provide hints that the growth of e-cigarette use

might be helping reduce smoking. The lower portion of Figure 1 highlights the well-known

downward trend in adult smoking. The rate fell from 20.9 percent in 2005 to 15.1 percent in

2015. During the 2011-2015 period in which data on e-cigarette use are also available, adult

smoking participation fell by almost four percentage points. The almost two percentage point

decline in smoking between 2014 and 2015 was the largest in more than twenty years (Jamal et

al. 2016). In other national data, Zhu et al. (2017) find that the quit attempt rate and annual

cessation rate were higher in 2014-15 compared to surveys earlier in the 2000s prior to the surge

in e-cigarettes use.




                                                  2
         Figure 2 shows that the growth in e-cigarette use among youth was also accompanied by

a downward trend in youth smoking. Past month smoking participation fell from 10.5 percent in

2011 to 6.1 percent in 2015, continuing a longer-term downward trend in youth smoking.

         On the other side of the policy debate are several arguments that suggest caution about e-

cigarettes. There is no research on the long-term health effects of e-cig use. Nicotine exposure

during the prenatal period is harmful. Adolescent nicotine exposure via e-cigarettes may have

lasting adverse consequences for cognitive development (U.S. Surgeon General 2014). 2

Accidental poisoning can result from the damaging of e-cigarette products as reflected by the

large increase in the number of calls to poison centers involving e-liquids (Richtel 2014). The

greatest danger may be that these products may induce adolescents to begin nicotine addiction

first by using e-cigs and then transitioning into smoking (Marcus 2014).

         The general debate over e-cigarettes has carried over to the regulation of e-cigarette

advertising. In the U.S. until 2016, e-cigarettes were regulated as an ordinary consumer product

and allowed to advertise as long as they did not make health or cessation claims. In 2016, the

Food and Drug Administration (FDA) extended its authority over tobacco products (created by

the 2009 Family Protection and Tobacco Control Act) to include e-cigarettes. The FDA

announced regulations that would ban the sale of e-cigarettes and related products to minors and

would require all products that were not commercially marketed prior to February 15, 2007 to

submit marketing applications (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2016a). Because the

marketing application approval process can be quite lengthy and costly, it has the potential to

eliminate many current producers and result in significant price increases. In July 2017, FDA

Commissioner Scott Gottlieb indicated these regulations will not be required until August 2022


2
 Controlled trials on cognitive development are based on animal studies, as it is difficult to study this question
experimentally for humans.

                                                           3
and that he would consider endorsing e-cigs as a method to quit smoking (Kaplan 2017). The

status quo remains that e-cigarette manufacturers are allowed to advertise in magazines,

television and other media in the U.S. In 2016, however, the European Court of Justice,

Europe’s highest court, found that the European Union had the right to regulate e-cigarettes

including banning advertising (Jolly 2016).

       The purpose of this paper is to shed light on one side of the contentious debate just

outlined by investigating whether e-cigarette advertising on television and in magazines

encourage adult smokers to quit. To preview our results, the answer to this question is a

tentative yes for TV advertising but no for magazine advertising. We use extremely detailed

information on TV viewing patterns and magazine issues read in the Simmons National

Consumer Survey and match this information to all e-cigarette ads aired on national and local

broadcast and cable stations and all ads published in magazines from Kantar Media. The match

yields estimates of the number of ads seen and read by each survey respondent in the past six

months. Quasi-random variation in advertising exposure provides a credible strategy to identify

the causal effects of advertising. We find that an additional ad seen on TV increases the number

of adults who quit smoking by almost 1 percent relative to a mean quit rate of 9 percent in the

past year.

                                      II.     Prior Studies

       There are no prior studies that have estimated the effects of e-cigarette advertising on quit

behavior of current smokers. Three streams of literature do, however, bear on our study. One

addresses the effectiveness of e-cigarettes when used to aid smoking cessation in comparison

with nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) and with unaided quitting (“cold turkey” quitting).

Brown et al. (2014) and Zhuang et al. (2016) found that quit rates were higher among e-cigarette



                                                 4
users than among the other two groups. On the other hand, Kalkhoran and Glantz (2016) review

a number of studies that reach the opposite conclusion, although the studies find that the use of e-

cigarettes is associated with some quitting. Some of this research is based on small samples of

smokers and does not control for unobserved factors that may be correlated with the decision to

use a particular method to attempt to quit.

       The second group of studies contains estimates of the effects of advertising on sales or

consumption of e-cigarettes and combustible cigarettes. Two related papers that use time series

data from 30 U.S. cities for 2009 through 2013 but with slightly different estimation methods

(Zheng et al. 2016, 2017) find that TV advertising was associated with increased per capita e-

cigarette sales by convenience stores. Results for magazine advertising were inconclusive as

were those for the effects of both types of ads on cigarette sales. Clearly, these results do not

pertain specifically to the behavior of consumers, and there is no way of assessing whether

individuals who made the purchases actually were exposed to the ads. Furthermore, estimates

may be confounded by reverse causality due to targeting wherein manufacturers are advertising

in response to strong demand.

       In a modification of the sales-advertising design, Tuchman (2017) uses weekly sales and

TV advertising data for the top 100 designated market areas (DMAs, which are media market

areas similar to Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas) for the period from 2010 through 2014.

Firms set advertising levels for a given DMA based on its urban center, where most of the

population lives. Since borders between DMAs tend to fall in more rural areas, residents of these

areas should have similar observed and unobserved characteristics but may be exposed to

different levels of advertising because of differences in the urban centers of their respective

DMAs. After limiting her sample to residents of border areas, she finds that an increase in e-



                                                  5
cigarette advertising is associated with an increase in e-cigarette sales and a reduction in

conventional cigarette sales. While her design is an improvement of the ones employed by

Zheng et al. (2016, 2017), she cannot determine whether individuals were actually exposed to the

ads and cannot treat quitting smoking as an outcome. Moreover, her advertising measures are

limited to local or spot TV ads. As we indicate below, over 90 percent of e-cigarette ads viewed

in our data appear at the national level.

       O’Connor et al. (2017) report that subjects who participated in an experimental auction in

which they bid for e-cigarettes were willing to pay more if they saw print ads for the product

prior to the auction compared to those who saw no ads. This result did not carry over to those

who saw TV ads. In a study with a similar research design, Rousu, O’Connor, and Corrigan

(2017) report cases in which participants who were exposed to an ad for a specific brand of e-

cigarettes were willing to pay more for that brand and less for a competing product. They also

report cases in which exposure to an ad for one product appears to increase demand for that

product as well as for cigarettes based on willingness to pay bids. If these results carry over to a

real-world setting as opposed to an experimental setting, they suggest reasons why advertising

may not encourage quit behavior. But they are based on small samples of individuals who reside

in one or two cities. Hence, they may not generalize to the population of smokers at large.

       Current FDA regulations do not allow e-cigarette ads to mention that the product can be

used for smoking cessation and are less harmful than combustible cigarettes. Yet Kim et al.

(2015) find that 75 percent of a sample of Florida adult smokers reported that seeing a TV ad for

e-cigarettes “made me think about quitting smoking.” The main message of the ad was that one

can use e-cigarettes anywhere. At the end, it mentions that the product is available in flavors,

different nicotine levels, and costs less than cigarettes. This study contradicts findings in the one



                                                  6
by Rousu, O’Connor, and Corrigan (2017). It suggests that even though quitting is not explicitly

mentioned, it induced viewers to think about quitting.

       From a methodological perspective, our study is most closely related to a set of studies

that use the same data and similar approach to assess the causal effects of advertising on the

demand for cigarettes (Avery et al. 2007; Kenkel, Mathios, and Wang forthcoming); smokeless

tobacco (Dave and Saffer 2013); alcohol (Molloy 2016); pharmaceutical products to treat

allergies, arthritis, asthma, high cholesterol (Avery et al. 2008); antidepressants (Avery,

Eisenberg, and Simon 2012); weight-loss products (Avery et al. 2013); and vitamins (Eisenberg,

Avery, and Cantor 2017). Each of these studies uses detailed information on consumer TV

viewing and/or magazine reading patterns in the Simmons National Consumer Survey (NCS,

http://www.simmonssurvey.com ) combined with comprehensive measures of advertising in

these two media primarily from Kantar Media (https://www.kantarmedia.com/us). Most of these

studies find positive effects of advertising on the outcomes being considered. The one by Avery

et al. (2007) is especially relevant because they find that an increase in exposure to magazine

advertisements of nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) products is associated with higher quit

rates among cigarette smokers.

       The NCS is a nationally representative proprietary marketing survey whose media usage

and consumer demographic information are utilized by virtually all major marketing and

advertising firms in the U.S. (Avery et al. 2013). Hence, the use of the NCS allows one to

observe the same consumer information and characteristics as the advertiser, minimizing the

“targeting bias” that would result from ads potentially being targeted based on factors not

observed by the researcher (Avery et al. 2007). Furthermore, the in-depth information on media

usage allows one to construct detailed and salient measures of advertising exposure that vary at



                                                 7
the individual level to identify plausibly causal effects of this exposure. For instance, even

readers of the same magazine may be exposed to different levels of e-cigarette ads due to the

staggering of ads across different months and issues. Along the same lines, viewers of the same

number of a given TV program in, for example, the last half of 2015, may view a different

number of ads because they do not watch exactly the same episodes of that show. By exploiting

these sources of variation and others described in the next section, we develop a credible

identification strategy to estimate the causal effects of e-cigarette advertising on smoking

cessation.

                                     III.    Empirical Implementation

A. Sample and Measurement of Outcomes

           The NCS is a repeat cross section conducted on a quarterly basis and contains

approximately 25,000 individuals ages 18 and over each year. All individuals in a given

household in that age category have the opportunity to participate in the survey and are

compensated if they do. Because no information on e-cigarettes was obtained prior to the fourth

quarter of 2013, we use data from that quarter through the fourth quarter of 2015. 3 That yields

an approximate sample size of 58,000 individuals. Respondents report their current smoking

status, any smoking cessation attempt over the past year, and methods used to attempt smoking

cessation over this period. Based on information on respondents’ current smoking status for

those who attempted to quit smoking over the past year, we can define whether the respondent

successfully quit or whether the cessation attempt was unsuccessful.

           One limitation of the NCS is that information on e-cigarette use is available only in the

context of quitting. That is, individuals respond whether they attempted to quit smoking in the



3
    We cannot include more recent Simmons surveys because they are extremely expensive.

                                                        8
past year and, if so, whether they used e-cigarettes as a method. A second limitation is that there

is no information on the number of e-cigarettes currently smoked or smoked in the past year.

Note, however, that a key question at the center of the harm reduction/policy debates concerns

whether e-cigarette advertising impacts smoking cessation. To that end, the structure of the

questions in the NCS are helpful towards assessing whether that advertising has impacted

smoking cessation in general, and smoking cessation with the aid of e-cigarettes in particular.

Furthermore, the NCS also asks respondents whether their quit attempt involved FDA-approved

nicotine replacement therapy (NRT). One concern among public health officials and

policymakers is that the use of e-cigarettes as an unapproved cessation aid may crowd-out other

FDA-approved (and possibly more effective) modes of smoking cessation. Thus, with the NCS,

we directly test whether e-cigarette advertising has affected smoking cessation through approved

methods such as NRT.

         Given the structure of the survey, we limit our sample to individuals who are either past-

year quitters or current smokers (N = 8,291). There are three groups in the sample: successful

quitters or simply quitters (Q = 747), unsuccessful quitters or simply failures (F = 2,324), and

non-attempters (D = 5,220). The last two groups form the larger group of current smokers. 4

         Panel A of Table 1 contains the basic outcomes that we consider in our empirical analysis

and the mean of each outcome. The quit rate in the sample (q = Q/N) expressed as a percentage

is 9.0 percent, and the failure rate (f = F/N) is 28.0 percent. Hence, the attempt rate




4
  We note here that the term “failure” as used in the paper specifically refers to those who attempted to quit smoking
but were unsuccessful, and is separate from those who did not make any attempt towards smoking cessation.
Because it may often take several attempts to quit smoking, unsuccessful attempts are often a necessary first step
towards successful smoking cessation. With 77 percent of smokers reporting that they would like to quit smoking
(Gallup Poll 2017), an unsuccessful quit attempt is therefore closer to these smokers’ realized goal than non-
attempts.

                                                          9
(A/N = a = q + f, where A = Q + F) is 37.0 percent, or almost 40 percent of the sample attempted

to quit in the past year. In addition to considering the attempt, quit, and failure rates as

outcomes, we examine the determinants of the success rate conditional on an attempt or the

conditional probability of success (π = Q/A = q/a). The mean of that outcome is 24.3 percent. 5

         Panel B of Table 1 contains outcomes related to those in Panel A that we also examine.

They are the percentage of attempts accounted for by each of four specific methods of quitting

and the success rate of each method. The methods are the use of e-cigarettes only, the use of

nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) only, cold turkey (attempts without the use of any products

and without any assistance), and other methods (gradual reduction, hypnosis, acupuncture, quit

smoking programs, and mixed methods). Attempts using e-cigarettes account for the second

highest percentage of all attempts (24.1 percent compared not surprisingly to 40.0 percent for

mixed methods). Attempts using e-cigarettes have the second highest success rate (28.9 percent

compared to 31.2 percent for cold turkey attempts). It is notable that the NRT quit rate is

somewhat lower than the e-cigarette rate. Again not surprisingly, attempts to quit by other

methods are the least successful. 6

         Note that the sample includes starters, individuals who began to smoke for the first time

sometime during the past year, and re-starters, that is individuals who smoked in the past, quit at


5
  When divided by 100, the rates just defined can be interpreted as probabilities at the individual level.
6
  The relative success of NRT and e-cigarettes is generally consistent with evidence from randomized control trials
(RCTs). There is no consistent evidence that other methods such as hypnotherapy or acupuncture (and related
techniques) have a sustained benefit on smoking cessation of six months or longer (Barnes et al. 2010; White et al.
2014), which may explain why attempts to quit by other methods in the NCS are the least successful. On the other
hand, based on data from 150 RCTs, there is consistent evidence that NRTs significantly raise the rate of successful
quits by about 50-60 percent or more (relative risk ratio of 1.6) (Stead et al. 2012). In comparison, RCTs for e-
cigarettes are quite sparse, though some limited evidence indicates that e-cigarettes significantly raise the likelihood
of six-month smoking abstinence by about 129 percent (compared to a placebo e-cigarette; relative risk ratio of
2.29), and that there may be no statistically significant difference between electronic cigarettes and NRTs with
respect to the six-month smoking abstinence rate (Hartmann-Boyce et al. 2016). The slightly higher success rate for
“cold turkey” attempts in our observational data may potentially reflect that smokers who use e-cigarettes and NRTs
might have failed previous cold turkey attempts. Thus, their lower success rate (for e-cigarettes and NRTs relative
to cold turkey attempts) might reflect that they may be relatively more hard-core addicted smokers.

                                                          10
some point, and then took up smoking again. 7 While we cannot identify these specific groups in

the sample, 8 both are salient to our analyses as they may have quit in the past year. Starters are

likely to comprise a very small percentage of the sample, however, since almost all smokers

initiate that behavior by their early twenties. 9

B. Measurement of Advertising

         The in-depth information on media usage in the NCS allows us to construct detailed and

salient measures of advertising exposure that vary at the individual level. Specifically, to

measure the NCS respondent’s potential exposure to e-cigarette advertising, we combine

questions that ask respondents about their TV watching and magazine reading habits with ad

placements in TV and magazine. There are two sets of broad questions in the NCS about TV

viewing behavior. One set of questions tells us the times they have watched specific channels in

the past week. To give some examples, a respondent may report that they have watched NBC

from 8:00 PM-8:30 PM, sometime from Monday-Friday, or that they watched Bravo from Noon-

3 PM on the weekend. Note that the time slot can be narrow or broad depending on if it is a time

slot that is frequently watched such as a weekday network primetime time slot or uncommonly

watched such as the afternoon cable weekend time slot.

         A second set of questions asks respondents to recall whether they usually watch specific

programs on each channel. For network TV, the survey asks the frequency that the respondent

usually watches a program; one to four times a month for weekly programs or one to five times a

week for daily programs. For example, a respondent can report that she has watched The Big




7
  Put differently, the sample is not limited to individuals who smoked exactly one year prior to their interview date
as smoking status exactly one year prior is not available in the NCS.
8
  This is because smoking status exactly one year prior to the interview date is not available in the NCS.
9
  Over 80 percent of ever-smokers have initiated smoking prior to age 18 (Substance Use and Mental Health
Services Administration 2014).

                                                          11
Bang Theory on CBS one out of four times a month or that she has watched Good Morning

America on ABC three times out of five a week. For cable TV, the survey asks only whether she

has watched a program at all in the past seven days or in the past four weeks. For example, she

could have viewed American Dad on TBS in the past seven days, or Bones on TNT in the past

four weeks.

       Kantar Media provides us a list of advertising placements for e-cigarettes, that includes

the date and time the ad aired, on what channel, during what program, and what brand of e-

cigarette is advertised. The data we connect to the NCS extends from the 2nd quarter of 2013

through the 4th quarter of 2015. We consider a respondent to have been potentially exposed to an

ad if she reports watching a program and channel where an electronic cigarette ad aired in the

past six months, and having watched a time slot on the same channel where that same electronic

cigarette ad aired in the past six months.

       We use this strict criterion for several reasons. First, a program can air on a channel

many times throughout the day. E-cigarette ads tend to air on network television outside of the

primetime schedule where most respondents report watching television. If we simply counted all

ads that aired on this network without regard to what time the respondent watches television on

this channel, we would over-count e-cigarette ad exposure. Second, as mentioned, the time slots

are specified for any time between Monday through Friday, or separately on the weekend.

Therefore, if an ad simply aired during a time slot the respondent reports watching but on a day

that airs a program they do not actually watch, this would again be over-counting e-cigarette ad

exposure. Third, the time slots are broad and off-hours can be as large as six-hour time frames.

A report of watching a time slot does not necessarily imply the respondent watched every

program in that time slot. The application of this strict matching criterion therefore minimizes



                                                12
positive measurement error (assigning ad exposure to a respondent when he or she may not have

been) given the available information, assuming regularity in viewing behavior over a six-month

period.

          For spot ads that appear only in certain designated market areas (DMAs, which are media

market areas similar to Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas), there is the additional restriction

that we only assign persons as exposed if they live in the DMA in which the ad appeared. In this

sample of the NCS, 46 DMAs can be identified, which include 72 percent of the total NCS

sample. Nevertheless, we still include the sample of adults that reside in areas outside the 46

identified DMAs. For these adults, we are unable to measure their spot advertising exposure but

this leads to only a minor amount of measurement error: when we are able to measure spot ad

exposure, they only account for approximately 3 percent of the estimated exposure to all ads.

          Total TV ad exposure is thus a weighted sum of all ads to which a respondent is exposed

based on the programs, channels, and time slots that the respondent views and the ads that aired

on these programs, channels, and time slots. We apply summation weights to ad exposure

depending on the frequency of viewing a program. The weight for a respondent watching a daily

show where an e-cigarette ad airs on network TV and watches it once a week, twice a week,

three times a week, four times a week, or five times a week, is 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, or 1,

respectively. Similarly, the weight for a respondent watching a weekly show where an e-

cigarette ad airs on network TV and watches it once a month, twice a month, three times a

month, or four times a month is 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 or 1 respectively. Finally, the weight for a

respondent watching a cable TV show, and has watched it in the past four weeks or the past

seven days, is 0.5 or 1 respectively.




                                                 13
       Although the TV advertising exposure data pertains to exposure in the past six months,

the actual information on viewing patterns pertains to the past week or the past month. This

information as well as all other information is obtained from respondents by means of a

questionnaire that they receive in the mail, complete, and return. While their answers are subject

to recall error, this is minimized by limiting the recall period to the past month as opposed to the

past six months. Clearly, we assume that viewing patterns in the past week or past month are

representative of those in the past six months.

       Our advertising exposure measure assumes that exposure does not depreciate over time

until six months after exposure when it depreciates completely. This is the same assumption that

has been employed in other studies with the NCS data cited in Section II. It is supported in

reviews of the literature by Leone (1995) and Dave and Kelly (2014).

       Time-shifting, distractions, and changing channels are long-standing issues in all TV

advertising studies that use data from actual experience rather than from limited laboratory

settings. While time-shifting and non-traditional TV viewing are on the rise, most viewing still

occurs live and on the TV screen. Bronnenberg et al. (2010) find that 95 percent of television

was watched live rather than recorded, and even when viewers were given the opportunity to

skip commercials (through the use of a DVR), many users did not do so. Nielsen (2014)

confirms that about 94 percent of the time spent watching original TV series by adults and teens

is on traditional TV, with the remainder viewed through the internet on alternative devices.

Moreover, among the time spent watching traditional TV (on the TV screen), 91 percent (for

both adults and teens) is watched live and the remaining is time-shifted. Thus, the average effect

of time-shifting is minimal; this is consistent with a recent international study that found

advertising awareness to be generally similar across live and delayed viewers (TVNZ/Colmar



                                                  14
Brunton 2013). Furthermore, as long as the level of distraction while watching TV or time-

shifting are not systematically correlated with e-cigarette advertising per se (relative to other

advertising), estimated effects will be biased towards zero because of random measurement error

and any general trends in time-shifting or differences across areas/demographic groups will be

captured, by demographic controls and area and time fixed effects.

          Kantar Media also provides the issue and date that e-cigarette ads appear in magazines.

NCS respondents provide detailed information on their magazine reading behavior. For each

magazine, they report whether they read or looked into it in the past six months, and further

report on the number of issues that they read out of every four issues, on average. Magazine ad

exposure is measured as the weighted sum of the number of ads that appeared in all magazines in

the past six months that the respondent has read, weighted by the frequency (number of issues

consumed) with which the respondent reads each magazine. Specifically, the weights for

reading a magazine less than one out of four, one out of four, two out of four, three out of four,

or four out of four issues, are 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1 respectively. While the recall period for

magazine exposure is longer than the one employed for TV exposure, the amount of information

requested from respondents is much more limited. Hence, there is no reason to believe that

random measurement error for the two types of exposure differs.

         In addition to estimating the effects of e-cigarette advertising on quit behavior, we also

estimate the effects of NRT advertising with measures obtained from Kantar. There are virtually

no NRT ads in magazines, and hence we do not control for magazine ad exposure. 10 TV ad

exposure for NRT is constructed the same way as described above for e-cigarettes, combining



10
  In the past, most NRT products had to be obtained with a prescription from a physician. If they were advertised
on television, a printed source of information on them was required. This no longer is the case because almost all of
these products can be acquired over-the-counter.

                                                         15
information on actual NRT ads airing on TV with the TV consumption habits of the NRT

respondents.

       We note that there are no prior studies that have estimated how e-cigarette advertising

affects smoking cessation behaviors. Furthermore, our individual-level measures of ad exposure

are superior to other market-level measures such as market-level ad spending or average ratings

points, which have been typically used in prior work to study the effects of advertising in health-

related markets, including tobacco and alcohol (Dave and Kelly 2014). Market-level variation in

ad spending mostly reflects spot or local ads, which misses most advertising in these markets.

Furthermore, aggregated market-level measures provide a measure of the average exposure in a

market, while we capture individual-level variation in TV viewing and magazine reading habits.

Outside of a controlled laboratory experiment, these measures from the NCS provide the most

precise and salient matching of ad exposure to date in any national tobacco study of individuals

in a real-world setting (Dave and Kelly 2014; Dave and Saffer 2013; Avery et al. 2007).

C. Definitions of Other Variables and Sample Characteristics

       All models estimated in Section IV contain age, gender, race, education, household

income, employment status, insurance status, and marital status, as independent variables. All of

these variables are defined in Table 2, and their means in each of the three groups in the sample

(quitters, failures, and non-attempters) are shown. Means of exposure to TV and magazine e-

cigarette ads and to NRT TV ads in each group are also reported in Table 2.

       Males, whites, those with high levels of education, and those residing in households with

high levels of income are over-represented in the sample of quitters. The relationship between

age and the probability of quitting is nonlinear, with the two youngest and the oldest age groups

accounting for larger percentages of the quit group than of the other two groups. It also is



                                                16
notable that quitters are exposed to more TV ads for e-cigarettes (4.5 ads on average over the

past 6 months) than failures (3.7) or non-attempters (2.9). The latter pattern, does not, however

hold in the case of magazine ads. Quitters have more exposure to these ads than non-attempters

but less exposure than failures. The average respondent is exposed to 4-5 times more NRT ads

relative to e-cigarette ads, but quitters are less likely to be exposed to these ads than those whose

quit attempts are not successful. All of the differences just mentioned are statistically significant

at the one percent level.

D. Identification Strategy

       At several points in this paper, we have mentioned that firms are likely to target ads for

their products to individuals who have certain characteristics. Hence, efforts to identify the

causal effects to ads for the product in question must control as much as possible for the

characteristics of the targeted groups. If this is not done, estimates are biased due to omitted

characteristics that make it more likely that given consumers are exposed to more ads and have

unobserved propensities to quit, the key outcome in our case.

       The advertising exposure that varies at the individual level can be exploited to identify

plausibly causal effects of this exposure. For instance, even readers of the same magazine may

be exposed to different levels of e-cigarettes ads due to variation in their reading frequency

(issues read) and the staggering of ads across different months and issues. A similar comment

applies to individuals who viewed the same number of episodes of a given TV show but in

different quarters or different years. Our identification strategy isolates these sources of

variation and others specified below by means of fixed effects to control for unobservable

characteristics that may be correlated with both outcomes such as quitting and the key

independent variable of interest--advertising exposure.



                                                 17
       In addition to the variables in Table 2, the most complete specifications in Section IV are

saturated with year-quarter, magazine, program, time slot, and channel fixed effects. Year-

quarter fixed effects, one for each year and quarter combination, are necessary because there is

variation in advertising spending over time, which may be correlated with any other variables

that would influence quitting rates in the U.S. over time. DMA fixed effects, which include a

fixed effect for 46 identified DMA’s and one for all the unidentified DMA’s, are necessary

because people in different areas may be exposed to spot ads at different rates, or more

importantly have different viewing patterns based on the local preferences of an area.

       Magazine fixed effects (one for each of the 32 magazines that carried e-cigarette ads at

some point over the sample period) are included for each magazine that the respondent has read

or looked into, regardless of their frequency of reading that magazine. Program fixed effects

(one for each of a set of 326 programs that aired e-cigarette ads at some point over the sample

period) are included for each program that the respondent watched regardless of the channel on

which it was watched or the time slot during which it was watched.

       A set of 62 time slot indicators are included to identify different time slots during which a

respondent may have watched TV regardless of the program watched and the channel on which

it was aired. Time slot fixed effects are different by weekend and weekday viewing, as well as

by cable or network viewing. Finally, a set of 131 channel indicators are included for channels

that aired ads and were watched by the respondent regardless of the time slot during which the

program was watched or the program that was watched.

       The magazine, channel, time slot, and program fixed effects are necessary because

advertisers may target e-cigarette ads to viewers that are prone to be more likely to quit and try e-

cigarettes if induced. They help us identify variation in individual ad exposure that is orthogonal



                                                 18
to any targeting bias resulting from advertisers allocating ads across magazines, TV programs,

time-slots, and network and cable channels, based on unobserved characteristics of viewers and

readers. Note that the time slot fixed effects are extremely highly correlated with the amount of

time spent watching television. Therefore, our results are unaffected when the latter variable is

added as a regressor.

       Even after controlling for all of the fixed effects, there are still sources of variation in

advertising exposure. For example, someone could watch the same programs, watch the same

channels, watch TV in the same general timeframes, in the same quarter, in the same DMA, and

have the same demographics but still have different TV ad exposure. For example, person A

could be watching The Big Bang Theory on TBS at 8:30 PM and an e-cigarette ad could air,

while person B is watching Law and Order: SVU on USA Network at 8:30 PM and no e-

cigarette ads air. Person B could also watch The Big Bang Theory on TBS but at 4:00 PM while

person A watches Law and Order: SVU on USA Network at 4:00 PM and no e-cigarette ads air

on either show. Therefore, person A and person B would have the same year-quarter, DMA,

program, channel, and time slot fixed effects but different ad exposure.

       Other sources of variation net of fixed effects were mentioned above and are consistent

with the way in which advertising typically is scheduled: high levels of ads for a limited time

followed by no ads for a period of time (Bogart 1984; Dubé et al. 2005). By using such “pulses”

or “flights” of advertising, diminishing marginal product at higher levels of ads is moderated

while lingering effects of advertising may keep the consumer aware of the brand. Such pulsing

may also explain shifts in advertising within a given magazine or program at different points in

time or at different frequencies. Thus, two individuals consuming the same TV program or




                                                  19
magazine would be exposed to different levels of ads based on their frequency and time-slot of

consumption.

        To highlight the significant amount of variation in TV and magazine e-cigarette exposure

on which our estimates are based, we regressed each exposure measure on the sociodemographic

variables in Table 2 (age, gender, race/ethnicity, education, household income, employment

status, insurance status, and marital status) and on year-quarter, channel, program, time slot, and

magazine fixed effects. In the TV ad exposure regression, the R2 is 0.5126. The corresponding

statistic in the magazine ad exposure regression is 0.6808. Both R2s indicate a substantial

amount of residual variation in the exposure measures. 11

        Not only does our procedure control for unobservables, but it also balances the

sociodemographic characteristic of groups defined by different amounts of advertising exposure.

Table 3 contains the means for all sociodemographic characteristics across three groups exposed

to different levels of ads: no exposure, less than the median ad exposure, and greater than the

median ad exposure. Panel A reports these means across levels of TV ad exposure, and Panel B

reports them across levels of magazine ad exposure. In general, respondents are unbalanced on

their observable characteristics across advertising exposure.

        To highlight the unbalance in the case of TV ad exposure, we run three regressions in

which this measure is the dependent variable. In the first, the independent variables are limited

to the set of sociodemographic characteristics. In the second, year-quarter and DMA fixed

effects are included. In the third, channel, time slot, and program fixed effects are added. In

each regression, we test the hypothesis that the sociodemographic variables as a set are not


11
  Each of the two regressions also includes NRT TV advertising exposure and additional program fixed effects that
are unique to this variable. We treat NRT exposure as a control variable rather than one of interest because its
coefficient never is significant in the regressions in Table 4 and 5. In Tables A1 and A2 in the appendix, we show
that our results in Tables 4 and 5 are not affected when the NRT measure is excluded.

                                                        20
related to advertising exposure. The p-value associated with this test is 0.000 in the first

regression and second regression and 0.603 in the third regression. Clearly, the

sociodemographic variables are significant predictors of TV ad exposure when the program,

channel, and time slot indicators are not held constant but are not significant predictors when

these indicators are held constant.

        The same results emerge in the case of magazine ad exposure. The sociodemographic

characteristics have significant effects on exposure with or without controls for year-quarter and

DMA fixed effects (p-value equals 0.000 in each case). But there is no relationship between

these characteristics and exposure once magazine fixed effects are included in the regression (p-

value equals 0.648). We conclude that the three groups in Table 3 are balanced on observables

once we control for fixed effects that pertain specifically to TV viewing and magazine reading

patterns. Indicators for year-quarter and DMA residence is not sufficient to achieve this balance.

This finding strengthens our identification strategy because there may be additional individual

characteristics that we do not observe and that are correlated with the ones that we do observe.

That suggests that the saturation of the regressions estimated in the next section with the large set

of fixed effects just discussed eliminates biases that could be generated by these missing

individual characteristics. 12

E. Empirical Specifications

        Recall that the sample consists of individuals who are either past-year quitters or current

smokers (N = 8,291) and that there are three groups in it. These are successful quitters or simply

quitters (Q = 747), unsuccessful quitters or simply failures (F = 2,324), and non-attempters (D =



 These results are not affected when indicators for magazines read are included in the TV ad exposure regression,
12

when indicators for programs, time slots, and channels are included in the magazine ad exposure regression, and
when NRT exposure is included in both regressions.

                                                        21
5,220). We begin by estimating a multinomial logit function with three outcomes: successfully

quitting smoking or simply quitting, attempting to quit and failing or simply failing, and not

attempting to quit. The mean probability of quitting (q, expressed as a percentage) is 9.0 percent.

The comparable probabilities of failing (f) and not attempting (d) are 28.0 percent and 63.0

percent, respectively. We take non-attempters (D) as the omitted category in the logit so that the

logit coefficients pertain to changes in the log odds of q or f relative to d.

        Since the attempt rate (a) is the sum of the quit rate and the failure rate and since

                          d = 1 – a = 1 – q – f,                       (1)

the marginal effect of any variable, x, on a is the negative of the marginal effect of that variable

on d or the sum of the marginal effect of that variable on q and its marginal effect on f. This

estimate is more flexible than one obtained from a binomial logit in which the two outcomes are

attempts and non-attempts because it allows the marginal effects on q and f to differ. Similar

considerations underscore the advantage of obtaining quit effects from the multinomial logit

model rather than from a binomial logit model in which the two outcomes are quits and the other

two are combined (f + d), the non-quitters. In particular, the latter model is appropriate only if x

has no impact on the log odds of f relative to d. From, however, an empirical perspective, effects

that emerge from the two binomial logit models just described are similar to those that emerge

from the multinomial logit model. 13

        In addition to treating q, f, and a as outcomes, we also treat the conditional probability of

success (π = q/a) as a fourth outcome. This is the success rate conditional on a quit attempt.

Conceptually, this can be done in two ways. The first involves deleting all the individuals who



 We also estimated these two binomial logit models for attempts vs. non-attempts and for quits vs. non-quitters via
13

OLS. Our estimates and results are not sensitive to using linear probability models, and yield highly similar
marginal effects to those reported in Table 4.

                                                        22
do not attempt to quit and then estimating a binomial logit model with two outcomes: quits or

failures. That is, the logit is limited to observations for individuals who attempt to quit. The

second method is to obtain the relevant logit coefficient of x on the log odds of q relative to f as

the difference between the logit coefficient of x on the log odds of q relative to d and the logit

coefficient of x on the log of f relative to d. We prefer the first method because it is more

convenient to compute the marginal effect from it, but we want to emphasize that the two

methods are identical save for rounding due to the algorithm used to achieve convergence. 14

         Finally, we estimate logit models in which the outcomes are the method-specific attempt

or success rates defined in Panel B of Table 1. The former logits are limited to individuals who

attempt to quit and allow us to determine whether exposure to advertising induces crowd-out

from other methods of quitting, especially nicotine replacement therapy, to the use of e-

cigarettes. The latter logits contain an important specification or falsification test. If e-cigarette

advertising encourages successful quitting, that effect should be largest for those who use e-

cigarettes to quit relative to those who attempt to quit using other methods. We extend these

models to perform additional specification and validation checks.

                                                   IV.      Results

         Marginal effects of e-cigarette TV and magazine advertising exposure from multinomial

logit models that examine the probabilities of quitting, failing to quit, and attempting to quit are

reported in Table 4. 15 Five specifications are shown. In the first, the only fixed effects included


14
   This result illustrates the property of independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) that characterizes multinomial
and conditional logit models. The former refer to models in which the regressors that vary among individuals but
not among choices (our case), while the latter refer to models in which the regressors vary among choices as well as
among individuals. IIA can be tested in a conditional logit model by deleting one of the choices and then comparing
the remaining coefficients to those in the full model. That test cannot be performed with a multinomial model
because that model allows for a full set of interactions between the regressors and the choices. On the other hand, in
a conditional logit model, choice-specific regressors are forced to have the same coefficient for each choice.
15
   These are marginal effects averaged over individuals. Since more than one individual in a given household can be
included in the survey, standard errors are clustered at the household level in Table 4 and in all tables that follow it.

                                                           23
pertain to year and quarter. In the second, DMA indicators are added followed by time slot

indicators in the third. In the fourth model, channel and magazine fixed effects are included. In

the last and most comprehensive specification, program indicators join the set of fixed effects.

         Focusing on the marginal effect of TV advertising on the probability of quitting, one sees

that this effect is positive and significant at the 5 percent level in the first two models and at the 1

percent level in the last three models. The size of the effect is fairly stable across alternative

specifications and actually gets larger as more fixed effects are added. 16 In the most

comprehensive model, an increase in exposure to one additional ad raises the quit probability by

0.0009 *100 = 0.09 percentage points (approximately 1 percent relative to the mean quit

probability). The magnitude of this effect is identical to the impact of an increase in exposure to

one additional magazine ad for an NRT product in a study by Avery et al. (2007). They use

Simmons NCS data for fall and spring quarters from the fall of 1995 through the fall of 1999.

The quit rate in their sample of 10 percent is approximately the same as the 9 percent rate in our

sample.

         TV advertising has no statistically or economically significant impact on the failure rate

across all specifications. Exposure to an additional ad does raise the attempt probability by

between 0.06 and 0.08 percentage points; the marginal effect is 0.07 percentage points in the

most saturated model, though these effects are imprecisely estimated and not statistically

significant. Together, these estimates indicate that most of the quit effect is due to an increase in

the success rate conditional on attempting. That issue is explored in more detail in the next table.




Since 51 percent of the observations have only one individual per household and 33 percent have two observations
per household, standard errors that ignore clustering are extremely similar to those that take it into account.
16
   This indicates a form of negative selection such that ads may be targeted to individuals with unobservable
characteristics that may make them less likely to use e-cigarettes to quit smoking. Such targeting is consistent with
e-cigarette manufacturers attempting to attract new populations of users.

                                                         24
        Exposure to an additional magazine ad never has a significant effect on the quit

probability. The effect is small in magnitude and becomes negative in the last two models. The

failure effect is positive, significant, and quite large in the first three models but is greatly

reduced and insignificant once magazine fixed effects are included.

        The estimated TV effects are not sensitive to the exclusion of magazine advertising since

the two advertising variables are weakly correlated. The estimated TV effects also are not

sensitive to the order in which the different types of fixed effects are included. In summary, the

results in Table 4 indicate that exposure to TV ads raises the quit probability but exposure to

magazine ads does not.

        When we stratify by age (comparing adults ages 18-34 vs. those ages 35+; see Table A4

in the appendix), we find that the marginal effect of TV ad exposure on the quit probability is

significantly larger among younger adults. Specifically, one additional TV ad raises the quit

probability by 0.16 percentage point among 18-34 year olds and by 0.07 percentage point among

older adults; both estimates are statistically significant. However, the effect of TV ads on the

probability of making an attempt is suggestively larger among older adults (0.13 percentage

point vs. 0.10 percentage point; though the effects are imprecise and we cannot reject the null of

no difference) in the most comprehensive specification. Thus, while e-cigarette ads on TV lead

both groups to attempt to quit smoking, the stronger successful quit effect among younger adults

may reflect their lower addictive nicotine stock, as well as relatively their weaker habit formation

related to the actual experience of smoking conventional cigarettes.

        In multinomial logits not shown, we have examined the effects of advertising on method-

specific attempt rates and find no significant effects of each type of advertising on these rates.

Hence, there is no evidence of crowd-out. Instead, TV advertising for e-cigarettes appears to



                                                   25
encourage smokers to attempt to quit by each of the four methods that we consider. This result is

similar to one reported by Avery et al. (2007). They find that exposure to NRT ads in magazines

raises the attempt rate but does not increase attempts using NRT relative to cold turkey attempts.

         In Table 5 we specifically assess how ad exposure impacts the conditional probability of

success. The table reports the results of linear probability models in which the conditional

probability of success (quits conditional on attempts denoted by π) is the outcome. 17 These

models are estimated separately for all attempts to quit and for each of four method-specific

attempts to quit. Only the marginal effects and standard errors of the TV advertising exposure

measure are shown because the magazine exposure effects are not meaningful and insignificant.

Magazine ad exposure is, however, included in all specifications.

         Focusing on the results for all attempts, one sees that an increase in exposure to e-

cigarette advertising on TV has a positive effect on the success rate. The effect is significant in

all specifications and is fairly stable across alternative specifications. It ranges in magnitude

from a 0.14 percentage point increase in the probability of success to a 0.19 percentage point

increase in that probability.

         The results just reported can be combined with those in Table 4 to decompose the quit

effect into a component due to an increase in the attempt rate (a) and one due to an increase in

the success rate (π). This decomposition also puts the magnitude of these effects in perspective.

Since q = aπ,

                           (qx/q) = (ax/a) + (πx/π),                             (2)




17
   We report estimates from linear probability models (LPM), rather than the binary logit, due to the smaller sample
sizes as we condition the sample on attempters and method-specific attempters. As we saturate the models with
fixed effects in specifications (4) and (5) some logit models fail to converge. We confirm that for models (1)
through (3) where we are able to estimate both LPM and logit specifications, the marginal effects are highly similar.

                                                         26
where x is the advertising variable and a subscript denotes a partial derivative. The means of q,

a, and π are 9.0 percent, 37.0 percent, and 24.3 percent, respectively. Based on the fifth and

most comprehensive specification in Tables 4 and 5, our results imply that an additional

exposure to an e-cigarette advertisement on TV raises the quit rate by about 1 percent, the

attempt rate by 0.2 percent, and the success rate by 0.8 percent. Clearly, most of the one percent

increase in the number of smokers who quit is due to the increase in the success rate. While

these effects are somewhat modest, they pertain to a small change in exposure. Computations

suggest that the logits are fairly linear in the range in which we estimate them. Hence, an

exposure to five additional ads would increase the number of quitters by 5 percent.

       The remainder of the estimates in Table 5 pertain to marginal effects of exposure to TV

ads on attempt-specific success rates. As in the case with the models for success with all

attempts, magazine effects are not shown because they never are significant. The fifth model

could not be estimated because the sample size was too small to include all the fixed effects.

       The only case in which success effects are positive, generally significant, and generally

stable pertains to e-cigarette only attempters. These range from a marginal effect of 0.25

percentage points to 0.62 percentage point. The pattern of larger and more significant effects as

additional fixed effects are included mirrors that observed for all attempters.

       How reasonable are the effects just observed? As an identity,

                       π = keπe + knπn + kcπc + koπo,                        (3)

where the superscript denotes the method (e for electronic cigarettes only, n for NRT only, c for

cold turkey, and o for other methods) and ke, for example is the fraction of all attempts accounted

for by e-cigarette attempts. We find that exposure to additional ads has no effect on the attempt-

specific fractions just defined. Hence,


                                                 27
                        (∂π/∂x) = ke*(∂πe/∂x).                                 (4)

The fraction of attempts accounted for by e-cigarette attempts (ke) equals 0.241 (Table 1), and in

the third specification in Table 5, ∂πe/∂x = 0.0044. Therefore, the estimated value of the right-

hand side of equation (4) is 0.0011. That is very similar to the actual value of ∂π/∂x of 0.0015 in

the third specification of the success rate logit for all attempters in Table 5. In the fourth

specification, ∂πe/∂x equals 0.0062. So the right-hand side of equation (4) becomes 0.0015.

That is also close to that actual value of ∂π/∂x of 0.0019 in the fourth specification of the success

rate logit for all attempters.

        In summary, the lack of effects for attempt methods other than with e-cigarettes amounts

to an important falsification test. In addition, the agreement between the two methods of

estimating the success rate for all attempts provides further validation of our specifications.

        Our estimate that exposure to an additional TV e-cigarette message increases the quit rate

by one percent obviously is a small effect. It pertains, however to a small change in exposure. A

better way to evaluate the magnitude of the effect is to apply our estimate to potential policies to

reduce or expand advertising. A complete ban on advertising is an obvious example of the

former. It would have reduced the average number of ads seen in our sample period from three

to zero and lowered the quit rate from 9.0 percent to 8.7 percent. Based on the smoking

participation rates that underlie the lower portion of Figure 1, this reduction in the quit rate

translates into approximately 105,000 fewer quitters in 2015.

        A policy that has the potential to encourage advertising would be to eliminate the FDA

mandate requiring that all e-cigarette products not commercially marketed prior to February 15,

2007 to submit costly and lengthy marketing applications originally by August 2018. While this

deadline was extended to August 2022 in July 2017 and post-dates our sample period, the


                                                  28
mandate was under discussion during our sample period. If that had not been the case, it is likely

that e-cigarette producers would have devoted more expenditures to advertising. Suppose that

this increased exposure to 14 ads—the mean number of NRT ads seen during our sample period.

Then the quit rate would have risen to 10.1 percent, which would have resulted in an additional

350,000 quitters in 2015. 18

         In evaluating the magnitudes of these effects, keep in mind that the estimate of a ban is

based on a small number of ads actually being aired. Moreover, the policy that expands

advertising does not allow producers to advertise the health benefits of e-cigarettes or their use as

a method to stop smoking.

                                                   V. Discussion

         The title of this paper poses the question whether e-cigarette advertising encourages

smokers to quit. The results in the paper suggest that the answer is yes for TV advertising but no

for magazine advertising. We find that exposure to an additional ad seen on TV increases the

number of adults who quit by about 0.09 percentage point, about 1 percent relative to a mean

quit rate of 9 percent in the past year. Most of this effect is due to an increase in the success rate

conditional on attempts rather than to an increase in attempts. We predict that a ban on TV

advertising would lower the quit rate by around 3 percent, while a policy that would not

discourage it would raise the quit rate by slightly more than 10 percent. We find no effects of

exposure to magazine ads on quit behavior. We label the TV findings as tentative because they

pertain to a short period of time (the fourth quarter of 2013 through the fourth quarter of 2015).

Studies that span a longer period of time deserve a high priority on an agenda for future research.


18
  Both policy simulations fix all independent variables other than the TV ads at their values for each individual. In
the first simulation, the value of the ads is set equal to zero for each individual. In the second simulation, the value
of the ads is increased by 11 for each person so that the new mean is equal to 14. Then the new quit rates that result
from these changes are computed and averaged.

                                                          29
Given the short period of time that e-cigarettes have been on the market, the lack of information

on the use of the product in the NCS until the fourth quarter of 2013, and the absence of

comparable sources, this research will require the use of very current data. One advantage of

such research is that it can address the issue of whether e-cigarettes may continue to promote the

continued reduction in adults’ smoking participation possibly because of lagged responses to the

introduction of the product.

         How much of the sharp reduction in adult smoking depicted in Figure 1 can be

“explained” by the increase in e-cigarette advertising? Consider the period from 2010 through

2015. In the former year, the smoking participation rate of adults 18 years of age and older was

19.34 percent. In the latter year, it fell to 15.11 percent or by 4.23 percentage points. If there

were no TV ads during this period, our estimates suggest that smoking participation in 2015

would have been 15.22 percent, which amounts to a difference of 0.11 percentage points

between the predicted and the actual rate in that year. Hence, we account for (0.11/4.23) *100 or

2.6 percent of the observed decline. While the ads explain only a small portion of the trend, they

probably also account for only a small portion of the introduction and rapid diffusion of a new

product. 19


19
  Consider a time series of annual smoking participation rates indexed by t where t = 0 is the base year (2010 in our
case) and t =n in the last year (2015 in our case). Assume that the population is fixed over the six-year time period
and that no one starts or restarts smoking in that period. Then

                               n
                    Sn = S0 ∏ (1 − q t ),
                             t =1
where ∏ is the symbol for multiplication and qt is the annual quit rate qt = (St-1 - St)/St-1. In computing Sn, we
assume that the quit rates in periods 1 and 2 (2011 and 2012) are the ones implied by the data that underlie the lower
portion of Figure 1. That is because there was almost no advertising in those two years. In 2013, 2014, and 2015,
we reduce the quit rates from the actual rates implied by the data to ones that we predict would have been in effect in
each of those three years. That is, we use our estimates only to reduce the quit rate in each year in the NHIS series.
The quit rates in the NCS are higher than those in the NHIS, possibly because the rates in the former are more short
term than those in the latter. Taken by itself, that might cause us to overstate the contribution of the ads because
they may have smaller effects on longer term quit rates. A factor that goes in the opposite direction is that the ads
might have had bigger effects if they mentioned benefits and the use of e-cigarettes as a method to quit smoking.

                                                         30
       Our results and those by Majeed et al. (2017) should give pause to those who advocate a

complete ban on e-cigarette advertising. Majeed and colleagues examine whether the perceived

harm of e-cigarettes among U.S. adults changed between 2012 and 2015. They find that it did.

In 2015 approximately 36 percent of adults perceived that e-cigarettes had the same level of

harm as cigarettes compared to only 12 percent in 2012. Even more striking, there was a four-

fold increase in the number of adults who perceived e-cigarettes to be more harmful than

cigarettes from roughly 1 percent in 2012 to 4 percent in 2015. In light of contradictory evidence

in the medical literature, these trends point to a lack of information about a product that

potentially is harm-reducing.

       Of course, it is far too early for us or other investigators to advocate unrestricted

advertising of e-cigarettes. Medical researchers need to investigate the long-term health

consequences of the use of the product. Economists need to investigate the role of e-cigarettes in

initiation in the use of nicotine by youths. Do youths who otherwise would start to smoke

cigarettes substitute e-cigarettes instead? Or does the availability of a new source of nicotine

attract youths who otherwise would not use the product? And does initiation into the use of

nicotine by both types of youths eventually lead them to start to smoke conventional cigarettes

by means of a “gateway” effect?

       Some of these questions revolve around whether e-cigarettes and combustible cigarettes

are substitutes or complements. Friedman (2015) and Pesko, Hughes, and Faisal (2016) find that

state bans on e-cigarette sales to minors raise smoking rates among youths ages 12-17 in two

different data sets. These studies suggest that the two products are substitutes, but do not use

recent data and do not verify that the use of e-cigarettes was affected in states with higher

minimum purchase age laws. Using a third different data set, Abouk and Adams (2017) report



                                                 31
that state bans on e-cigarette sales to minors actually lower youth smoking participation rates.

They also present suggestive evidence that the bans lower youth e-cigarette participation rates.

These results suggest that the two sources of nicotine are complements, although the findings for

e-cigarettes are based on within-state monthly changes in the laws banning sales in a single year.

These conflicting findings and our remarks above concerning research on quit behavior by adults

and advertising underscore the rich nature of future research by economists on e-cigarettes.




                                                32
                                          References

Abouk, Rahi, and Scott Adams. 2017. “Bans on Electronic-Cigarette Sales to Minors and

       Smoking Among High School Students.” Journal of Health Economics 54(July): 17-24.

Avery, Rosemary, Donald Kenkel, Dean Lillard, and Alan Mathios. 2007. “Private Profits and

       Public Health: Does Advertising Smoking Cessation Products Encourage Smokers to

       Quit?” Journal of Political Economy 115(3): 447-481.

Avery, Rosemary J., Donald Kenkel, Dean R. Lillard, Alan Mathios, and Hua Wang. 2008.

       “Health Disparities and Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Pharmaceutical Products.” In

       Beyond Health Insurance: Public Policies to Improve Health, ed. Lorens Helmchen,

       Robert Kaestner, and Anthony Lo Sasso. Volume 19 of Advances in Health Economics

       and Health Services Research. Bingley, UK: Emerald Publishing Ltd., 71-94.

Avery, Rosemary A., Matthew D. Eisenberg, and Kosali I. Simon. 2012. “The Impact of Direct-

       to-Consumer Television and Magazine Advertising on Antidepressant Use.” Journal of

       Health Economics 31(5): 705-718.

Avery, Rosemary J., John Cawley, Matthew Eisenberg, and Jonathan Cantor. 2013. “The

       Change in Deceptive Advertising of Weight Loss Products after the Federal Trade

       Commission’s 2003 Red Flags Initiative.” Journal of Public Policy and Marketing

       32(1): 129-139.

Barnes, J., C.Y. Dong, H McRobbie, N. Walker, M. Mehta, and L.F. Stead. 2010.

       “Hypnotherapy for Smoking Cessation.” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 10.

       Art. No.: CD001008. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001008.pub2.

Bogart, Leo. 1984. Strategy in Advertising, 2nd Edition. Chicago: Crain Books, Inc.




                                              33
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre Dubé, and Carla F. Mela. 2010. “Do Digital Video Recorders

       Influence Sales?” Journal of Marketing Research 47(6): 998-1010.

Brown, Jamie, Emma Beard, Daniel Kotz, Susan Michie, and Robert West. 2014. “Real‐world

       Effectiveness of E‐cigarettes When Used to Aid Smoking Cessation: A Cross‐sectional

       Population Study. Addiction 109(9): 1531-1540.

Czogala, Jan, Maciej L. Goniewicz, Bartlomiej Fidelus, Wioleta Zielinska-Danch, Mark J.

       Travers, and Andrzej Sobczak. 2014. “Secondhand Exposure to Vapors from Electronic

       Cigarettes.” Nicotine & Tobacco Research 16(6): 655-662.

Dave, Dhaval, and Henry Saffer. 2013. “Demand for Smokeless Tobacco: Role of Magazine

       Advertising.” Journal of Health Economics 32(4): 682-697.

Dave, Dhaval, and Inas Kelly. 2014. “Advertising as a Determinant of Health in the USA.” In

       Encyclopedia of Health Economics, ed. Anthony Culyer. Amsterdam: Elsevier Inc., 32-

       50.

Dubé, Jean-Pierre, Günter J. Hitsch, and Puneet Manchanda. 2005, “An Empirical Model of

       Advertising Dynamics.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 3(2): 107-144.

Duke, Jennifer C., Youn O. Lee, Annice E. Kim, Kimberly A. Watson, Kristin Y. Arnold, James

       M. Nonnemaker, and Lauren Porter. 2014. “Exposure to Electronic Cigarette Television

       Advertisements Among Youth and Young Adults.” Pediatrics 134(1): e29-e36.

Eisenberg, Matthew D., Rosemary Avery, and Jonathan H. Cantor. 2017. “Vitamin Panacea: Is

       Advertising Fueling Demand for Products with Little Scientific Benefits? Journal of

       Health Economics 44(September): 30-44.

Friedman, Abigail S. 2015. “How Does Electronic Cigarette Access Affect Adolescent

       Smoking?” Journal of Health Economics 44(December): 300-308.


                                              34
Gallup Poll. 2017. Tobacco and Smoking. http://news.gallup.com/poll/1717/tobacco-

       smoking.aspx, last accessed December 18, 2017.

Goniewicz, M.L., J. Knysak, M. Gawron, L. Kosmider, A. Sobczak, J. Kurek, A. Prokopowicz,

       M. Jablonska-Czapla, C. Rosik-Dulewska, C. Havel, P. Jacob, 3rd, and N. Benowitz.

       2013. “Levels of Selected Carcinogens and Toxicants in Vapour from Electronic

       Cigarettes.” Tobacco Control 23(2): 133-9.

Hartmann-Boyce J, H. McRobbie, C. Bullen, R. Begh, L. F. Stead, and P. Hajek. 2016.

       “Electronic Cigarettes for Smoking Cessation.” Cochrane Database of Systematic

       Reviews 9. Art. No.: CD010216. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010216.pub3.

Jamal, Ahmed, Brian A. King, Linda J. Neff, Jennifer Whitmill, Stephen D. Babb, and Corinne

       M. Graffunder. 2016. “Current Smoking Among Adults—United States—2005-2015.”

       Mortality and Morbidity Weekly Report 65(44): 1205-1211.

Jolly, David. 2016. “European Court of Justice Upholds Strict Rules on Tobacco.” New York

       Times, May 4:B1.

Kalkhoran, Sara, and Stanton A. Glantz. 2016. “E-cigs and Smoking Cessation in Real-World

       and Clinical Settings: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” The Lancet Respiratory

       Medicine 4(2): 116-128.

Kandra, Kelly L., Leah M. Ranney, Joseph G.L. Lee, and Adam O. Goldstein. 2014.

       “Physicians’ Attitudes and Use of E-Cigarettes as Cessation Devices, North Carolina,

       2013.” PloS one 9(7): e103462.

Kaplan, Sheila. 2017. “F.D.A. Delays Rules That Would Have Limited E-Cigarettes on

       Market.” New York Times, July 28,




                                              35
       https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/28/health/electronic-cigarette-tobacco-nicotine-

       fda.html?_r=0, last accessed November 27, 2017.

Kenkel, Donald, Alan Mathios, and Hua Wang. Forthcoming. “Advertising and Health: A Case

       Study of Menthol Cigarette Advertising and Cigarette Demand.” American Journal of

       Health Economics.

Kim, Annice E., Kristin Y. Arnold, and Olga Makarenko. 2014. “E-cigarette Advertising

       Expenditures in the U.S., 2011-2012.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 46(4):

       409-412.

Kim, Annice E., Youn Ok Lee, Paul Shafer, James Nonnemaker, and Olga Makarenko. 2015.

       “Adult Smokers’ Receptivity to a Television Advert for Electronic Nicotine Delivery

       Systems.” Tobacco Control 24(2): 132-135.

Leone, Robert P. 1995. “Generalizing What is Known about Temporal Aggregation and

       Advertising Carryover.” Marketing Science 14(3): 141-150.

Majeed, Ban A., Scott R. Weaver, Kyle R. Gregory, Carrie F. Whitney, Paul Slovic, Terry F.

       Pechacek, and Michael P. Eriksen. 2017. “Changing Perceptions of Harm of E-

       Cigarettes Among U.S. Adults, 2011-2015.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine

       52(3): 331–338.

Markus, Ruth. 2014. “The E-Cigarette Quandary: Helping Smokers Quit While Enticing New

       Addicts.” The Washington Post September 5,

       http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/ruth-marcus-the-e-cigarette-quandary-helping-

       smokers-quit-while-enticing-new-addictsthe-e-cigarette-dilemma/2014/09/05/95ccd876-

       3538-11e4-a723-fa3895a25d02_story.html, last accessed June 19, 2017.




                                             36
McMillen, Robert C., Mark A. Gottlieb, Regina M. Whitmore Shaefer, Jonathan P. Winickoff,

       and Jonathan D. Klein. 2015. “Trends in Electronic Cigarette Use Among U.S. Adults:

       Use is Increasing in Both Smokers and Nonsmokers.” Nicotine and Tobacco Research

       17(10): 1195-1202.

Mickle, Tripp. 2015. “E-Cigarette Sales Rapidly Lose Steam: Customer Dissatisfaction,

       Inventory Backlogs, State Laws, and Safety Issues are Curbing Revenue Growth.” Wall

       Street Journal November 18, retrieved from

       http://search.proquest.com/docview/17336925524?accountid=35174, July 5, 2016.

Molloy, Eamon. 2016. “This Ad is for You: Targeting and the Effect of Alcohol Advertising on

       Youth Drinking.” Health Economics 25(2): 148-164.

National Adult Tobacco Survey. 2014.

       https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/surveys/nats/index.htm, last accessed

       November 10, 2017. See site for historical data.

National Youth Tobacco Survey. 2015.

       https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/surveys/nyts/index.htm, last accessed

       November 10, 2017. See site for historical data.

National Health Interview Survey. 2015.

       https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/nhis_2015_data_release.htm, last accessed, November 10,

       2017. See site for historical data.

Nielsen. 2014. “The Total Audience Report.” The Total Audience Series Q3.

O’Connor, Richard, Matthew C. Rousu, Maansi Bansal-Travers, Lisa Vogl, and Jay R. Corrigan.

       2017. “Using Experimental Auctions to Examine Demand for E-Cigarettes.” Nicotine &

       Tobacco Research 19(6): 767-772



                                              37
Pesko, Michael F., Jenna M. Hughes, and Fatima S. Faisal. 2016. “The Influence of Electronic

       Cigarette Age Purchasing Restrictions on Adolescent Tobacco and Marijuana Use.”

       Preventive Medicine 87(June): 207-212.

Richtel, Matt. 2014. “E-cigarettes, By Other Names, Lure Young and Worry Experts.” The

       New York Times March 23: B1, B4.

Rousu, Matthew C., Richard O’Connor, and Jay Corrigan. 2017. “Effect of Brand and

       Advertising Medium on Demand for E-Cigarettes: Evidence from an Experimental

       Auction.” Preventive Medicine Reports 7(April): 11-15.

Royal College of Physicians. 2016. Nicotine without Smoke: Tobacco Harm Reduction.

       London: Royal College of Physicians.

Stead, L.F., R. Perera, C Bullen, D Mant, J Hartmann-Boyce, K. Cahill, and T. Lancaster. 2012.

       “Nicotine Replacement Therapy for Smoking Cessation.” Cochrane Database of

       Systematic Reviews 11. Art. No.: CD000146. DOI: 10.1002/14651858. CD000146.pub4.

Substance Use and Mental Health Services Administration. 2014. “Results from the 2014

       National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables.”

       https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-DetTabs2014/NSDUH-

       DetTabs2014.pdf, last accessed, December 18, 2017.

Tuchman, Anna E. 2017. “Advertising and Demand for Addictive Goods: The Effects of E-

       Cigarette Advertising.” Working Paper, Northwestern University Kellogg School of

       Management (October).

TVNZ/Colmar Brunton. 2013. “Choice Means More Ways to View TV, Not Less Ways to

       Watch Advertising.” http://spot.nl/docs/default-source/onderzoeken-

       /tvnzbiz_one_powerpoint_v4.pdf?sfvrsn=2, last accessed 12/14/2017.



                                              38
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2016a. “Deeming Tobacco Products To Be Subject to the

       Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as Amended by the Family Smoking Prevention

       and Tobacco Control Act; Restrictions on the Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products

       and Required Warning Statements for Tobacco Products; Final Rule. Federal Registrar

       May 10.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2016b. “FDA Warns of Health Risks Posed by E-

       Cigarettes.” https://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm173401.htm, last

       accessed June 19, 2017.

U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse. 2016. “Electronic Cigarettes.” Drug Facts.

       https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/electronic-cigarettes-e-cigarettes, last

       accessed June 19, 2017.

U.S. Surgeon General. 2014. The Health Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress.

       Rockville, MD: Office of the Surgeon General, Public Health Service, US Department of

       Health and Human Services

U.S. Surgeon General. 2016 . E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the

       Surgeon General. Rockville, MD: Office of the Surgeon General, Public Health Service,

       US Department of Health and Human Services.

White, A.R., H Rampes, J.P. Liu, L. F. Stead, and J. Campbell. 2014. “Acupuncture and

       Related Interventions for Smoking Cessation.” Cochrane Database of Systematic

       Reviews 1. Art. No.: CD000009. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000009. pub4.

Zheng, Yuqing, Chen Zhen, James M. Nonnemaker, and Daniel Dench. 2016. “Advertising,

       Habit Formation, and U.S. Product Demand.” American Journal of Agricultural

       Economics 98(4): 1038-1054.



                                               39
Zheng, Yuqing, Chen Zhen, Daniel Dench, and James M. Nonnemaker. 2017. “U.S. Demand

      for Tobacco Products in a System Framework.” Health Economics 26(8): 1067-1086.

Zhu, Shu-Hong Yue-Lin Zhuang, Shiushing Wong, Sharon E Cummins, and Gary J Todeschini.

      2017. “E-cigarette Use and Associated Changes in Population Smoking Cessation:

      Evidence from US Current Population Surveys. British Medical Journal 358(j3262): 1-7.


Zhuang, Yue-Lin, Sharon E. Cummins, Jessica Y. Sun, and Shu-Hong Zhu. 2016. “Long-term

      E-cigarette Use and Smoking Cessation: A Longitudinal Study with US Population.”

      Tobacco Control 25(Suppl. 1): i90-i95.




                                               40
                                                         Figure 1
                    E-Cigarette1             and Traditional Cigarette Use2 Trends, Adults


                                                            E-cigarette
              16%

              14%

              12%

              10%

               8%                                                                                             6.9%

               6%

               4%

               2%
                       0.3%
               0%
                            2010                    2011            2012            2013               2014

                                   Overall          18-24      25-34       35-44          45-54     55+




                                                      Traditional Cigarettes
              30%


              25%


              20%
                     20.9%                                                                                      15.1%

              15%


              10%


               5%


               0%
                     2005     2006           2007    2008   2009    2010   2011    2012      2013   2014      2015

                                   Overall          18-24      25-34       35-44          45-54     55+



1
  Source: National Adult Tobacco Survey (2012-2014); McMillen et al. (2015) for 2010 and 2011. Figures for
          overall population comparable from both sources for 2012-2013
2
  Source: National Health Interview Survey (2005-2015)



                                                                   41
                                                          Figure 2
                                  E-Cigarette and Traditional Cigarette Use Trends, Youths 1


                                  14%   13.2%

                                  12%                                                                     11.3%

                                  10%
                  Percent users




                                  8%
                                                                                                          6.1%
                                  6%


                                  4%


                                  2%                                        1.0%

                                  0%
                                        2006    2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012     2013   2014   2015

                                                         "Cigarette Use"       "E-cig Use


1
    Source: National Youth Tobacco Survey (2006-2015)




                                                                     42
                                              Figure 3
                       E-Cigarette Magazine and Television Advertising Trends1



                                                   Magazine Advertising
             40                                                                                                                                 250

             35
                                                                                                                                                200
             30

             25                                                                                                                                 150
             20

             15                                                                                                                                 100

             10
                                                                                                                                                50
              5

              0                                                                                                                                 0
                  1   2   3    4   1      2        3       4       1       2       3       4       1       2        3       4   1   2   3   4
                       2012                  2013                          2014                            2015                     2016

                                             Mag Ad Spending ($ millions)                                          Ad Pages


                                                           TV Advertising
             10                                                                                                                             500,000
              9                                                                                                                             450,000
              8                                                                                                                             400,000
              7                                                                                                                             350,000
              6                                                                                                                             300,000
              5                                                                                                                             250,000
              4                                                                                                                             200,000
              3                                                                                                                             150,000
              2                                                                                                                             100,000
              1                                                                                                                             50,000
              0                                                                                                                             0
                  1   2   3   4    1     2     3       4       1       2       3       4       1       2       3        4   1   2   3   4
                      2012               2013                          2014                            2015                     2016

                                       TV Ad Spending ($ millions)                                     TV ads Length (Secs)



1
    Source: Kantar Media, purchased from the source



                                                                               43
Table 1: Definitions and Means of Key Outcomes1
Panel A: Basic Outcomes
Variable                    Definition                                       Mean
 Attempt Rate:              a = A/N                                          37.0%
 Quit Rate                  q = Q/N                                          9.0%
 Failure Rate:              f = F/N                                          28.0%
 Success Rate               π = Q/A = q/a                                    24.3%

Panel B, Percentage Distribution of Attempts by Method and Success Rates by Method
Method                       Percentage of Attempts     Success Rate
 E-cigs only                 24.1%                      28.9%
 NRT only                    18.2%                      27.4%
 Cold Turkey                 17.8%                      31.2%
      2
 Other                       40.0%                      17.1%
1
  Sample (N = 8,291) consists of quitters in past year (Q), failures in past year (F), and non-attempters in past
year (D). N = Q + F + D, A = Q + F, a = q + f, current smokers = F + D.
2
  Includes gradual reduction only and mixed methods.




                                                          44
Table 2: Means of Independent variables by quitting, failing to quit, and not trying
Variable/Outcome               Quitters (Q)       Failures (F)     Non-Attempters (D)
Gender
 Male                            55.2%               41.8%                51.0%
 Female                          44.8%               58.2%                49.0%
Education
 Less than HS                    12.2%               17.9%                22.2%
 HS                              30.4%               34.4%                36.6%
 Some College                    34.9%               33.4%                28.2%
 College or more                 22.5%               14.3%                13.0%
Insurance Status
 Private or Medicare              69.3                58.8                 50.9
 Medicaid                          8.6                15.1                 11.6
 No Insurance                     22.1                26.1                 37.5
Age
 18-24                            9.2%                7.9%                 8.7%
 25-34                           18.9%               15.5%                17.0%
 35-44                           18.5%               17.2%                18.3%
 45-54                           20.2%               22.4%                23.8%
 55-64                           17.0%               23.0%                20.2%
 65+                             16.2%               13.9%                12.1%
Income
 <$15k                            7.6%               15.0%                13.7%
 15k-34.99k                      13.7%               18.5%                19.5%
 35k-49.99k                      13.3%               14.8%                15.8%
 50k-99k                         34.7%               30.6%                31.4%
 100k+                           30.8%               21.1%                19.6%
Race
 White or other races            73.8%               65.0%                60.8%
 Black                            6.5%               11.4%                10.3%
 Hispanic                        19.7%               23.6%                28.9%
Marital Status
 Married                          51.9                44.7                 44.0
 Divorced or separated            18.5                21.0                 21.1
 Widow                             3.5                 6.9                  5.0
 Single                           26.1                27.5                 30.0
Employment Status
 Employed Full-time               51.0                42.9                 45.3
 Employed part-time               10.8                10.5                 12.0
 Retired                          15.5                14.7                 13.1
 Unemployed                        6.8                 9.6                 11.2
 Disabled                          7.9                14.3                 10.9

                                         45
 Student                1.7          1.5     1.2
 Homemaker              6.2          6.5     6.3
E-cig TV Ad Exposure    4.5          3.7     2.9
NRT TV Ad Exposure     16.5         17.9    14.1
Magazine Ad Exposure    3.8          4.8     3.3
N                      747         2,324   5,220




                              46
Table 3: Means of Demographics by Advertising Exposure
  Panel A: Means by E-cigarette TV Advertising Exposure
                         No Advertising    Less than Median1 Greater than Median1
Variable
                           Exposure       Advertising Exposure Advertising Exposure
Gender
 Male                           48.7%           49.3%                48.6%
 Female                         51.3%           50.7%                51.4%
Education
 Less than HS                   21.1%           16.3%                17.4%
 HS                             35.1%           36.4%                36.6%
 Some College                   29.6%           31.7%                33.5%
 College or more                14.2%           15.6%                12.6%
Insurance Status
 Private or Medicare            53.9%           56.4%                59.3%
 Medicaid                       11.9%           13.0%                14.3%
 No Insurance                   34.2%           30.7%                26.4%
Age
 18-24                           8.7%            6.3%                 9.6%
 25-34                          16.5%           16.4%                18.3%
 35-44                          17.7%           17.6%                20.3%
 45-54                          22.9%           24.8%                22.6%
 55-64                          20.8%           20.7%                20.0%
 65+                            13.3%           14.2%                 9.2%
Income
 <$15k                          13.7%           12.8%                13.0%
 15k-34.99k                     19.3%           16.8%                16.4%
 35k-49.99k                     15.2%           16.9%                13.9%
 50k-99k                        31.0%           31.6%                34.0%
 100k+                          20.7%           21.8%                22.7%
Race
 White or other races           62.6%           64.6%                65.5%
 Black                           9.6%           12.6%                12.2%
 Hispanic                       27.8%           22.7%                22.3%
Marital Status
 Married                        45.3%           46.1%                41.2%
 Divorced or Separated          21.1%           19.7%                19.9%
 Widow                           5.4%            5.5%                 5.1%
 Single                         28.2%           28.8%                33.9%
Employment Status
  Employed Full-time            45.3%           42.4%                46.4%
  Employed Part-time            11.6%           10.9%                11.0%
  Retired                       14.2%           14.8%                10.3%
  Unemployed                    10.0%           12.1%                10.6%
  Disabled                      11.1%           12.3%                14.2%

                                          47
    Student                                1.3%                  1.1%       1.6%
    Homemaker                              6.4%                  6.3%       5.9%
1
 The median is defined for those that have been exposed to at least 1 ad.




                                                       48
Table 3: Means of Demographics by Advertising Exposure
Panel B: Means by E-cigarette Magazine Advertising Exposure
                         No Advertising    Less than Median1 Greater than Median1
Variable
                           Exposure       Advertising Exposure Advertising Exposure
Gender
 Male                           51.4%           47.8%                43.0%
 Female                         48.6%           52.2%                57.0%
Education
 Less than HS                   22.6%           17.3%                16.4%
 HS                             37.3%           33.2%                32.7%
 Some College                   27.4%           31.9%                36.1%
 College or more                12.7%           17.6%                14.8%
Insurance Status
 Private or Medicare            53.3%           59.5%                54.5%
 Medicaid                       12.4%           11.3%                13.1%
 No Insurance                   34.4%           29.3%                32.4%
Age
 18-24                           8.2%            7.9%                 9.8%
 25-34                          16.4%           15.0%                19.1%
 35-44                          17.8%           16.4%                19.9%
 45-54                          23.4%           22.6%                22.8%
 55-64                          20.7%           22.5%                19.1%
 65+                            13.5%           15.7%                 9.3%
Income
 <$15k                          13.9%           11.9%                14.0%
 15k-34.99k                     19.4%           17.5%                18.1%
 35k-49.99k                     15.3%           15.6%                15.1%
 50k-99k                        31.3%           33.0%                30.4%
 100k+                          20.1%           22.0%                22.5%
Race
 White or other races           63.2%           65.2%                61.3%
 Black                           9.8%           10.2%                11.6%
 Hispanic                       27.0%           24.6%                27.2%
Marital Status
 Married                        47.0%           45.5%                39.1%
 Divorced or Separated          20.2%           21.1%                22.1%
 Widow                           5.4%            5.2%                 5.5%
 Single                         27.5%           28.2%                33.2%
Employment Status
  Employed Full-time            45.4%           44.7%                44.9%
  Employed Part-time            11.4%           10.4%                12.4%
  Retired                       14.3%           17.0%                 9.7%
  Unemployed                    10.1%            9.6%                11.6%


                                                 49
    Disabled                             11.6%                 11.3%       11.9%
    Student                               1.1%                  1.5%        1.8%
    Homemaker                             6.1%                  5.4%        7.7%
The median is defined for those that have been exposed to at least 1 ad.
1




                                                                 50
Table 4: Multinomial Logit Model, Marginal Effects [S.E.]1
Independent Variable
                                (1)           (2)             (3)                                   (4)                (5)
  Outcome
E-cig TV Ads
                              0.0005        0.0006          0.0007                               0.0008             0.0009
  Q
                            [0.0003]**   [0.0003]**      [0.0003]***                          [0.0003]***        [0.0003]***
                              0.0000        0.0000          0.0000                               0.0000             -0.0002
  F
                             [0.0005]      [0.0005]        [0.0005]                             [0.0005]           [0.0006]
    A                                   0.0006             0.0006             0.0006             0.0008              0.0007
                                       [0.0005]           [0.0005]           [0.0005]           [0.0005]            [0.0006]
Magazine Ads

    Q                                   0.0002             0.0002             0.0003             -0.0005             -0.0009
                                       [0.0003]           [0.0003]           [0.0003]           [0.0005]            [0.0006]
    F                                   0.0023             0.0024             0.0020             0.0001              0.0010
                                     [0.0005]***        [0.0005]***        [0.0005]***          [0.0008]            [0.0008]
    A                                   0.0025             0.0026             0.0023             -0.0004             0.0001
                                     [0.0005]***        [0.0006]***        [0.0005]***          [0.0008]            [0.0009]
Year-qtr. fixed effects, and
                                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
demographic controls
DMA fixed effects                          No                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Time slot fixed effects                    No                No                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Channel and Magazine
                                           No                 No                 No                Yes                Yes
fixed effects
Program fixed effects                      No                 No                 No                 No                Yes
1
  Each column represents a separate multinomial logit model with the three outcomes being successful quits (Q), failures (F),
and non-attempters (D), the latter being the reference category. Marginal effects are reported, with standard errors clustered at
the household level in brackets. Instead of reporting the marginal effect on D (non-attempters), we report the marginal effect of
the regressor on A (attempts) since this is just the negative of the marginal effect of the regressor on D, and thus the sum of
marginal effects of the regressor on Q and F. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                               51
Table 5: LPM of Successful Quitting Given Attempting, Marginal Effects of TV Ads [S.E.]1
Independent Variable
                                                      (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)                                           (5)
  Sub-population
E-cig TV Ads
                                                    0.0015        0.0014      0.0015        0.0019                                       0.0018
  All Attempters
                                                 [0.0008]*     [0.0008]* [0.0008]**      [0.0008]**                                     [0.0009]*
                                                    0.0025        0.0034      0.0044        0.0062                                           2
  E-cig Only Attempters
                                                  [0.0017]     [0.0019]* [0.0019]**      [0.0025]**
                                                    0.0021        0.0022      0.0028        0.0031                                           2
  NRT Only Attempters
                                                   [0.015]      [0.0017]    [0.0014]*     [0.0021]
                                                   -0.0017       -0.0015      -0.0020      -0.0000                                           2
  Cold Turkey Attempters
                                                  [0.0015]      [0.0016]     [0.0018]     [0.0033]
                                                    0.0010        0.0007      0.0005        0.0003                                           2
  Other Method Attempters
                                                  [0.0012]      [0.0013]     [0.0014]     [0.0013]
Year-qtr fixed effects, and demographic controls     Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes                                           Yes
DMA fixed effects                                     No           Yes          Yes          Yes                                           Yes
Time slot fixed effects                               No            No          Yes          Yes                                           Yes
Channel and Magazine fixed effects                    No            No          No           Yes                                           Yes
Program fixed effects                                 No            No          No            No                                           Yes
1
  Each cell represent a separate linear probability model on successfully quitting smoking. Samples are restricted to those who attempted smoking
cessation (when considering overall quit probability) and to those who attempted smoking cessation with a specific method (when considering
method-specific success). Standard errors clustered at the household level are reported in brackets. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
2
  Models did not converge because of insufficient sample size
3
  N=3,076 for All attempters, N=740 for E-cig Only, N=561 for NRT Only, N=546 for Cold Turkey Only, N=1,229 for Other Method.




                                                                         52
                                                           Appendix

Table A1: Multinomial Logit Model, Marginal Effects (w/o NRT) [S.E.]1
Independent Variable
                                (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)                                            (5)
  Outcome
E-cig TV Ads
                              0.0005        0.0005          0.0006       0.0007                                         0.0008
  Q
                            [0.0002]**   [0.0002]**      [0.0002]*** [0.0003]***                                     [0.0003]**
                              0.0005        0.0005          0.0001      -0.0001                                        -0.0001
  F
                             [0.0004]      [0.0004]        [0.0004]    [0.0004]                                       [0.0005]
    A                                    0.0010             0.0010              0.0007              0.0006             0.0006
                                       [0.0004]**         [0.0004]**           [0.0004]            [0.0005]           [0.0005]
Magazine Ads

    Q                                    0.0002              0.0002             0.0002              -0.0005             -0.0010
                                        [0.0003]            [0.0003]           [0.0003]            [0.0005]           [0.0006]*
    F                                    0.0024              0.0025             0.0020               0.0001              0.0007
                                      [0.0005]***         [0.0005]***        [0.0005]***           [0.0008]            [0.0009]
    A                                    0.0026              0.0026             0.0023              -0.0004             -0.0003
                                      [0.0005]***         [0.0005]***        [0.0005]***           [0.0009]            [0.0009]
Year-qtr. fixed effects, and
                                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
demographic controls
DMA fixed effects                           No                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
Time slot fixed effects                     No                 No                 Yes                 Yes                Yes
Channel and Magazine
                                            No                 No                  No                 Yes                Yes
fixed effects
Program fixed effects                       No                 No                  No                 No                 Yes
1
  Each column represents a separate multinomial logit model with the three outcomes being successful quits (Q), failures (F), and
non-attempters (D), the latter being the reference category. Marginal effects are reported, with standard errors clustered at the
household level in brackets. Instead of reporting the marginal effect on D (non-attempters), we report the marginal effect of the
regressor on A (attempts) since this is just the negative of the marginal effect of the regressor on D, and thus the sum of marginal
effects of the regressor on Q and F. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.



                                                                53
Table A2: LPM of Successful Quitting Given Attempting, Marginal Effects of TV Ads (w/o NRT) [S.E.]1
Independent Variable
                                                     (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)                                            (5)
  Sub-population
E-cig TV Ads
                                                   0.0008        0.0008      0.0013        0.0017                                        0.0019
  All Attempters
                                                 [0.0006]      [0.0007] [0.0007]**      [0.0007]**                                    [0.0008]***
                                                   0.0024        0.0033      0.0045        0.0065                                            2
  E-cig Only Attempters
                                                 [0.0016]     [0.0017]* [0.0018]**      [0.0025]**
                                                   0.0013        0.0016      0.0022        0.0025                                            2
  NRT Only Attempters
                                                  [0.010]      [0.0011] [0.0010]**       [0.0018]
                                                  -0.0017       -0.0018      -0.0026      -0.0000                                            2
  Cold Turkey Attempters
                                                 [0.0014]      [0.0015]     [0.0018]     [0.0031]
                                                   0.0002        0.0001      0.0006        0.0008                                            2
  Other Method Attempters
                                                 [0.0010]      [0.0011]     [0.0012]     [0.0012]
Year-qtr fixed effects, and demographic controls    Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes                                            Yes
DMA fixed effects                                    No           Yes          Yes          Yes                                            Yes
Time slot fixed effects                              No            No          Yes          Yes                                            Yes
Channel and Magazine fixed effects                   No            No          No           Yes                                            Yes
Program fixed effects                                No            No          No            No                                            Yes
1
  Each cell represent a separate linear probability model on successfully quitting smoking. Samples are restricted to those who attempted smoking
cessation (when considering overall quit probability) and to those who attempted smoking cessation with a specific method (when considering
method-specific success). Standard errors clustered at the household level are reported in brackets. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
2
  Models did not converge because of insufficient sample size
3
  N=3,076 for All attempters, N=740 for E-cig Only, N=561 for NRT Only, N=546 for Cold Turkey Only, N=1,229 for Other Method.




                                                                         54
Table A3: Multinomial Logit Model by Age Group, Marginal Effects (w/ NRT) [S.E.]1
Independent Variable
                               (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
  Outcome
                                   Panel A 18-34
E-cig TV Ads

                                        0.0008             0.0009               0.0012             0.0016
    Q
                                      [0.0004]**         [0.0005]**         [0.0004]***        [0.0005]***
                                        0.0000             0.0000              -0.0003            -0.0004
    F
                                       [0.0008]           [0.0006]            [0.0008]           [0.0009]
    A                                    0.0008              0.0009            0.0009             0.0010
                                        [0.0009]            [0.0007]          [0.0009]           [0.0010]

                                              Panel B Ages 35+
E-cig TV Ads

    Q                                    0.0003              0.0003            0.0005             0.0007
                                        [0.0004]            [0.0004]          [0.0003]          [0.0003]**
    F                                    0.0000              0.0001            0.0001             0.0006
                                        [0.0006]            [0.0007]          [0.0007]           [0.0007]
    A                                    0.0004              0.0003            0.0005             0.0013
                                        [0.0006]            [0.0007]          [0.0008]           [0.0008]
Year-qtr. fixed effects, and
                                          Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
demographic controls
DMA fixed effects                          No                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Time slot fixed effects                    No                 No                 Yes                Yes
Channel and Magazine
                                           No                 No                 No                 Yes
fixed effects
Program fixed effects                      No                 No                 No                 No
1
   Each column represents a separate multinomial logit model with the three outcomes being successful quits (Q),
failures (F), and non-attempters (D), the latter being the reference category. Marginal effects are reported, with
standard errors in brackets. Instead of reporting the marginal effect on D (non-attempters), we report the
marginal effect of the regressor on A (attempts) since this is just the negative of the marginal effect of the
regressor on D, and thus the sum of marginal effects of the regressor on Q and F. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
2
  Sample size of 18-34 sample is 3,587 and for 35+ is 4,704.




                                                       55
