                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE RIGHT TYPE OF LEGISLATOR:
                   A THEORY OF TAXATION AND REPRESENTATION

                                       Andrea Mattozzi
                                       Erik Snowberg

                                      Working Paper 24279
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24279


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2018




Snowberg gratefully acknowledges the support of NSF SES-1156154. We thank Ethan Bueno de
Mesquita, Josh Clinton, Stephen Coate, Daniel Diermeier, Tim Feddersen, Patrick Francois, Sean
Gailmard, Andrea Galeotti, Alex Hirsch, Morgan Kousser, Kai Konrad, Jenny Mansbridge,
Gerard Padr\'o i Miquel, Pablo Montagnes, Salvatore Nunnari, Giacomo Ponzetto, Debraj Ray,
Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Allistair Smith, Ken Shotts, Jim Snyder, Francesco Trebbi, Leeat Yariv,
and seminar audiences at the Priorat Workshop, the Rotterdam Workshop in Political Economy,
WZB Berlin, the Chicago Workshop on Institutional Design, the CIRPEE Political Economy
conference, the Collegio Carlo Alberto, MPSA, Caltech, the University of Miami, IPEG, MEDS,
George Mason, Georgetown, UBC, and UCB for useful conversations, comments, and
encouragement. We also thank the Casa del Popolo di Fiesole for their hospitality, although it
may have been reduced had they known what we were writing. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Andrea Mattozzi and Erik Snowberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Right Type of Legislator: A Theory of Taxation and Representation
Andrea Mattozzi and Erik Snowberg
NBER Working Paper No. 24279
February 2018
JEL No. D72,D78,H10,H23

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a theory of taxation and the distribution of government spending in a citizen-
candidate model of legislatures. Individuals are heterogeneous in two dimensions: productive
ability in the private sector and negotiating ability in politics. When these are positively
correlated, rich voters always prefer a rich legislator, but poor voters face a trade-off. A rich
legislator will secure more pork for the district, but will also prefer lower taxation than the poor
voter. Our theory organizes a number of stylized facts across countries about taxation and
redistribution, parties, and class representation in legislatures. We demonstrate that spending does
not necessarily increase when the number of legislators increases, as the standard common-pool
intuition suggests, and that many policies aimed at increasing descriptive representation may have
the opposite effect.


Andrea Mattozzi
European University Institute
Department of Economics
Villa La Fonte
Via delle Fontanelle 18
50014 San Domenico di Fiesole
Italy
Andrea.Mattozzi@EUI.eu

Erik Snowberg
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences
MC 228-77
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
snowberg@caltech.edu
1         Introduction

The determination of economic policies, such as tax regimes, is of central importance to
economic inquiry. In seminal models of distributive politics, legislators are viewed as inde-
pendent actors mainly interested in directing public funds to their district at the expense
of the general population (Tullock, 1959; Weingast, 1979; Weingast, Shepsle and Johnsen,
1981). Legislators’ desire to bring “pork” to their districts results in a common pool problem,
leading to higher spending, and thus, taxation. This mechanism is a fundamental compo-
nent of the way the existing theoretical literature has modeled fiscal policy outcomes in
representative democracies.
        The main drawback of this approach is that it is at odds with what is seen across de-
veloped countries. In particular, the U.S. has relatively low taxes even though successfully
delivering pork is an important part of a legislator’s job. In contrast, European countries,
such as the U.K., Italy, or Germany, have higher taxes despite the fact that legislators largely
do not compete for pork.1 Further, the literature investigating the empirical relation between
the severity of the common pool problem (measured by the size of the legislature) and the
size of government is inconclusive, with a number of papers finding a negative relationship.2
        In this paper, we reconcile the common pool logic with the above stylized facts, and
generate a number of additional testable predictions. We do so by introducing the abilities
and personal preferences of legislators into the model. Specifically, we combine workhorse
models with a simple assumption: individuals who are more successful in the private sector
will tend to be more successful, as legislators, at directing resources back to their district.
This assumption can be summarized simply as: whatever gets one ahead in the private
    1
       U.S. taxes at all levels of government equaled 26% of GDP in 2015. This number is well below the 36%
for the U.K., 37% for Germany, and 43% for Italy. See, for example, taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/how-
do-us-taxes-compare-internationally. Hix and Noury (2016) analyzes roll-call voting data from 16 legislatures
and shows that voting behavior follows government-opposition interests, rather than individual members’
or parties’ policy positions, and concludes that “voting in most legislatures is more like Westminster than
Washington.” As there is little competition for pork in the U.K., this suggests very little competition for
pork in European legislatures.
    2
      For a review of the theoretical and empirical literature on the so-called “Law of 1/n” see Primo and
Snyder (2008). Pettersson-Lidbom (2012) is one of the cleanest tests, and finds a negative relationship
between spending and the number of legislators.


                                                                                                           1
sector—for example, connections, hard work, charisma—is also useful, on average, in nego-
tiating resources for one’s district. We refer to these skills, as a group, as negotiating skills.
This is in contrast to recent work—reviewed in Section 1.2—that has largely abandoned the
common pool mechanism, and instead argues that cross-countries differences in tax regimes
are the result of differences in the political system, the electoral rule, or culture.
       Our results are useful for organizing a number of stylized facts about differences in tax-
ation, redistribution, and representation across developed countries. Our model and as-
sumption together imply that the rich will be overrepresented in all legislatures. It further
suggests that the U.S. will have wealthier legislators, lower taxes, and parties that are less
differentiated on the size of government than Western European countries. Moreover, our
findings are consistent with the fact that, in the U.S., individual legislators will be popular
in their districts, while the legislature itself is quite unpopular. Additionally, our model can
be used to derive implications about descriptive representation, in particular, that women
will be more under-represented in the U.S. than in Western Europe.


1.1       Theoretical Argument

Before delineating the specifics of our model, it is worth discussing, in broad conceptual
terms, how our central assumption leads to the predictions above. In contrast with standard
models, which assume every legislator has equal ability to bring pork back to his district, we
allow for heterogeneity in that skill.3 This may create a trade-off for voters: they may prefer
someone they think is more able to bring pork to their district over someone who perfectly
shares their preferences. If these abilities are correlated with particular preferences, this
will naturally lead to over-representation of these preferences in the legislature and policy.
The specific assumption we consider seems quite natural: the ability to generate private
sector value (income) and public sector value (pork) are correlated, and thus also correlated
with preferences for low taxes (to protect their high incomes). This will lead to an over-
   3
    We follow the principal-agent literature in referring to legislators (agents) using masculine pronouns,
and citizens (principals)—especially the median voter of a district—using feminine pronouns.



                                                                                                         2
representation of low-tax preferences in legislatures, even if the correlation in abilities is
imperfect (Section 4.1), or if the correlation does not actually exist, but voters perceive that
it does (Section 5.1).
       Our instantiation of the above logic allows for redistribution both between the rich and
the poor, and between legislative districts. Citizen voting follows standard median-voter
logic (Downs, 1957; Hotelling, 1929; Meltzer and Richard, 1981). Once elected, legislators
participate in a two-stage budgeting process where they first vote on taxes using majority
rule, and then negotiate over the distribution of the budget (Chari, Jones and Marimon, 1997;
Persson, Roland and Tabellini, 1997). Because we assume legislators are citizen candidates,
their actions in office follow their own preferences.4 Citizens are one of two types: rich or
poor. Our central assumption is that the rich have relatively high negotiating skills, and the
poor have relatively low negotiating skills.
       The main tradeoff that our model highlights is simple and robust: a district’s legislator,
as one of many in the legislature, has little impact on broad policies, such as the tax rate,
but a relatively large impact on the transfers that the district receives. Knowing this, even
the median voter of a poor district will ignore a candidate’s preferences over redistribution
and focus on his negotiating skills, that is, a rich candidate’s superior ability to direct
transfers to his district. A more subtle intuition comes from seeing the game that voters
play as a prisoner’s dilemma: all poor voters voting for poor legislators would make all poor
voters better off. However, it is strictly dominant for an individual poor voter to choose a
successful—that is, rich—legislator.
       This model yields a striking result: when securing resources for one’s district is im-
portant, then, in equilibrium, every district votes for candidates who are successful in the
private sector—that is, rich. This occurs even though those candidates prefer lower taxes—
which they actualize—than voters, and despite the fact that everyone elects equally effective
   4
     This is implicit in the citizen-candidate framework of Osborne and Slivinski (1996) and Besley and
Coate (1997), and can be relaxed. See Sections 4.3, 4.1, and 7. This is consistent with the selection model of
Miller and Stokes (1963), especially as elucidated by Mansbridge (2009). A focus on candidate preferences
is rationalizable: Fearon (1999) finds that voters are better off using elections to select types, rather than
disciplining incumbents.



                                                                                                            3
negotiators, so the spending in all districts is equal.
   The equilibrium exhibits three patterns of representation. When ability to direct funds
to a legislator’s own district does not matter at all—say through budgeting procedures
that make it impossible to target funding—then every district elects a legislator who is
the same type as its median voter, and the tax rate is effectively set by the median voter
of the median district. We call this a representative equilibrium. If, instead, ability to
direct funds matters just a little, many districts with poor median voters will elect rich
legislators. However, poor legislators will still form a minimal winning coalition in the
legislature. Those that vote for rich legislators will know, in equilibrium, that they will
not cause the legislature to tip to a rich majority, and hence will choose a rich legislator
for his superior negotiating abilities. The legislative majority, composed of poor legislators,
knows that rich legislators will get more than an equal share of tax revenues, and will shade
down the tax rate to reduce the expropriation from their districts. We call such equilibria
somewhat representative. Finally, when the ability to direct funds to a legislator’s own
district is important, then the unique equilibrium will be for every district to elect a rich
legislator. This unrepresentative equilibrium occurs due to the logic laid out above.


1.2    Literature

A large literature argues that tax regimes are largely explained by voting systems and rules, in
particular by differences between plurality rule and proportional representation (see Persson
and Tabellini, 2000, for a review). While these explanations capture important aspects of
variation in tax regimes for countries with markedly different rules, they are less compelling
for countries that are relatively more similar, such as the U.S. and U.K., which both elect
legislators through plurality rule. We instead focus on how differences in opportunities for
distributional spending affects the preferences of those elected, and thus, policy. Our paper
contributes to a literature examining heterogeneity in political skills and its potential effect on
redistributive policies. Following Stokes’s (1963) influential critique of the Downsian model,
this literature tries to understand the causes and consequences the “ability” of politicians.

                                                                                                 4
Theory papers in this tradition tend to assume that the ability of a politician is a draw from
a distribution (for example, Groseclose, 2001), while empirical papers consider education
or prior income as markers of quality (for example, Gagliarducci and Nannicini, 2013).5
Instead, we consider a specific ability—the ability to negotiate resources for their district—
and assume that this ability is correlated with private sector success.6
       In our theory, we explicitly consider the interaction between different legislative districts,
and how this alters voters’ preferences over politicians. While the mechanism we uncover
is novel, the existence of a tension between candidates’ preferences and their ability to im-
plement certain policies is documented elsewhere (Besley and Coate, 1997; Harstad, 2010;
Volden and Wiseman, 2007; Christiansen, 2013; Huber and Ting, 2013).7 Within this lit-
erature, the closest paper to ours is Huber and Ting (2013). It primarily focuses on when
people “cross over” party lines in their voting. This work shares with ours the equilibrium
feature that poor voters may vote for rich candidates who prefer a low tax rate.8 However,
their explanation relies on parties that can exclude districts from receiving funds. The poor
then vote for the rich party in order to avoid being excluded from the legislative majority.
It is worth noting that their assumption relies on powers there is little evidence that parties
have. For example, heterogeneity in federal spending across districts is not well explained
by the party of the legislator (Boone, Dube and Kaplan, 2014). More generally, the idea
that pork distribution in the U.S. can be very unequal between parties is supported by little
   5
      Recent research has focused on identifying more direct measures of quality, see, for example Galasso
et al. (2010), Volden and Wiseman (2014), and Dal Bo et al. (2017).
    6
      Most papers in this literature focus on why poor quality politicians are elected, including Caselli and
Morelli (2004), Messner and Polborn (2004), Mattozzi and Merlo (2008). Appendix B.2 compares results
with a model where those that are successful in the private sector have a generic ability to improve the
efficiency of policy.
    7
      A number of papers describe strategic delegation motives for voters electing politicians different from
themselves. Harstad (2010) considers the trade-off between electing a conservative legislator who is a better
negotiator, and electing a progressive legislator who is more likely to be included in the governing coalition.
Christiansen (2013) extends the legislative bargaining framework of Volden and Wiseman (2007) by includ-
ing an election stage, and shows that when voters’ preferences toward pork are relatively weak, strategic
delegation occurs. In addition, Besley and Coate (1997) explores the efficiency consequences of limiting the
set of people (preferences) to whom voters can strategically delegate.
    8
      In the presence of preference heterogeneity arising from different ethnic groups, Fernández and Levy
(2008) show that poor voters may choose to support conservative parties that propose a mix of redistribution
and targeted transfer.



                                                                                                             5
empirical evidence.9 Furthermore, in Huber and Ting (2013), coordination could benefit
either the party of the rich or the party of the poor. That is, the rich may vote for the party
of the poor and high taxes to ensure they are not left out of the governing coalition.
        Closely related to this phenomena, and, in particular, to why many U.S. voters appear to
vote against their economic interest, is the debate about whether or not there is a wealth bias
in U.S. politics (Frank, 2004; Bartels, 2007; Gilens and Page, 2014). To develop our formal-
theoretic basis for why poorer voters would choose to be represented by wealthy legislators
with policy preferences different from theirs, we build on Carnes’s (2013) empirical findings
showing that legislators from higher socio-economic status professions have more conservative
voting records. Our explanation is complementary to explanations that focus on differences
in campaign resources (Campante, 2011) and the sensitivity of poor voters to the outcomes
of richer voters (Bartels, 2007).



2         Model

The structure of our model, and the players these structures contain are:


Legislative Districts: We model a country populated with a unit measure of citizens,
and with 2n + 1 legislative districts j ∈ J = {1, 2, . . . , 2n + 1}, each containing an equal
measure of citizens.


Citizens: A citizen’s utility includes post-tax income and utility from government spending
in her district. A citizen’s pre-tax income is determined solely by her publicly observable
type, t ∈ {l, h}, which is either low or high. The income of a low type is yl , and the income
    9
    There is considerable empirical evidence in the pork-barrel politics literature that points to
“[U]niversalism and reciprocity [being] the prevailing decision rules in the U.S. Congress.” (Weingast,
1979, p. 353). See also Weingast (1994). More recently, Berry and Fowler (2016) finds that Members
of Congress holding seats on key committees are not particularly successful in bringing more federal funds to
their districts, with the only exception being chairs of Appropriations subcommittees. While Berry, Burden
and Howell (2010) finds that districts receive more federal funds when their legislators are allied with the
president’s party, Dynes and Huber (2015) shows that there is little evidence that presidents favor areas
represented by their party in the House.



                                                                                                           6
of a high type is yh = ηyl , with η ∈ (1, η) parameterizing the productivity difference between
high types and low types. We occasionally refer to high types as rich or successful, and low
types as poor or unsuccessful. Overall, a fraction λ ∈ (1/2, 1) of citizens are low types, so the
total income of all legislative districts together is given by y ≡ (λ + (1 − λ)η)yl . We restrict
the tax instrument τ to be linear in income, thus tax revenue is given by τ y.10
                                         j
       District j receives a proportion π−j of tax revenues, which is determined by the type of
legislator elected in j’s district, as well as the other (−j) districts. Section 2.2.1 describes
the specific process determining this distribution. The utility that each individual receives
from x amount of local government spending is g(x) = xα /α with α ∈ (0, 1). Given the
above, we can write the utility of an individual voter as:

                                                               j
                                                                      α
                                                             π −j τ y
                                         uij = (1 − τ )y i +             .                                        (1)
                                                                 α

                                                                                 j
       When an equal proportion of tax revenues is transferred to each district π−j = 1/(2n+1),
and we denote by τl∗ and τh∗ the most-preferred tax rates of low and high types, respectively:

                                    α
                                  !1−α                                               α
                                                                                   !1−α
                        y                                             y                           τl∗
           τl∗ =              1              and      τh∗ =                    1          =        1    < τl∗ .   (2)
                   (2n + 1)yl α                               (2n + 1)(ηyl )   α              η   1−α




To guarantee τl∗ < 1, we assume that (2n + 1)yl > y α . Finally, we denote by ul (τ ) the utility
a low type receives from a given tax rate τ when tax revenues are divided equally between
districts.


Legislators: Legislators are citizen candidates, implying that their actions in office are
determined solely by their preferences as citizens. Initially, we assume that two candidates
run in each district, a low type and a high type. Later, we endogenize candidate selection
by adding parties. As types are publicly known, voters know what each candidate will do if
elected, and vote accordingly.11
  10
    Section 7 briefly discusses more complex tax instruments.
  11
    A central assumption of the citizen-candidate model is that candidates are committed to implementing
their own most-preferred policy once in office. We informally discuss relaxing this assumption in Section 4.3.


                                                                                                                   7
Median Voters: Using standard results, the winning candidate will be chosen by the
median voter of each district. A number z ≡ b(1 − λ)(2n + 1)c ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n} of districts
have a high-type median voter. By making the proportion of high-type median voters roughly
equivalent to the proportion of high types in the population, we eliminate the effect of the
boundaries of districts on representation (Chen and Rodden, 2013).


2.1       Equilibrium

We focus on subgame perfect equilibria, and establish an equilibrium concept, stage-strong,
to judge the robustness of equilibria to coordinated deviations of multiple legislative districts.

Definition 1. An equilibrium is a pure-strategy, subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium in
which voters play weakly-undominated strategies. A stage-strong equilibrium is an equi-
librium where there are no joint deviations within a single stage of the game that make all
deviating players weakly better off, and at least one player strictly better off.12

       The assumption that voters play weakly-undominated strategies means we can simply
examine the strategies of the median voters of each district. The equilibria of this model can
be of three types:

Definition 2.

   1. We say an equilibrium is representative if the tax rate is the same as the most
      preferred tax rate of the median voter of the median district, τl∗ .

   2. We say an equilibrium is somewhat representative if there is an over-representation
      of high types in the legislature, and the equilibrium tax rate is τ ∈ (τh∗ , τl∗ ).

   3. We say an equilibrium is unrepresentative if all districts elect high-type legislators,
      and the tax rate is that most preferred by a high-type citizen, τh∗ .13

  12
      In our environment, there will be no strong Nash equilibria, but the deviations that prevent such equi-
libria from occurring are not sequentially rational. On the other hand, unique equilibria are always coalition-
proof (Bernheim, Peleg and Whinston, 1987; Bernheim and Whinston, 1987). Stage-strong equilibria are
thus more robust to deviations than coalition-proof equilibria, but impose that deviations be sequentially
rational.
   13
      We do not conduct welfare analyses, as these depend critically on assumptions about the distortionary
effects of taxation. That is, there exists some level of distortion such that any of these equilibria structures
may be welfare maximizing.

                                                                                                              8
2.2      Timeline

Our model of elections and legislative policymaking proceeds in three stages. These are:

  1. The voting stage. Voters simultaneously vote for one of two citizen candidates based
        on the utility they expect to receive with each candidate as their representative in the
        legislature. Thus, their votes will depend on the candidates’ types, and the types of
        candidates elected by the other legislative districts.

  2. The tax-policy stage. Legislators vote on a level of taxes using an open rule. In
        subgame perfect equilibria, legislators will take into account what will happen in the
        distributive stage. As the majority of the legislature will always be of the same type,
        they will have the same most-preferred tax rate, which will be adopted.

  3. The distributive stage. Distribution of the public budget among districts is deter-
        mined by a negotiating process described in Section 2.2.1.

After the distribution stage, incomes are realized, taxes are levied, and tax revenue is dis-
tributed according to the decisions described above. We describe these stages in more detail
below.


2.2.1     The Distributive Stage

Taking advantage of the fact that subgame perfect equilibria can be found through backwards
induction, we start by defining outcomes in the third, distributive, stage.
   As noted above, each district receives public transfers funded by a linear tax on income.
High types are advantaged in negotiating transfers for their district by the same proportion
as their increase in productivity in the private sector: η. Section 4.1 discusses the case when
negotiating ability and preferences for redistribution are imperfectly correlated.
   A high type’s advantage may be mitigated by institutional features. In particular, 1−γ ∈




                                                                                              9
[0, 1] parameterizes the degree to which a high type’s negotiating ability is restricted.14 The
proportion of tax revenues a district receives takes on six values that are relevant for the
analysis. We define these as:

                                               L               1
                                              π(2n+1)L =     2n+1
                                                                  ,

               L                  1                 1        H                (1−γ)+γη             1
              π(n+1)L =   n((1−γ)+γη)+(n+1)
                                              <   2n+1
                                                       ,    π(n+1)L =    n((1−γ)+γη)+(n+1)
                                                                                             >   2n+1
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                           (3)
               L                   1                1        H               (1−γ)+γη              1
              π(n+1)H =   (n+1)((1−γ)+γη)+n
                                              <   2n+1
                                                       ,    π(n+1)H =    (n+1)((1−γ)+γη)+n
                                                                                             >   2n+1
                                                                                                      ,

                                             H                 1
                                        and π(2n+1)H =       2n+1
                                                                  ,

where the subscript displays the number and type of legislators in the legislative majority,
and the superscript defines whether district j is represented by a high-type or low-type
legislator. Note that the denominator changes to ensure that the sum of proportions always
equals one.
       The most important way in which our model departs from previous work is the existence
of different abilities for negotiating transfers to a legislator’s district. The parameter γ
dictates the extent to which negotiating ability matters. If γ is low, then most funds are
simply divided evenly between districts, and a legislator’s type will matter very little for the
amount of transfers a district will receive. On the other hand, when γ is high, a legislator’s
type may matters quite a lot. Thus, 1 − γ can be thought of as any institutional features
that limit the competition between legislators, or reduce the amount of tax revenue a high-
type legislator can negotiate for his district. For example, the ability to target only to broad
demographic groups, rather than to narrow geographic areas, would result in a lower γ. How
  14
       Formally, the share of tax revenue that is returned to district j is given by:
                                   
                               j      (1 − γ) + γ ∗ 1 if legislator j is a low type
                              π ∝
                                      (1 − γ) + γ ∗ η if legislator j is a high type,

Solving this system of equations produces the values in the text. This particular form can be motivated
by the Baron and Ferejohn (1989) legislative bargaining model, see Appendix B.4. However, modeling this
explicitly makes outcomes risky from the perspective of the voter, which, given the concavity of the utility of
public spending, will lead to effects that obscure the main intuition driving our result without qualitatively
affecting it.



                                                                                                            10
institutional features shape γ and the nature of representation is the subject of extensive
discussion in Section 6.


2.2.2    The Tax-Policy and Voting Stages

Given the outcome of the distributive stage, the first two stages are governed by standard
median voter results. In the tax-policy stage, tax preferences will depend on a legislator’s
type and the types of the other legislators. However, there will always be at least n + 1
legislators who are the same type—and face the same other types in the legislature—and
thus will end up with the same most-preferred tax rate. These legislators will vote together
to establish the tax rate.
    Knowing these outcomes, voters will vote for the candidate they believe will maximize
their utility through taxes and negotiated government spending in their district, taking into
account the electoral choices in other districts.



3       Analysis

The analysis of the model proceeds here in three steps. First, we characterize all equilibria.
Second, we examine the roll of γ by focusing on an example using three districts (n = 1).
As γ grows, the payoffs to low-type median voters resemble a prisoner’s dilemma; thus, they
all defect to electing a high-type legislator. Third, we examine the common pool logic by
describing how the equilibria change with n. As n grows, an individual legislator’s effect on
the tax rate decreases, while his impact on transfers to his district stays relatively constant.
Thus, as it will be clear in the Section 3.3, the unrepresentative equilibrium is unique for
lower values of γ.


3.1     Central Result

Our central result shows that when legislators’ ability to negotiate spending for their district
does not matter, fairly standard results apply. However, when this ability is important, no


                                                                                             11
                Figure 1: Equilibrium structure depends on the value of γ.




district wants to reduce their transfers by electing a low-type legislator, and thus, only high-
type legislators will be elected in equilibrium. Because high-type legislators are richer, they
have a personal preference for lower taxation, which results in a lower level of equilibrium
redistribution than low-type voters would like.
Proposition 1.

  1. If γ = 0, then every equilibrium is representative with tax rate τl∗ , and all districts
     receive an equal proportion of the tax revenues.

  2. If 0 < γ < γ ∗ (n) < 1 there are two types of equilibria:

      (a) Unrepresentative equilibria, with the legislature composed of all high types, and
          tax rate τh∗ . These equilibria are not stage strong.
       (b) Somewhat representative, with the legislature composed of n + 1 low types and n
                                   h                   α
                                                    i 1−α
                                             L
           high types, and tax rate (2n + 1)π(n+1)L       τl∗ < τl∗ .

  3. If γ ∗ (n) < γ < 1 then the unique equilibrium is unrepresentative with tax rate τh∗ , and
     all districts receive  an equal proportion of the tax revenues.
                        
                          1
                                 1−α
                                   α
                                         
           z        1        1−α
     If 2n+1   > γ(η−1) η α η−α       − 1 this equilibrium is stage strong.

Where γ ∗ (n) is defined implicitly from the following relationship

                                                        α
                                                      !1−α
                                             H
                                            π(n+1)H          ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                        γ < γ ∗ (n) ⇐⇒                   <                  ,               (4)
                                             L
                                            π(n+1)L          ul (τh∗ ) − yl

which is central to the analysis that follows.
   We now turn to a detailed construction of this result where we can isolate the effects of
negotiating ability (γ) and of the number of districts (n).


3.2    Example: Three Districts



                                                                                             12
We first examine the case when n = 1, that is, when there are three legislative districts.
This helps elucidate how differences in negotiating ability affect our results, and builds the
prisoner’s dilemma intuition behind Proposition 1.


3.2.1   Representative Equilibrium

                                          L     H     L     H
When γ = 0, then (3) simplifies to π3L = π2L = π2L = π2H = π2H = π3H = 1/3. That is,
no matter what type of legislator a district elects, it will receive the same amount of the tax
revenue. Thus, the median voter in each district will focus on the effect that her legislator
will have on the tax rate. As such, median voters choose to elect someone who favors exactly
the same tax rate that they do.
   The more interesting cases are the stage-strong equilibria when γ > 0.


3.2.2   Building the Central Result with Negotiation

When γ > 0 there is the potential for redistribution not just between rich and poor, but
also between districts. This changes incentives for low-type median voters. As described in
Table 1, if both the other districts are electing a high type, a low-type median voter will
want to elect a high type as well, leading to the first equilibrium in Part 2 of Proposition
1. However, this equilibrium is not stage strong. Specifically, if two districts with low-type
median voters deviated to elect low-type legislators, these districts would be strictly better
off. When γ < γ ∗ (n) holds, this deviation is also an equilibrium, and it is stage strong.
However, when γ > γ ∗ (n), then this cannot be sustained as an equilibrium, as each low-type
median voter is made strictly better off by electing a high type, no matter who the other
median voter elects. Thus, each low-type median voter is caught in a prisoner’s dilemma,
and defects to electing a high-type legislator.


The Legislative Stages: The outcome of the distributive stage is determined by the
types of the three legislators, according to (3). As we focus on subgame perfect equilibria,
the legislators will take this expected distribution into account when voting on the tax rate. If


                                                                                              13
the legislature is composed either entirely of high types or entirely of low types, then all three
                                                                                     ∗
districts will receive the same proportion of tax revenue πj = 1/3 for all j. Thus, τ3L = τl∗ ,
     ∗
and τ3H = τh∗ , which are the ideal tax rates of high- and low-type citizens, respectively. The
legislative majority could also consist of two low types or two high types, which leads to two
other potential values of the tax rate in equilibrium,

                                       α                                   α
                        ∗       L 1−α ∗                     ∗       H 1−α ∗
                       τ2L ≡ (3π2L ) τl          and       τ2H ≡ (3π2H ) τh ,                        (5)


                                             ∗
                            H
respectively. Note that as π2H    H
                               > π3H = 13 , τ2H > τh∗ , and as π2L
                                                                L     L
                                                                   < π3L         ∗
                                                                         = 31 , τ2L < τl∗ . Thus,
in equilibrium, τh∗ < τ2H
                       ∗     ∗
                          < τ2L < τl∗ .15


The Election Stage: The utility of a median voter in a given district will depend on the
types of the legislators elected from all three districts—see (3) and (5). It is thus useful
to examine what type of legislator a median voter would want to elect, given the types of
legislators elected from the other two districts. As, in equilibrium, a voter’s beliefs about
the types of the legislators elected by other districts must be correct, these preferences will
shape the median voter’s vote choice.
   The preferences of median voters, conditional on the types elected in other districts, are
summarized in Table 1. A high-type median voter will always want to elect a high type,
as, from her perspective, there is no strategic delegation problem. A low-type median voter
will also want to elect a high-type legislator whenever the other two legislative districts both
elect high types or both elect low types, as the median voter’s choice will not affect tax rates
much, and they will get a larger portion of tax revenue.
   The crucial conflict occurs when a low-type median voter is pivotal in determining the
majority type in the legislature. In this case, she must weigh the benefits of a high type’s
ability to direct resources to her district—the left-hand side of (6)—against the cost of
allowing high types to set the tax rate—the right-hand side of (6). This inequality is the
  15 ∗      ∗
    τ2H < τ2L  follows from γ < γ ∗ . When γ > γ ∗ the opposite may hold. However, when that is the case,
these tax rates are not relevant to the analysis.



                                                                                                      14
                             Table 1: Median Voter Incentives

        If the other two     A low-type median voter            A high-type median voter
        districts elect         will want to elect a               will want to elect a


        Two low types:               high type                         high type


                                   low type if:
        A low type                   α
                                         ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                               H 1−α
                               π2H
                                       ≤                , (6)          high type
        and a high type:        L
                               π2L       ul (τh∗ ) − yl
                               otherwise, a high type


        Two high types:              high type                         high type




same as (4) for n = 1, and is crucial in understanding the unrepresentative equilibrium.
When it fails to hold, a low-type median voter will not want to elect a low-type legislator,
even when she knows her choice will be pivotal in determining the majority type in the
legislature. Thus, districts with low-type median voters are in a prisoner’s dilemma: they
cannot commit to each other to both elect low types—even if one or two followed through,
the others would be strictly better off electing a high type.


3.2.3    Regional Disparities

It is worthwhile stressing that in equilibrium the money transferred to each district will
always be relatively equal. In the representative equilibrium, transfers are equal because
γ = 0. In the unrepresentative equilibrium, all districts elect high types, leading to equal
transfers. In the somewhat representative equilibria, transfers may be unequal, but they will
be similar, as these equilibria only obtain for low values of γ, which is when high types have
the smallest advantage in negotiating transfers for their districts. This is consistent with a



                                                                                           15
number of findings in the empirical literature showing that pork distribution in the U.S. is
fairly equal between parties.16


3.3        The Common Pool

As pointed out in the introduction, a central question in the literature on fiscal policy is
how taxing and spending evolve as the size of the legislature grows. In this respect, our
model delivers an anti-common pool result, which appears to be consistent with a number
of empirical findings.17 To establish this, we examine how taxing and spending evolve as
the size of the legislature n grows. When this occurs, the effect of a legislator’s ability to
negotiate resources for his district is relatively constant, while his effect on tax policy shrinks.
As such, low types want to elect high-type legislators even if γ is relatively low.
       Recall that there are z ≤ n high-type median voters. These voters will always elect a
high-type legislator. Thus, when (4) holds, n − z low-type median voters will elect high-type
legislators. This makes the remaining n + 1 low-type median voters pivotal, so they will
prefer to elect a low-type legislator. On the other-hand, if (4) does not hold, then low-type
median voters always wish to elect high-type legislators, no matter who is elected in every
other district. As electing a low-type legislator is strictly dominated, the unique equilibrium
will be for every district to elect a high-type legislator.
       To understand how (4) depends on n, note that the right-hand side can be reduced to
   1
η 1−α (1−α)
   η−α
              , which is constant in n. However, the left-hand side is increasing in n. Thus,
holding γ > 0 constant, as n grows there is a point where the equilibrium switches from a
somewhat representative equilibrium to the unrepresentative equilibrium. Defining τn∗ as the
tax rate implemented when there are 2n + 1 legislators, we have:




  16
       See the discussion in Section 1.2.
  17
       See the review in Primo and Snyder (2008).


                                                                                                 16
                 Figure 2: The Anti-Common Pool: Tax rates decrease with n.




                   (a) γ is small.                                           (b) γ is large.


Proposition 2.

   1. γ ∗ (n) is decreasing in n. As n → ∞, γ ∗ (n) → κ(η, α), where κ(η, α) ∈ (0, 1).

   2. τn∗ is decreasing in n.18

       There are two reasons that taxes decrease when n increases. First, the tax rate in a
                                                                      α
                                                 L
somewhat representative equilibrium is ((2n + 1)π(n+1)L ) 1−α τl∗ . This is decreasing in n, due
to the fact that as n increases, closer and closer to 50% of the districts are represented by high
types. Thus, if γ < κ(η, α) then the tax rate be will continually decreasing as n grows. On
                                                                           ∗
the other hand, if γ > κ(η, α) then at some n the tax rate will drop from τ(n+1)L > τh∗ to τh∗ as
the equilibrium moves from somewhat representative to representative.19 As n grows beyond
this point, the tax rate will be τh∗ . Thus, the tax rate will either be smoothly decreasing
in n, or will decrease smoothly in n up until a point when the equilibrium switches from
somewhat representative to unrepresentative, at which point there will be a sudden decrease
in the tax rate.
  18
     This is due, in part, to the way we have modeled the utility of government spending: the functional
form implies spending is on local public goods. Thus, as districts become smaller, the effectiveness of this
spending goes down—see, for example, the expression for τl∗ in (2). Appendix B.5 shows the result still holds
when using a slightly different citizen utility function that does not have this feature.
                                                                      ∗
  19
     When γ and η are particularly large, it may be the case that τ(n+1)L    < τh∗ , as much of the tax revenue
will go to the high-type legislator’s district. Anticipating the outcome of the distributive stage, a majority
composed of low-type legislators will set a relatively low tax rate in the tax-policy stage to prevent their
                                                                          ∗
districts from being expropriated. Similarly, it may be the case that τ(n+1)H     > τl∗ . While these orderings
are theoretically possible, they never obtain in equilibrium.



                                                                                                            17
4     Theoretical Robustness

The simplicity of our model starkly reveals the theoretical forces at work. However, some
of our assumptions are clearly too restrictive, and may limit our results in important ways.
Here we discuss three key assumptions: the perfect correlation between tax preferences and
negotiating ability, that negotiating ability does not directly affect the setting of the tax
rate, and the inability of legislators to commit to platforms other than their most preferred
policies. Relaxing these assumptions does not qualitatively change our results.


4.1      Imperfect Correlation between Types

There are, of course, politicians who are successful in the private sector, but favor high
taxes.20 Allowing for a positive but imperfect correlation between tax preferences and leg-
islative ability can be easily incorporated in our model as long as we maintain our assumption
that the only signal of a candidate’s type is his success. In this case, there is little effect on
our results, and the existence of such a correlation may lower tax rates in equilibrium.
    There are two ways in which tax preferences may be mismatched with type. A low-type
candidate may actually favor low taxes, that is, have high-type tax preferences. This will
make low-type candidates less appealing to low-type median voters, without changing the
preferences of high-type voters (who already favor high-type candidates). Thus, taxes will
be lower in equilibrium as low-type median voters will elect high types for lower values of γ,
and even when they elect low-type legislators, these legislators may sometimes vote for low
taxes.
    The more subtle case is when success in the private sector is a perfect signal of a citizen’s
ability to direct resources to his district, but some high types may favor high taxes. We
analyze this formally by assuming that with a small probability q a high-type citizen will
  20
     This is only one of four ways in which there may be an imperfect correlation between a legislator’s pref-
erences over tax rates and his negotiating ability. For each type, either negotiating ability or tax preferences
may be mismatched with the candidate’s type. If negotiating ability is mismatched with type, this will make
low-type candidates more attractive (and high-type candidates less attractive) to low-type median voters.
However, as indicated above, the more common concern is over mismatched tax preferences, perhaps because
private-sector success is likely a more credible signal of ability than of preferences.


                                                                                                             18
vote for tax rates as if he had low income, yl . This means that ability to direct funds
to one’s district and tax preferences are imperfectly correlated (with a positive correlation
proportional to 1 − q). However, there is still a single signal of both dimensions of a citizen’s
type—his private sector success. This is a perfect signal of his negotiating ability, but, for
high types, an imperfect signal of tax preferences.

Proposition 3.
   1. γ ∗ (q) is decreasing in q.
   2. In unrepresentative equilibria, the average tax rate is increasing in q.
   3. There exists a q > 0 such that for q < q expected taxes are lower in the unrepresentative
      equilibrium than in somewhat representative equilibria.

       The first part of the proposition says that increasing q widens the range of parameters for
which the unrepresentative equilibrium is unique. Intuitively, the cost to a low-type median
voter of electing a high type is reduced because the high type might share the low type’s
preferences for redistribution. The consequence of this, described in the second part of the
proposition, is that values of γ for which a somewhat representative equilibrium may exist
would change to unrepresentative, with a corresponding increase in taxes, so long as q is not
too large. The third point says that the existence of high types with low-type tax preferences
may raise the tax rate: when there are two or more high types with low-type tax preferences
elected to the legislature, they will set the tax rate at τl∗ . However, as this happens somewhat
rarely, the increase in the expected tax rate will be much smaller. Together, this suggests
that the presence of high types with low-type tax preferences may actually raise tax rates
relative to a model with perfect correlation in the dimensions of a citizen’s type.21


4.2       Weighted Voting

In our core model, the relative skill of legislators in apportioning funds is not reflected in the
tax-setting stage. A potential way to mitigate this asymmetry is to assume that high-type
  21
    Similarly, if a party has superior ability to screen candidates—that is, it can increase q for its candidate
pool—-this may produce higher tax rates and less representative outcomes. For related findings on the role
of parties, see Section 6.2.2.

                                                                                                             19
legislators have a higher voting weight in the tax-setting stage. This will not generally affect
the results, and, when it does, will make the unrepresentative equilibrium hold whenever
γ > 0.
   This is easy to understand when there are only three districts (n = 1). Note that the
only case in which the addition of voting weights can make a difference is when there are
two low-type legislators and one high-type legislator, and the voting weight of the single
high-type legislator is such that he can control the tax-setting process. In this case, there is
no benefit to a low-type median voter of electing a low-type legislator, as he will not affect
the tax rate, and will negotiate a lesser proportion of tax revenues for his district. As such,
low-type median voters will always elect a high-type legislator when γ > 0, and the resulting
equilibrium will always be unrepresentative.


4.3      Accountability and Commitment

In the citizen-candidate framework, there is no scope for re-election incentives to influence
politicians’ actions in office (Barro, 1973; Ferejohn, 1986). As this framework is a building
block of our theoretical construction we inherit this assumption. While this assumption is
somewhat extreme, it makes our analysis transparent. If, instead, accountability was perfect
and candidates could perfectly commit to a given tax policy, then, unsurprisingly, the policy
outcome would be representative of the median voter’s preferences.
   There is little doubt that in reality political accountability is not perfect. It has been
shown that factors such as term limits, inter- and intra-group conflict, and policy-making
across multiple issue dimensions reduce accountability (Hatfield and Padró-i-Miquel, 2012;
Herron and Shotts, 2006; Padró-i-Miquel, 2007; Padró i Miquel and Snowberg, 2012). More-
over, limited transparency in policy-making may reduce accountability (Holmstrom, 1979;
Besley and Burgess, 2002).
   While perfect accountability leads to fully representative outcomes, less than perfect
accountability may lead to less representative outcomes. Explicitly micro-founding imperfect
accountability would considerably complicate the analysis, and is beyond the scope of this

                                                                                             20
paper. However, note that whenever accountability is imperfect, voters continue to face a
trade-off when choosing legislators who are better at directing resources to their districts,
but have policy preferences that are at odds with the voters on taxes or other dimensions.
Imperfect accountability means that high-type politicians can take rents, and will do so by
implementing lower tax rates whenever possible. Moreover, limited accountability may make
outcomes worse, from the median voter’s point of view, than no accountability. For example,
one way to think about limited accountability is that high-type legislators once elected may
follow the policy preferences of their low-type constituents. As shown in Section 4.1, this
may actually make policy outcomes worse. Similarly, imperfect party discipline may also
lower taxes in equilibrium, see Section 6.2.2.



5     Empirical Regularities

As noted in Section 1.2, there are many theories that seek to explain heterogeneity in the
size of government. Our model contributes to this literature by reconciling the common pool
mechanism with broad stylized facts about the size of government. We do so by adding a
simple assumption—those who are more successful in the private sector are also better at
negotiating resources for their district. This produces a theory that, we argue, allows us to
organize stylized facts not just about the size of government, but also about who gets elected
in democracies. In this section, we provide empirical support for our central assumption,
and discuss additional stylized facts that our theory may help organize.


5.1    Central Assumption

Our results generally require only that voters believe our central assumption, not that it
actually holds. This distinction is useful, as a direct test of the central assumption is infeasible
since it involves assessing several variables that are often unmeasured, or unmeasurable.
Instead, we ran a few simple surveys on convenience samples to assess voters’ belief in our




                                                                                                 21
central assumption.22 The questions on these surveys were aimed at ascertaining whether
U.S. voters saw private sector success as a signal of distributive prowess, and furthermore,
whether this perception was enough to overwhelm policy concerns in voting decisions.
       We asked a sample of U.S. citizens (n = 1, 076) to rank various professions in terms of the
respondent’s belief as to which would be most indicative of talent at “obtaining resources for
your district (for example by obtaining funding for local projects).” Respondents ranked a list
of professions from 1–6. These professions, with their average rank, were as follows: successful
businessman (2.07), entrepreneur (2.38), successful lawyer (2.63), high school teacher (3.73),
factory worker (4.73), and bus driver (5.46). We also asked the same respondents to rank
people with different educational backgrounds in terms of their ability to secure funds for
the voter’s district. The rankings were: MBA (2.28), law degree (2.44), PhD (2.78), medical
degree (3.83), university degree (4.16), and only high school degree (5.50).23 A clear pattern
emerges in this data: more highly compensated professions, and educational backgrounds
correlated with compensation, are perceived by voters as being indicative of the legislative
skill of directing resources to a district.
       We also asked a subset of this group (n = 233) a question aimed at understanding how
they valued the trade-off between policy and directing resources to their district. They
were asked to choose between a (hypothetical) congressional candidate that was “good at
securing resources for your district: he has a long record of bringing in money for projects
the district needs and prefers lower taxes, especially on high-income earners,” and another
that was “not very good at securing resources for your district and prefers higher taxes,
especially on high-income earners.” The first candidate was chosen by 73% of respondents.
Self-identified Republicans chose the first candidate 93% of the time, versus 70% for self-
identified Democrats.
       While this is supportive of the central assumption of our model, for it to have implica-
tions for policy, it must also be the case that the core assumption of the citizen-candidate
  22
     We obtained our convenience samples in the U.S. through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. For more on the
use of Mechanical Turk in survey research see Berinsky, Huber and Lenz (2012).
  23
     All differences between rankings were significant at the p < 0.01 level. The rankings of those who
reported they voted in the last congressional election were not significantly different than those who did not.


                                                                                                            22
model holds as well. The analysis of roll-call votes is consistent with the hypothesis that
wealthier legislators support lower taxes, and more generally, that legislators tend to support
policies aligned with their private interests. In recent years, the literature has documented
more and more examples supporting this assumption. In particular, Carnes (2013), shows
that legislators from higher socio-economic status professions have more conservative voting
records, even controlling for party. Additionally, Matter and Stutzer (2015) documents that
state and national legislators who are attorneys are less likely to vote in favor of reforms re-
stricting tort litigation, and more likely to vote for reforms that extend torts, than legislators
from other professions.
   Taken together, these results suggest that our central assumption is reasonable, and that
it matches voter perceptions.


5.2    Stylized Facts

We use our results to organize stylized facts about taxes, redistribution, and representation.
This organization is rough, due to the fact that our results, which rely on only two types
and a simplified institutional structure, are quite stark.
   The analysis of these stylized facts proceeds by noting that the ability to direct funds
to one’s district is important in the U.S. (high-γ), but is relatively unimportant in most
Western European countries (low-γ). Here we focus on three Western European countries—
Italy, Germany, and the U.K.—due to the relative ease of obtaining descriptive data from
them. However, the data in these countries is still imperfect, especially as it pertains to
legislator wealth. A full comparative analysis is well beyond the scope of this theory paper.
   When γ > 0, then the rich will be over-represented in legislatures. The literature on
legislative recruitment concludes, “[T]hat legislatures worldwide include more of the affluent
than the less well-off, ... and more white-collar professionals than blue-collar workers” (Nor-
ris, 1997, p. 6). In all countries, distribution across districts should be relatively even. This
is the most counter-intuitive (given our model) in high-γ countries like the U.S. However, it
agrees with the literature cited in Footnote 9.

                                                                                               23
      Other implications require us to compare high- and low-γ countries. While the rich are
over-represented in all countries, the over-representation should be particularly extreme in
high-γ countries. In countries such as Italy and Germany, about a quarter of legislators have
no post-secondary education. Britain famously has coal-miner and factory-worker MPs.
However, in the U.S., there are almost no legislators who are laborers or without college
degrees (Carnes, 2013; Wessels, 1997). High-γ countries should also be composed of higher
productivity legislators. While this is difficult to compare in data, we note that members of
the U.S. Congress introduce ∼5,000 bills per year, while the Italian Parliament introduces
∼2,000 bills a year, and the U.K. Parliament introduces substantially fewer.
      Taxes should be lower in high-γ countries, and, indeed, U.S. taxes at all levels of govern-
ment are lower than in the U.K., Italy, or Germany.24
      Finally, in high-γ countries, low-type constituents should approve of the job done by
their legislator, but disapprove of the broad policies enacted by the legislature. In the
U.S., approval of individual congressmen and congresswomen is generally around 50%, while
approval of Congress itself is between 10–20%.25



6       Extensions

The simplicity of our basic model makes it straight-forward to extend to other issues. Here
we consider three: descriptive representation, party politics, and endogenously changing
the institutional parameter γ. The first two cases allow us to organize a few more stylized
facts with our model, while the third highlights interesting dynamics of institutional change.
Additional extensions can be found in Appendix B.


6.1       Descriptive Representation and Gender

Our model makes predictions about descriptive representation—essentially, whether repre-
sentatives have similar observable characteristics and preferences to their constituents. This
 24
      See Footnote 1 and taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/how-do-us-taxes-compare-internationally
 25
      See, for example, ropercenter.uconn.edu/data access/tag/congressional approval.html.

                                                                                                     24
has been largely overlooked by political economists in favor of examining ideological represen-
tation. However, representation of the voters themselves may be important when politician
actions are difficult to monitor.26
       Descriptive representation is not just ancillary to our model, but is the channel through
which policy changes. Take, for example, proportional representation. In our model, this
would be examined by setting n = 0. In this case, redistribution between districts is no longer
a force, and descriptive characteristics of legislators and policy are perfectly representative.
This is in contrast to distributive channels emphasized in previous work (see, Persson and
Tabellini, 2000, for a review).
       While our model focuses on descriptive representation as it applies to class, it could
also apply to any group with members perceived by society as being less able negotiators. A
particularly interesting case is women, who are generally perceived as less capable negotiators
(Croson and Gneezy, 2009; Niederle and Vesterlund, 2008) or as having less bargaining power
than men (Altonji and Black, 1999; Ayres and Siegelman, 1995; Harding, Rosenthal and
Sirmans, 2003). Regardless of the correctness of these beliefs—and recent research indicates
that they may be mistaken (Besley et al., 2014; Volden, Wiseman and Wittmer, 2013)—
our model makes the same predictions for the representation of men as it does for the rich
because voters believe that representatives with either of these descriptive characteristics
will be able to deliver more pork.
       Some of our results can be directly extended to gender: men will be over-represented in
all legislatures, and legislatures characterized by a focus on pork will have an even greater
majority of men than those that are not. In April 2015, despite the fact that most countries
are roughly 50% women, only two countries in the world—Rwanda and Bolivia—had a lower
house which is a majority women, and no country in the world has an upper house that is
a majority women. Of the countries examined in Section 5, the U.S. had the lowest rate
  26
    A concern for descriptive representation dates back to at least the Federalist Papers: “It is said to be
necessary, that all classes of citizens should have some of their own numbers in the representative body, in
order that their feelings and interests may be better understood and attended to.” (Alexander Hamilton,
The Federalist, no. 35.) For more recent normative arguments advocating descriptive representation see
Birch (1972), Mansbridge (1999) and Pitkin (1967). For a more formal argument about the importance of
elections in selecting types see Fearon (1999).


                                                                                                         25
of female representatives in the lower house (19.4%), and Germany the highest (36.5%).
The U.S. ranks 73rd in the world, the U.K. 59th, Italy 33rd, and Germany 20th for female
representation.
       These two examples—class and gender—suggest our model can be used to examine claims
made in the normative political philosophy literature. A common claim is that more legisla-
tive districts will lead to better descriptive representation.27 Paradoxically, in our model,
more representatives lead to less representative equilibria: the share of the legislature that
is rich (or male) increases with n.28
       Another common conjecture is that stronger parties will improve descriptive represen-
tation (Committee on Political Parties, 1950; Hazan and Rahat, 2010). We examine this
claim in the next subsection, which adds parties to our model. In particular, we find that
allowing policy-motivated parties to control representation or discipline legislators has little
effect on, and may even harm, descriptive representation. On the other hand, if parties can
reduce competition between legislators for district-specific public goods, this can improve
representation.


6.2       Party Politics

This section adds parties to our theory, and gives them increasing roles in candidate selection
and policy formation. We first examine purely policy-motivated parties who can nominate
candidates according to a closed list. We then give them the ability to constrain their
legislators’ tax policies. Parties have little effect on our results, and, in some cases, may
worsen the issues identified above.




  27
     For example, Dahl and Tufte (1973) argues that larger legislatures should promote representation of
minorities, and Taagepera and Shugart (1989) suggests that states with small legislatures (in particular
smaller than the cube root of their population size) cannot achieve representational goals. Furthermore,
the National Conference of State Legislatures argues that smaller legislative districts are preferable as,
“The legislature is designed to provide a cross-section of all points of view.” (ncsl.org/research/about-state-
legislatures/sizes-of-legislatures.aspx).
  28
     This is a direct corollary of Proposition 2.


                                                                                                            26
6.2.1      Party Control of Candidate Nominations

We begin by adding two policy-motivated parties that simultaneously nominate a slate 2n+1
citizen candidates, one for each legislative district.29 These slates are announced before the
election stage (see Section 2.2). That is, there is a closed list.
       The two parties are L—the party of low types, which has a preference for high tax rates—
and H—the party of high types, which has a preference for low tax rates. If the tax rate
chosen by the legislature is τ ∗ , then the utility of the two parties is:

                           UL = fL (|τ ∗ − τl |)             UH = fH (|τ ∗ − τh |)

we assume each fj is strictly decreasing, so is maximized when τ ∗ = τj∗ .

Proposition 4.

   1. If 0 < γ < γ ∗ (n) < 1 then party L nominates at least n + 1 low-type candidates in
      districts with low-type median voters, and is otherwise indifferent. Party H nominates
      n high-type candidates, and is otherwise indifferent.

   2. If γ ∗ (n) < γ < 1 then party H nominates high-type candidates in every district. Party
      L is indifferent in all districts.

   3. All patterns of representation and taxation continue to hold as in Proposition 1.

       The patterns of nomination may seem somewhat odd. However, if we eliminate weakly
dominated strategies, then each party would only nominate citizens of its type. This leads
to exactly the same slate of candidates assumed in the setup for Proposition 1, and thus the
patterns there will trivially hold. The intuition behind these nomination patterns is that
although the low-type party can supply low-type candidates in each district, this will not
change the type for whom voters want to vote. If the median voter of a district wants to
elect a high type, then the high-type party is more than happy to supply one as a candidate.
As such, the introduction of parties with perfect control over nomination does not affect our
results.30
  29
     If parties value winning even very slightly, then Downsian logic holds, and both parties will want to
nominate whoever voters want to elect. As such, the equilibrium patterns in Proposition 1 hold trivially.
  30
     There is one difference in the logic between this proposition and Proposition 1: when γ < γ ∗ (n) the reason
the unrepresentative equilibrium is not stage strong is slightly different. To support the unrepresentative


                                                                                                              27
6.2.2    Party Discipline

Suppose, in addition to closed-list nominations, parties could somehow discipline their leg-
islators to adopt tax rates other than those most preferred by the legislators. We model
(imperfect) party discipline by assuming a party can promise voters that their politicians, if
elected, will vote for a tax rate that is (at most) ∆τ away from the legislator’s ideal tax rate.
    Parties’ ability to imperfectly discipline legislators will never increase representation.
However, in two circumstances it can increase the tax rate. The first is when the equilibrium
is unrepresentative. In this case, high-type candidates from the party L can be forced
to implement a higher tax rate. Second, if ∆τ is large enough then any equilibrium will
approximate a representative equilibrium—that is ∆τ ≈ τl∗ − τh∗ .
    In between these circumstances are values of ∆τ for which the ability of parties to disci-
pline their legislators leads to lower tax rates and less representative equilibria.

Proposition 5. If 0 < γ < γ ∗ (n), then there exists some ∆∗τ such that when ∆τ ∈
        ∗
(∆∗τ , τ(n+1)L − τh∗ ) then the tax rate and representation will be lower in equilibrium when
parties can discipline their legislators than when they cannot.

    To understand this result, note that when 0 < γ < γ ∗ (n) all stage-strong equilibria are
somewhat unrepresentative. Then, consider the lower bound of ∆τ in the proposition. At
this level, it will be the high-type party—not the low-type party—that will take advantage
of the ability to discipline its politicians. Specifically, it will promise that high types elected
under its banner will implement a tax rate τh∗ + ∆∗τ , which will be sufficient to change the
equilibria from somewhat representative to unrepresentative, thus reducing representation.
                                                      ∗
Correspondingly the tax rate will decrease from from τ(n+1)L to τh∗ + ∆∗τ < τ(n+1)L
                                                                             ∗
                                                                                    . The
low-type party will need to respond by also nominating high types and promising a tax rate
equilibrium, both parties must nominate high types in all districts. For this to be the case, the low-type
party must believe that if it nominates low types in districts with low-type median voters, then all districts
would still elect high types. As this is a subgame-perfect equilibrium of the continuation subgame, it is
an equilibrium. However, this continuation play is not stage strong: in particular, if the low-type party
nominated low types, a deviation in the election stage by n + 1 districts with low-type median voters would
make them both strictly better off. As such, the unrepresentative equilibrium is not stage strong when (4)
holds.


                                                                                                           28
of τh∗ + ∆∗τ —if it failed to do so then the high party would promise a lower tax rate and win,
making the low-type party strictly worse off.31
       Thus, parties with limited ability to discipline politicians may lead to less representative
outcomes than parties with no such ability.


6.2.3      Limiting Competition for Funds

If parties could change the level of γ, this would have a profound impact on our theoretical
findings. But how can this actually be achieved? From Section 6.2.1, it should be clear that
even if a party could limit competition, it may not want to, as a relatively even distribution
of funds may cause a loss of seats that some targeting of funds would help secure.
       An example of how γ might actually be lowered comes from Great Britain. In the British
parliament, the ability to channel funds to one’s district is severely curtailed. All bills on
serious matters such as budgeting must be sponsored by the government (Prime Minister
and his or her cabinet). Each year only 20 bills may be sponsored by individual members,
so called private bills. These bills are often quite limited in scope: for example, they may
seek to keep a hospital or local community center open despite bureaucratic cuts.
       More generally, the results discussed above make predictions about the importance of
parties to policy outcomes. Specifically, there will be very little difference between parties’
implemented policies in high-γ countries. In the U.S., a change in the party of the President
moves the U.S. stock market by ∼2%, and a change in the party controlling Congress moves
the stock market by ∼ 0.2% (Snowberg, Wolfers and Zitzewitz, 2007a,b). In contrast, in
the U.K., a change in the government moves the British stock market by ∼11% (Herron,
2000). Moreover, in high-γ countries, the distribution of spending across districts should
be independent of the political party of a district’s legislator. This appears to be the case
(Boone, Dube and Kaplan, 2014).
  31
    A similar logic applies if parties are able to promise a specific value of γ as long as the low-type party
cannot promise γ = 0. In Section 6.3, we consider how changing institutions (γ) affect the long-run play of
the game.




                                                                                                           29
6.3       Changing Institutions

Our final extension examines a dynamic approach to the endogenous determination of γ.
We show that the specifics of institutional change, particularly whether it is slow or fast, are
critically important for whether a low level of γ can be achieved and maintained. Technical
details of the discussion that follows, as well as specific results, can be found in Appendix
B.1.
      Under our definition of slow institutional change, γ in the current period is set by the
legislature in the previous period. Under fast institutional change, the current legislature
is free to set γ before any policy decisions are made.32 When institutional change is slow,
the unrepresentative equilibrium will be an absorbing state, whereas the representative or
somewhat representative equilibria will not be. That is, the repeated game will eventually get
“stuck” in the unrepresentative equilibrium. On the other hand, if institutional change is fast,
then the equilibrium in each period will be representative. The asymmetry in “stickiness” of
the two types of equilibria, along with the fact that there are no costs to institutional change
in our model, present a rare example where fast may be preferable to slow institutional
change.
      Under slow institutional change, if high types are ever able to set γ = 1, low types will
face a trade-off in trying to set γ = 0. Electing low types in the current period results in a
current period loss because low-type legislators will be expropriated by high-type legislators.
On the other hand, with enough low-type legislators, γ = 0 will hold in the next period. For
ranges of parameter values, the cost of expropriation will be too high, and low-type median
voters prefer to elect high types in the current period. High-type legislators will perpetuate
the γ = 1 status quo, thus, outcomes will be unrepresentative from then on. The path of
tax rates in this sequence of events, as well as under fast institutional change, is displayed
in Figure 3.
      Alternatively, if the current legislature is able to set its own institutional rules, then a
low-type median voter will face no conflict between the current period and future periods.
 32
      McKelvey and Riezman (1992) studies seniority in legislatures in a similar way.


                                                                                               30
                Figure 3: Progression of tax rates over time when δ < δ ∗ (p).




(a) Slow institutional change leads to permanently   (b) Fast institutional change allows for representa-
unrepresentative equilibria.                         tive equilibria.


In particular, if the majority of the legislature is composed of low types, then they will vote
to set γ = 0 in the current period, tax revenues will be equally apportioned, and the tax
rate set by the legislature will be the ideal tax rate of a low type. Moreover, γ = 1 will only
occur when there are at least n + 1 high-type median voters, and thus, even these periods
feature representative equilibria.
   Other factors that might slow institutional change will only make this problem worse:
if it takes more periods for an institutional change to occur, or there are super-majority
requirements for institutional change, this will only make the unrepresentative equilibrium
stickier. Additionally, myopic voters, who act as though their discount rate were 0, would
be unable to make the tradeoff needed to change the state to γ = 0.
   This last point suggests that institutions which take decisions over γ out of the hands
of the legislature may be preferred. In particular, if there were a country-wide constitu-
tional referendum, low-type voters could coordinate to set γ = 0, resulting in representative
equilibria in every period. This further suggests that electing an executive by nation-wide
popular vote may serve as a check on the coordination problems caused by local represen-
tation. While examining executive-legislative interactions is beyond the scope of this paper,
it is one of many possible directions for future research, a few of which are discussed in the
next section.


                                                                                                      31
7     Discussion: Accountability and Representation

This paper studies redistribution both between the rich and the poor and between legislative
districts. We augment workhorse political economy models with the simple assumption
that those who are more successful in the private sector will tend to be more successful at
negotiating resources for their districts when elected to the legislature. This leads to a few,
stark, results: First, the rich will always be over-represented in legislatures. Second, this
will reduce taxes below the rate preferred by the median voter of the median district. Third,
when the ability to direct resources to one’s district is important, then all districts will elect
rich legislators, and the tax rate will be the most preferred tax rate of the rich.
    These results are robust to, and, indeed, exacerbated by, many traditional remedies for
political agency problems. First, larger legislatures are more likely to be unrepresentative:
that is, more representation may actually make government less representative. Second,
policy-motivated parties that can discipline legislators may lead to less representation and
lower taxes. Third, fast institutional change allows for representative equilibria, while slower
institutional change makes unrepresentative equilibria “sticky”: once an unrepresentative
equilibrium occurs, the legislature will stay in that state forever.
    An attractive feature of our model is that it makes predictions about descriptive rep-
resentation, an area not usually addressed in the political economy literature. We believe
that a renewed focus on descriptive representation would be useful. In particular, theories
of descriptive representation would lend themselves to cleaner, more direct tests than theo-
ries of ideological representation. This is due to the fact that, despite many methodological
advances, measuring and comparing legislator ideologies is especially difficult because legisla-
tive voting is endogenous, and the theories that we seek to test often make identification of
ideologies impossible (Achen, 1977, 1978; Clinton, 2007; Lewis and Tausanovitch, 2013). On
the other hand, testing theories of descriptive representation requires only compiling statis-
tics on the demographics of legislators. While such data is currently surprisingly difficult to
obtain, this seems to be, in part, due to the fact that such data has little use without the



                                                                                               32
predictions of positive theories to test.33
       Our results document numerous difficulties in trying to establish more representative
political outcomes. However, it is important to note that behavioral factors exhibited by
voters, such as imperfect recall, or a reliance on their own experiences to make political
choices (Ansolabehere, Meredith and Snowberg, 2014; Healy, Persson and Snowberg, 2017;
Ortoleva and Snowberg, 2015) may further reduce electoral accountability. This is of partic-
ular importance when we consider more complex tax instruments, like differential taxes on
income from labor and capital. As the rich are more likely to hold capital, our model would
imply that taxes will tend to be tilted away from capital income and toward labor income.
Moreover, as those without capital income are less likely to be aware of discrepancies be-
tween labor and capital income taxation, this provides a further incentive to tilt taxation in
this way.34 This can make policies aimed at reducing the rate of capital accumulation and
inequality especially difficult to implement (Piketty, 2014).35
       More generally, this work demonstrates a previously unappreciated downside to local
representation in legislatures: it advantages groups that are perceived as better at negotiating
resources for their district, and these groups will take rents according to their preferences.




  33
      For recent advances in particular countries, see Galasso et al. (2010) and Dal Bo et al. (2017).
  34
      On the other hand, if voters are aware of these dimensions, this would lead to different results. In par-
ticular, the awareness of difficult-to-observe policy instruments increases the importance of electing someone
with preferences similar to yours. This would push voters to focus on “character” over other features of a
candidate, such as competence.
   35
      Under the U.S. tax code, hedge fund managers are allowed to represent their labor income as capital
income, subject to a much lower rate of taxation, and there are three different ways for individuals to make
expenditures on private jets tax deductible (Kristof, 2014).


                                                                                                            33
References
Achen, Christopher H. 1977. “Measuring Representation: Perils of the Correlation Coeffi-
  cient.” American Journal of Political Science 21(4):805–815.

Achen, Christopher H. 1978. “Measuring representation.” American Journal of Political
  Science 22(3):475–510.

Altonji, Ian and Rebecca Black. 1999. Race and Gender in the Labor Market. In Handbook of
  Labor Economics, ed. Orin Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier pp. 3143–
  3251.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, Marc Meredith and Erik Snowberg. 2014. “Mecro-Economic Voting:
 Local Information and Micro-Perceptions of the Macro-Economy.” Economics & Politics
 forthcoming.

Ayres, Ian and Peter Siegelman. 1995. “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for
 a New Car.” American Economic Review 85(3):304–321.

Baron, David P. and John A. Ferejohn. 1989. “Bargaining in Legislatures.” The American
  Political Science Review 83(4):1181–1206.

Barro, Robert J. 1973. “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model.” Public Choice
  14(1):19–42.

Bartels, Larry M. 2007. Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age.
  Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Berinsky, Adam J, Gregory A Huber and Gabriel S Lenz. 2012. “Evaluating Online Labor
  Markets for Experimental Research: Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk.” Political Analysis
  20(3):351–368.

Bernheim, B Douglas, Bezalel Peleg and Michael D Whinston. 1987. “Coalition-proof Nash
  Equilibria: I. Concepts.” Journal of Economic Theory 42(1):1–12.

Bernheim, B Douglas and Michael D Whinston. 1987. “Coalition-proof Nash Equilibria: II.
  Applications.” Journal of Economic Theory 42(1):13–29.

Berry, Christopher R. and Anthony Fowler. 2016. “Cardinals or Clerics? Congressional Com-
  mittees and the Distribution of Pork.” American Journal of Political Science 60(3):692—
  708.

Berry, Christopher R. Barry C. Burden and William G. Howell. 2010. “The President and the
  Distribution of Federal Spending.” American Political Science Review 104(4):783—799.

Besley, Timothy. 2007. Principled Agents?: The Political Economy of Good Government.
  Oxford University Press.

Besley, Timothy, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson and Johanna Rickne. 2014. “Gender Quotas
  and the Crisis of the Mediocre Man: Theory and Evidence from Sweden.” Mimeo.

                                                                          Bibliography–1
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess. 2002. “The Political Economy of Government Re-
  sponsiveness: Theory and Evidence from India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  117:1415—-1451.

Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. 1997. “An Economic Model of Representative Democ-
  racy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1):85–114.

Birch, Anthony H. 1972. Representation. London, UK: Macmillan.

Boone, Christopher, Arindrajit Dube and Ethan Kaplan. 2014. “The Political Economy of
  Discretionary Spending: Evidence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity .

Campante, Felipe R. 2011. “Redistribution in a Model of Voting and Campaign Contribu-
  tions.” Journal of Public Economics 95(7–8):646–656.

Carnes, Nicholas. 2013. White-Collar Government: The Hidden Role of Class in Economic
  Policy Making. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Caselli, Francesco and Massimo Morelli. 2004. “Bad Politicians.” Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 88(3):759–782.

Chari, Varadarajan V, Larry E Jones and Ramon Marimon. 1997. “The Economics of Split-
 Ticket Voting in Representative Democracies.” The American Economic Review 87(5):957–
 976.

Chen, Jowei and Jonathan Rodden. 2013. “Unintentional Gerrymandering: Political Geog-
 raphy and Electoral Bias in Legislatures.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 8(3):239–
 269.

Christiansen, Nels. 2013. “Strategic Delegation in a Legislative Bargaining Model with Pork
 and Public Goods.” Journal of Public Economics 97:217—229.

Clinton, Joshua D. 2007. “Lawmaking and Roll Calls.” Journal of Politics 69(2):457–469.

Committee on Political Parties. 1950. “Toward a More Responsible Two-Party System.”
  Special issue of the American Political Science Review.

Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender Differences in Preferences.” Journal of
  Economic Literature 47(2):448–474.

Dahl, Robert A. and Edward R. Tufte. 1973. Size and Democracy. Stanford, California:
 Stanford University Press.

Dal Bo, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson and Johanna Rickne. 2017.
 “Who Becomes A Politician?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 132:1877—1914.

Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York, NY: Harper Collins.



                                                                            Bibliography–2
Dynes, Adam M. and Gregory A. Huber. 2015. “Partisanship and the Allocation of Federal
 Spending: Do Same-Party Legislators or Voters Benefit from Shared Party Affiliation with
 the President and House Majority?” American Political Science Review 109(1):172–186.

Eraslan, Hülya. 2002. “Uniqueness of Stationary Equilibrium Payoffs in the Baron-Ferejohn
  Model.” Journal of Economic Theory 103(1):11–30.

Fearon, James D. 1999. Electoral Accountability and the Control of Politicians: Selecting
  Good Types versus Sanctioning Poor Performance. In Democracy, Accountability, and
  Representation, ed. Adam Przeworski, Bernard Manin and Susan C. Stokes. Cambridge
  University Press pp. 55–97.

Ferejohn, John. 1986.   “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control.” Public Choice
  50(1):5–25.

Fernández, Raquel and Gilat Levy. 2008. “Diversity and Redistribution.” Journal of Public
  Economics 92:925—943.

Frank, Thomas. 2004. What’s the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Heart
  of America. New York: Henry Holt and Co.

Gagliarducci, Stefano and Tommaso Nannicini. 2013. “Do Better Paid Politicians Perform
 Better? Disentangling Incentives from Selection.” Journal of the European Economic As-
 sociation 11(2):369–398.

Galasso, Vincenzo, Massimiliano Landi, Andrea Mattozzi and Antonio Merlo. 2010. The
 Labor Market of Italian Politicians. In The Ruling Class: Management and Politics in
 Modern Italy, ed. Tito Boeri, Antonio Merlo and Andrea Prat. Oxford University Press
 pp. 7—104.

Gilens, Martin and Benjamin I. Page. 2014. “Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites,
  Interest Groups, and Average Citizens.” Perspectives on Politics forthcoming.

Groseclose, Tim. 2001. “A Model of Candidate Location when one Candidate has a Valence
  Advantage.” American Journal of Political Science 45(4):862–886.

Harding, John P., Stuart S. Rosenthal and C. F. Sirmans. 2003. “Estimating Bargaining
  Power in the Market for Existing Homes.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(1):178–
  188.

Harstad, Bard. 2010. “Strategic Delegation and Voting Rules.” Journal of Public Economics
  94:102–113.

Hatfield, John William and Gerard Padró-i-Miquel. 2012. “A Political Economy Theory of
  Partial Decentralization.” Journal of the European Economic Association 10(3):605–633.

Hazan, Reuven Y. and Gideon Rahat. 2010. Democracy within Parties: Candidate Selection
  Methods and Their Political Consequences. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.


                                                                           Bibliography–3
Healy, Andrew, Mikael Persson and Erik Snowberg. 2017. “Digging into the Pocketbook:
  Evidence on Economic Voting from Income Registry Data Matched to a Voter Survey.”
  American Political Science Review 111(4):771–785.

Herron, Michael C. 2000. “Estimating the Economic Impact of Political Party Competition
  in the 1992 British Election.” American Journal of Political Science 44(2):326–337.

Herron, Michael C. and Kenneth W. Shotts. 2006. “Term Limits and Pork.” Legislative
  Studies Quarterly 31(3):383–403.

Hix, Simon and Abdul Noury. 2016. “Government-Opposition or Left-Right? The Institu-
  tional Determinants of Voting in Legislatures.” Political Science Research and Methods
  4:249—273.

Holmstrom, Bengt. 1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability.” Bell Journal of Economics
  10:74—-91.

Hotelling, Harold. 1929. “Stability in Competition.” The Economic Journal 39(153):41–57.

Huber, John D and Michael M Ting. 2013. “Redistribution, Pork, and Elections.” Journal
 of the European Economic Association 11(6):1382–1403.

Kristof, Nicholas. 2014. “A Nation of Takers?” The New York Times p. A31.

Lewis, Jeffrey B. and Chris Tausanovitch. 2013. “Has Joint Scaling Solved the Achen Ob-
  jection to Miller and Stokes?” UCLA, mimeo.

Mansbridge, Jane. 1999. “Should Blacks Represent Blacks and Women Represent Women?
 A Contingent ”Yes”.” The Journal of Politics 61(3):628–657.

Mansbridge, Jane. 2009. “A Selection Model of Political Representation.” Journal of Political
 Philosophy 17(4):369–398.

Matter, Ulrich and Alois Stutzer. 2015. “The Role of Lawyer-Legislators in Shaping the Law:
 Evidence from Voting on Tort Reforms.” Journal of Law and Economics 58(2):357–384.

Mattozzi, Andrea and Antonio Merlo. 2008. “Political Careers or Career Politicians?” Jour-
 nal of Public Economics 92(3):597–608.

McKelvey, Richard D and Raymond Riezman. 1992. “Seniority in Legislatures.” American
 Political Science Review 86(4):951–965.

Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard. 1981. “A Rational Theory of the Size of Govern-
 ment.” The Journal of Political Economy 89(5):914–927.

Messner, Matthias and Mattias K Polborn. 2004. “Paying Politicians.” Journal of Public
 Economics 88(12):2423–2445.

Miller, Warren E and Donald E Stokes. 1963. “Constituency Influence in Congress.” Amer-
 ican Political Science Review 57(1):45–56.

                                                                             Bibliography–4
Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund. 2008. “Gender Differences in Competition.” Negotia-
  tion Journal 24(4):447–463.

Norris, Pippa. 1997. Theories of Recruitment. In Passages to Power: Legislative Recruitment
  in Advanced Democracies, ed. Pippa Norris. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
  chapter 1, pp. 1–14.

Ortoleva, Pietro and Erik Snowberg. 2015. “Overconfidence in Political Behavior.” American
  Economic Review 105(2):504–535.

Osborne, Martin J. and Al Slivinski. 1996. “A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
  Candidates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1):65–96.

Padró-i-Miquel, Gerard. 2007. “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics
  of Fear.” Review of Economic Studies 74(4):1259–1274.

Padró i Miquel, Gerard and Erik Snowberg. 2012. “The Lesser Evil: Executive Accountabil-
  ity with Partisan Supporters.” Journal of Theoretical Politics 24(1):19–45.

Persson, Torsten, Gerard Roland and Guido Tabellini. 1997. “Separation of Powers and
  Political Accountability.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4):1163–1202.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic
  Policy. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Pettersson-Lidbom, Per. 2012. “Does the Size of the Legislature Affect the Size of Govern-
  ment? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments.” Journal of Public Economics 96(3):269–
  278.

Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press.

Pitkin, Hanah. 1967. The Concept of Representation. Berkeley, CA: University of California
  Press.

Primo, David M and James M Snyder. 2008. “Distributive Politics and the Law of 1/n.”
  The Journal of Politics 70(02):477–486.

Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz. 2007a. “Partisan Impacts on the Econ-
  omy: Evidence from Prediction Markets and Close Elections.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 122(2):807–829.

Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz. 2007b. “Party Influence in Congress and
  the Economy.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 2(3):277–286.

Stokes, Donald E. 1963. “Spatial Models of Party Competition.” The American Political
  Science Review 57(2):368–377.

Taagepera, Rein and Matthew S. Shugart. 1989. Seats and Votes: The Effects and Determi-
  nants of Electoral Systems. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

                                                                             Bibliography–5
Tullock, Gordon. 1959. “Problems of Majority Voting.” The Journal of Political Economy
  67(6):571–579.

Volden, Craig and Alan E Wiseman. 2014. Legislative Effectiveness in the United States
  Congress: The Lawmakers. Cambridge University Press.

Volden, Craig, Alan E Wiseman and Dana E Wittmer. 2013. “When Are Women More
  Effective Lawmakers Than Men?” American Journal of Political Science 57(2):326–341.

Volden, Craig and Alan Wiseman. 2007. “Bargainig in Legislatures over Particularistic and
  Collective Goods.” American Political Science Review 101:79—92.

Weingast, Barry R. 1979. “A Rational Choice Perspective on Congressional Norms.” Amer-
 ican Journal of Political Science pp. 245–262.

Weingast, Barry R. 1994. “Reflections on Distributive Politics and Universalism.” Political
 Research Quarterly pp. 319—327.

Weingast, Barry R., Kenneth A. Shepsle and Christopher Johnsen. 1981. “The Political
 Economy of Benefits and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive Politics.” The
 Journal of Political Economy 89(4):642–664.

Wessels, Bernhard. 1997. Germany. In Passages to Power: Legislative Recruitment in Ad-
 vanced Democracies, ed. Pippa Norris. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
 pp. 76–97.




                                                                           Bibliography–6
A      Proofs—Not Intended for Publication

Proposition 1.
  1. If γ = 0, then every equilibrium is representative with tax rate τl∗ , and all districts
     receive an equal proportion of the tax revenues.
  2. If 0 < γ < γ ∗ (n) < 1 there are two types of equilibria:
       (a) Unrepresentative equilibria, with the legislature composed of all high types, and
           tax rate τh∗ . These equilibria are not stage strong.
       (b) Somewhat representative, with the legislature composed of n + 1 low types and n
                                   h                   α
                                                    i 1−α
                                             L
           high types, and tax rate (2n + 1)π(n+1)L       τl∗ < τl∗ .

  3. If γ ∗ (n) < γ < 1 then the unique equilibrium is unrepresentative with tax rate τh∗ , and
     all districts receive  an equal proportion of the tax revenues.
                        
                          1
                                 1−α
                                   α
                                         
           z        1        1−α
     If 2n+1   > γ(η−1) η α η−α       − 1 this equilibrium is stage strong.

                                k     0
Proof of Proposition 1: Define πrk as the share of tax revenues returned to a district by a
legislator of type k 0 ∈ {L, H} when the majority is composed of r ≥ n + 1 legislators of type
k ∈ {L, H}. Using this notation, and taking first order conditions yields that the tax rate
                                 ∗
                                                   α
                                               L 1−α ∗
set by the legislature will be: τrL = (2n + 1)πrL     τl when the majority of the legislature
                     ∗
                                        α
                                     H 1−α ∗
is low types, and τrH   = (2n + 1)πrH       τh when the majority of the legislature are high
types, where τl∗ and τh∗ are the tax rates set by the legislature when it is composed entirely
of low types or high types respectively, as defined in (2).
    In what follows we will use the notation uh (k|(2n + 1 − (j + 1))L, jH) to denote the
utility of a high-type median voter of electing a legislator of type k ∈ {L, H} when there are
j high-type legislators that have been elected to the legislature (ul (k|(2n + 1 − (j + 1))L, jH)
in the case of a low-type median voter).
    Consider the incentives of a voter when the majority of the legislature is low types, and
there are j < n high types that have been elected to the legislature. First, notice that if a
low-type median voter wants to elect a high-type legislator, a fortiori a high-type median
voter wants to elect a high-type legislator. Second, if a low-type median voter wants to elect
a high-type legislator when there are j < n high-type legislators that have been elected in
the legislature, a fortiori a low-type median voter wants to elect a high-type legislator when

                                                                                    Appendix–1
there are j − 1 high-type legislators that have been elected. Indeed, from the perspective of
a low-type median voter, the fewer the high-types in the legislature, the higher the benefit
of electing a high-type in the distributive stage and the lower the cost of electing a high-type
in the tax-setting stage.
   The utility that a low-type median voter will get when there are j = n − 1 high-type
legislators that have been elected to the legislature, and she electes a high-type legislator is:

                                                               α
                                                     L
                                                                  τl∗ )yl
                                                            1−α
        ul (H|(n + 1)L, (n − 1)H) = (1 − (2n + 1)π(n+1)L
                                          1 H                                α       α
                                                                   L
                                                                                 yτl∗
                                                                            1−α
                                       +      π(n+1)L (2n + 1)π(n+1)L
                                         α
                                                               α
                                                             1−α
                                                α     L                           !α      !
                                          1−α
                                           y         π(n+1)L               H
                                                                          π(n+1)L
                                  = yl +                                   L
                                                                                       −α
                                           yl            α                π(n+1)L

and, correspondingly, the utility that a low-type median voter will get when electing a low-
type legislator is

                                                                                α
                                                                               1−α
                                                    α                 L
                                                 1−α
                                                 y                   π(n+2)L
               ul (L|(n + 1)L, (n − 1)H) = yl +                                       (1 − α) .
                                                 yl                       α

Hence, a low-type will want to elect a high-type if and only if

                                          !α                                α
                                                                          !1−α
                                 H                               L
                                π(n+1)L                         π(n+2)L
                                 L
                                               − α > (1 − α)     L
                                π(n+1)L                         π(n+1)L

After substituting the expression for the πs and simplifying,we get that a low-type will want
to elect a high-type when low-types are in the majority (and doing so will not change the
majority) if and only if

                                                                                        α
                                                                                       1−α
                            α                           n(1 − γ + γη) + n + 1
             (1 − γ + γη) − α − (1 − α)                                                       >0         (7)
                                                     (n − 1)(1 − γ + γη) + n + 2

Notice that the left-hand-side of (7) is minimized when n = 1, that is, when there are three




                                                                                                  Appendix–2
districts and two of them are electing low types. Hence (7) will hold whenever

                                                                                    α
                                                                                   1−α
                                  α                         (1 − γ + γη) + 2
                    (1 − γ + γη) − α − (1 − α)                                            >0             (8)
                                                                    3

Notice that the left-hand-side of (8) is equal to zero when γ = 0, its derivative with respect
to γ evaluated at γ = 0 is positive, and when γ = 1, as η grows large it eventually becomes
negative. Hence, there exists a η > 1 such that for η < η (7) holds for all j and n. In a
similar way it can be shown that both high and low-type median voters prefer to elect a
high-type when the majority is composed of high-types, and doing so will not change which
type is in the majority.
   Next, consider the preferences of a voter when other districts have elected n high-types
and n low types, that is, when the voter is pivotal. Clearly, a high type median voter will
always want to elect a high-type. By doing so she can shift the majority of the legislature in
her favor and elect a high-type representative for her district. On the other hand, a low-type
median voter will want to elect a low-type when her choice will be pivotal in shifting the
majority of the legislature from high-types to low-types when ul (L|nL, nH) ≥ ul (H|nL, nH),
that is:                                           α
                                                ! 1−α
                                       H
                                      π(n+1)H                ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                                        ≤
                                       L
                                      π(n+1)L                ul (τh∗ ) − yl

which is the same as (4), and can be simplified to

                                                                      α
                                                                     1−α           1
                    (1 − γ + γη)(n(1 − γ + γη) + (n + 1))                       η 1−α (1 − α)
                                                                              ≤               .
                           (n + 1)(1 − γ + γη) + n                                  η−α

In the case of three districts, that is n = 1, that minimizes the left hand side of the inequality,
the condition further simplifies to

                                                                 α
                                                                1−α           1
                         (1 − γ + γη)((1 − γ + γη) + 2)                  η 1−α (1 − α)
                                                                       ≤               .
                                2(1 − γ + γη) + 1                            η−α

To show that γ ∗ (n) < 1, we need to show that the above never holds when γ = 1. In that



                                                                                                  Appendix–3
case the expression simplifies further to:

                                                  α
                                                 1−α
                                         η+2                 η(1 − α)
                                                        ≤             ,
                                        2η + 1                η−α

which never holds because, as shown above, in the case of γ = 1 we have that η < η if
                          α                                                    α             α
and only if (3/(η + 2)) 1−α > (1 − α)/(η α − α), so ((η + 2)/(2η + 1)) 1−α > (3/(η + 2)) 1−α >
(1 − α)/(η α − α) > η(1 − α)/(η − α).
   When (4) holds, then pure-strategy equilibria will have two forms. Either n + 1 districts
will elect low type legislators and n districts will elect high-type legislators, or all 2n + 1
districts will elect high type legislators.
   Consider the first type. This is an equilibrium as anyone who is electing a high-type
legislator is not pivotal, and thus would prefer to elect a high-type. Any median voter who
is electing a low-type legislator is pivotal, so, as (4) holds, they prefer to elect a low-type.
   Consider now the second type. This is an equilibrium as the median voter in every district
is not pivotal, they prefer to elect a high type.
   Now, we show there exist no other pure-strategy equilibria. Take as a candidate equilib-
rium one where j < n districts elect high types, and the rest of the districts elect high-types.
Then the median voter of every district that is electing a low-type is not pivotal, and would
prefer to elect a high-type. Thus, this cannot be an equilibrium. Similar logic applies when
the candidate equilibrium calls for j 0 < n districts to elect low types, and the rest to elect
high-types.
   Finally, we show that the equilibrium of the second type is not stage strong, but equilibria
of the first type are. In the equilibrium of the second type the tax rate is τh∗ and each district
gets an equal share of tax revenue. It will be a profitable deviation for n+1 low-type districts
to elect low-types if                              α
                                     H
                                                 !1−α
                                    π(2n+1)H                ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                                        <                  .
                                      L
                                     π(n+1)L                ul (τh∗ ) − yl




                                                                                     Appendix–4
    H           1      H
As π(2n+1)H =   3
                    < π(n+1)H , this implies that

                                           α
                                         !1−α                     α
                                                                !1−α
                               H                      H
                              π(2n+1)H               π(n+1)H               ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                             <                        <
                               L
                              π(n+1)L                 L
                                                     π(n+1)L               ul (τh∗ ) − yl

as (4) holds. Thus, there is a profitable deviation for n + 1 low types, and the equilibrium
of the second type is not stage strong.
   To see that all equilibria of the first type are stage strong, consider a potential deviation in
which the low-type voters in j of the districts that are supposed to elect low-type legislators
(in equilibrium) instead defect and vote for, and elect, high-type legislators. This will be a
profitable deviation if:                             α
                                          H
                                                   !1−α
                                         π(n+j)H            ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                                        >                  .
                                          L
                                         π(n+1)L            ul (τh∗ ) − yl
             H         H
However, as π(n+j)H < π(n+1)H , it follows from (4) that

                                           α
                                         !1−α                     α
                                                                !1−α
                               H                    H
                              π(n+j)H              π(n+1)H                 ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                            <                        <
                               L
                              π(n+1)L                 L
                                                     π(n+1)L               ul (τh∗ ) − yl

so there is no coalition of low-type voters who were supposed to vote for low-type candidates
who would be made strictly better off by voting for (and electing) high-type candidates.
As high-type voters do not affect the outcomes in any district, we do not need to consider
deviations by them.
   Next, consider a deviation in which the low-type voters in j 0 districts that are supposed
to elect high-type legislators (in equilibrium) instead defect and vote for, and elect, low-type
legislators. Had these voters complied with their equilibrium strategies, they would have
received:                                           α
                                                   1−α
                                    α       L                                   !α          !
                                 1−α
                                 y         π(n+1)L                    H
                                                                     π(n+1)L
                           yl +                                       L
                                                                                     −α
                                 yl                α                 π(n+1)L

while deviating gives:                                                α
                                                                   1−α
                                        α             L
                                     1−α
                                     y               π(n+j 0 +1)L
                               yl +                                        (1 − α)
                                     yl                     α

                                                                                                Appendix–5
After substitutions, and noticing that the utility gain from sticking with the equilibrium
strategy is minimized when n = 1, j 0 = 1, we obtain the same condition (8) we derived earlier.
Hence, the deviation will not be profitable as long as η < η, which it is, by assumption. Thus,
there is no coalition of low-type voters who were supposed to vote for high-type candidates
who would be made strictly better off by voting for (and electing) low-type candidates. Note
that none of the above relationships depend on the number of high-type median voters, z,
which will always elect high-types in equilibria.
   As all stage-strong equilibria are also equilibria, and we have identified all pure-strategy
equilibria, we have thus identified all pure-strategy stage-strong equilibria when (4) holds.
   When (4) does not hold, then electing a low-type legislator is strictly dominated, so every
district will want to elect a high-type legislator. As such, this is the unique equilibrium. As
the payoff to defection for low types is largest when they all defect to vote for a low-type
legislator, this equilibrium will be stage strong when this deviation is not profitable for a low
type. Specifically, if
                              ul (H|(2n)H) − ul (L|(2n − z)L, zH) > 0

then the equilibria will be stage strong. Simplifying leads to the following conditions for
stage-strong:                                         α
                                                   1−α     1
                                     zγ(η − 1)            η 1−α (1 − α)
                                               +1       >               ,
                                      2n + 1                  η−α

which is the same as found in the proposition. To see that this condition is not redundant,
that is, whenever the unrepresentative equilibrium is unique then it may or may not be
stage-strong, notice that the right-hand-side of the latter inequality is equal to the right
hand side of (4). Furthermore

                                                                    α
                                                                   1−α                             α
                                                                                                   1−α
                         (1 − γ + γη)(n(1 − γ + γη) + (n + 1))                      zγ(η − 1)
    LHS of (4) =                                                            >                 +1          ,
                                (n + 1)(1 − γ + γη) + n                              2n + 1

where the inequality follows from straightforward algebra.                                                    




                                                                                              Appendix–6
Proposition 2.
  1. γ ∗ (n) is decreasing in n. As n → ∞, γ ∗ (n) → κ(η, α), where κ(η, α) ∈ (0, 1).
  2. τn∗ is decreasing in n.

Proof of Proposition 2: To show (1), note that γ ∗ (n) is defined implicitly by (4), and
that the RHS of that equation does not depend on n or γ. Thus, by implicit differentiation
we have that
                      H       α .
                       π(n+1)H 1−α
                    d πL             dn
        dγ ∗ (n)        (n+1)L
                 = −            α
          dn            H
                               1−α
                       π(n+1)H
                                    .
                    d πL              dγ
                          (n+1)L
  H     α
  π(n+1)H 1−α                            !2α−1
d πL                            H
                               π(n+1)H    1−α
    (n+1)L         α                             γ(η − 1)((1 − γ) + γη)(1 + (1 − γ) + γη)
                =               L
                                                                                          >0
     dn           1−α          π(n+1)L                 ((n + 1)((1 − γ) + γη) + n)2
  H     α
  π(n+1)H 1−α                            !2α−1
d πL                            H
                               π(n+1)H    1−α
    (n+1)L           α
                =               L
      dγ            1−α        π(n+1)L
                               n(η − 1)(2n + 2(n + 1) + γ(η − 1)(3n + 1 + (n + 1)((1 − γ) + γη)))
                          ×                                                                       >0
                                                  ((n + 1)((1 − γ) + γη) + n)2

thus dγ ∗ (n)/dn < 0. As n → ∞, then γ ∗ (n) goes to:

                                                         α
                                           "          1−α         #
                                  1              1−α
                       γ ∗ (n) =                           η 1/α − 1 ≡ κ(η, α)
                                 η−1             η−α

which is clearly positive. Proposition 1 shows it is less than one.
   The second point follows from the first and the discussion in the text.                     




Proposition 3.
  1. γ ∗ (q) is decreasing in q.
  2. In unrepresentative equilibria, the average tax rate is increasing in q.
  3. There exists a q > 0 such that for q < q expected taxes are lower in the unrepresentative
     equilibrium than in somewhat representative equilibria.

                                                                                      Appendix–7
Proof of Proposition 3:
   To show the first part of the proposition we begin by characterizing γ ∗ (q). Recall that
γ ∗ (q) is obtained by imposing that when the first and third district elect a low and high type,
respectively, a low type median voter in the middle district is indifferent between electing a
low type and high type. The difference with benchmark model, however, is that now a high
type legislator will vote for tax rates as if he had low income with probability q > 0. With
slight abuse of notation, we will refer to this type as Hl and to the original high type in the
benchmark model as Hh. Hence, if the low type median voter in the middle district elects
a high type legislator, he faces three scenarios. With probability (1 − q)2 , the two Hh-type
                                                                  α
                                     ∗        H 1−α ∗
legislators will set a tax equal to τ2Hh ≡ (3π2H ) τh as in equation (5). With probability
q 2 , the two Hl-type legislators have preferences for relatively high taxes, and will set a tax
                            α
          ∗        H 1−α ∗
equal to τ2Hl ≡ (3π2H ) τl . Finally, with probability 2q(1 − q), there is one Hh-type and
one Hl-type (the first district legislator is a low type). Notice that in this latter case the
Hl-type legislator will always prefer a larger tax than the two other legislators (he prefers
high taxes and can secure for its district a large proportion of revenues). As such, he will
never be the median legislator. A necessary and sufficient condition for the low type to
be median legislator when the other two legislators are one Hh-type and one Hl-type is
                            α
           ∗        L 1−α ∗
therefore τ2Hh < (3π2H ) τl , where the RHS of the inequality is the most preferred tax the
low type in the legislature. The inequality can be rewritten as

                        α                     α                                       α
                   L 1−α ∗            L
                                           1−α                                   1−α
                (3π2H ) τl           π2H                 1                 1                 1
                       α   =          H
                                                    η   1−α   =                            η 1−α > 1
                   H 1−α ∗
                (3π2H ) τh           π2H                              1 − γ + γη

which is always verified since

                                          α
                                         1−α                    α
                                                              1−α
                                1                    1       1         1
                                                η   1−α   >         η 1−α = η > 1
                           1 − γ + γη                        η




                                                                                                       Appendix–8
Combining results, we have that with q > 0, (4) becomes:

                      α
               H
                                                                   ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                   1−α
              π2H
               L
                        ≤                                                                               
              π2L                                                                             τl∗
                            (1 −   q)2 ul (τh∗ )   +   q 2 ul (τl∗ )   + 2q(1 − q)ul                α        − yl
                                                                                        ((1−γ)+γη) 1−α



which uniquely pins down γ ∗ (q). Since the denominator of the RHS is increasing in q, γ ∗ (q)
is decreasing in q.
   To establish the second point, fix γ < γ ∗ (q = 0). The tax rate in an unrepresentative
equilibrium is τh∗ with probability (1−q)3 +3q(1−q)2 and τl∗ > τh∗ with probability q 3 +3q 2 (1−
                                                                                                         α
                                                                          L 1−α ∗
q), whereas the tax rate in the somewhat representative equilibrium is (3π2L ) τl ∈ (τh∗ , τl∗ ).
Thus, when q = 0 the tax rate is lower in the unrepresentative equilibrium, and when q = 1
the tax rate is lower in somewhat representative equilibria. As the tax rate in somewhat
representative equilibria is constant in q (for fixed γ), whereas it is monotonically increasing
in q in the unrepresentative equilibria, there is some q such that for q < q the tax rate is
lower in the unrepresentative equilibrium.
   The third point follows from the fact that q 3 + 3q 2 (1 − q) > 0 when q > 0.
                                                                                                                       




Proposition 4.

  1. If 0 < γ < γ ∗ (n) < 1 then party L nominates at least n + 1 low-type candidates in
     districts with low-type median voters, and is otherwise indifferent. Party H nominates
     n high-type candidates, and is otherwise indifferent.

  2. If γ ∗ (n) < γ < 1 then party H nominates high-type candidates in every district. Party
     L is indifferent in all districts.

  3. All patterns of representation and taxation continue to hold as in Proposition 1.

Proof of Proposition 4: It is straight-forward to show that, in equilibrium


       τh∗ < τ(2n)H
              ∗        ∗
                    < τ(2n−1)H            ∗
                               < · · · < τ(n+1)H    ∗
                                                 < τ(n+1)L            ∗
                                                           < · · · < τ(2n−1)L    ∗
                                                                              < τ(2n)L < τl∗



                                                                                                               Appendix–9
thus, given the preferences of the L and H parties, they want to maximize the number of
low-types and high-types, respectively, in office.
   If γ > γ ∗ (n), then every district would like to elect a high-type legislator. To ensure that
one is elected in every district, party H must nominate one in every district. If they did
not, then the L party would not either, and a low-type would be elected in that district. As
party L’s strategy does not affect the outcome, they are indifferent.
   When γ < γ ∗ (n), then suppose that both parties play in accordance with the equilibrium
strategies described in part 1) of the proposition. Then n + 1 low-type legislators and n
high-type legislators are being elected. To show that this describes all equilibria, we need
to show that neither party can improve its outcome through deviating. First, suppose that
party L attempts to do so by getting another low-type legislator elected. The only way this
could occur is if there is a district where party H is nominating a low type, and party L is
nominating a high type who is being elected. By switching to a low-type candidate in that
district, the district will be forced to elect a low-type candidate. However, because party H
has nominated n high types, and at most n − 1 of them are being elected (because in the
district under consideration the high type was nominated by party L) there exists another
district that wants to elect a high type, and can do so. So the deviation will not be profitable
for party L.
   Now, suppose party H tries to change strategy and get an additional high-type legislator
elected. There are two ways this could happen. First, a district with a low-type median
voter could be electing a low-type from party H with party L nominating a high-type in
that district. The reason this is not a profitable deviation for party H follows the logic in
the paragraph above. Second, a district with a high-type median voter is electing a low
type because both parties are nominating a low types in the district. Party H could switch
to nominate a high type, who the district would then elect. However, at most n of the
n + 1 low-type candidates nominated by party L in districts with low-type median voters
are winning. So there would be a district with a low-type median voter that would want
to, and could, elect a low type, and would thus do so, ensuring that this is not a profitable


                                                                                  Appendix–10
deviation from the proposed equilibrium for either party. Similar arguments show that if
either party nominated less low or high types then in the specified equilibria, they would be
strictly better off by deviating to nominating all low or high types (respectively), showing
we have identified all equilibria.
   Part 3) follows from the argument above.                                                      



Proposition 5. If 0 < γ < γ ∗ (n), then there exists some ∆∗τ such that when ∆τ ∈
        ∗
(∆∗τ , τ(n+1)L − τh∗ ) then the tax rate and representation will be lower in equilibrium when
parties can discipline their legislators than when they cannot.

Proof of Proposition 5: We begin by examining the response of low-type median voters
to different candidate types, and then examine party strategies.
   Suppose that a low-type median voter had a choice between a high type that who commits
                                                      ∗
to act as if his ideal tax rate was τh∗ + ∆τ = τh∗ + τ2L          ∗
                                                         − τh∗ = τ2L , and a low type while the
other two districts are electing a high type and a low type. The utility of voting for the high
type is greater than voting for the low-type:


                         ∗           1 H ∗ α               ∗       1 L ∗ α
                   (1 − τ2L )yl +      (π2H τ2L y) > (1 − τ2L )yl + (π2L τ2L y)
                                     α                             α

         H     L
because π2H > π2L . As this is strictly greater, the low-type median voter would prefer to
vote for a high type who commits to act as if his preferred tax rate is τh∗ + ∆τ as long as

                                    1 H ∗                                1 L ∗ α
            (1 − (τh∗ + ∆τ ))yl +                                ∗
                                      (π2H (τh + ∆τ )y)α ≥ (1 − τ2L )yl + (π2L τ2L y)
                                    α                                    α

where ∆∗τ is defined as the point of equality. Given that (4) is assumed to hold, without the
ability to commit to τh∗ + ∆τ , the tax rate would be τ2L
                                                       ∗
                                                          , so if ∆τ ∈ (∆∗τ , τ2L
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                  − τh∗ ), then the
ability to commit will lower taxes.
   If the commitment to implement a tax rate of τh∗ + ∆τ comes from a party, then Propo-
sition 4, shows this will not change the structure of the equilibria. So what level of ∆τ


                                                                                    Appendix–11
would the parties choose? If ∆τ ∈ (∆∗τ , τ2L
                                          ∗
                                             − τh∗ ), then the equilibrium is for the parties to
nominate only high-types, and to commit their candidates to τh∗ + ∆τ . If the low-type party
committed to τh∗ + ∆0τ < τh∗ + ∆τ , then the high party could deviate to the same platform
and would be strictly better off, while the low-type party would be made strictly worse off. 




B      Additional Results—Not Intended for Publication

B.1     Formal Treatment of Changing Institutions

This subsection provides the technical details underlying the discussion of dynamic institu-
tional change in Section 6.3.
    Under our definition of slow institutional change, γ in the current period is set by the
legislature in the previous period. Under fast institutional change, the current legislature is
free to set γ before any policy decisions are made. We define a period as a single iteration of
our model with three legislative districts (n = 1), as in Section 3.2. Additionally, we assume
that one district always has a high-type median voter (z = 1); we refer to this as the high
district. A second district has a small probability, 1 − p, that the median voter there will be
a high-type; we refer to this as the middle district. The type of the middle district’s median
voter is realized before the voting stage of each period. We also assume that all players have
a common discount factor between periods of δ < 1.
    We focus on Markov-perfect equilibria. To avoid issues of the state variable encoding
entire histories, we restrict γ to take on one of two values γ ∈ {0, 1}. The state will thus
include the type of the middle district’s median voter, and the value of γ at the beginning
of the stage. We further assume that in the first period γ = 0. Then we have:
Proposition 6. When institutional change is slow, then:

    • If δ < δ ∗ (p) then in each period the Markov-perfect equilibrium will be representa-
      tive until the first period when the median voter of the middle district is a high type.
      Thereafter γ = 1, and the equilibrium will be unrepresentative.



                                                                                  Appendix–12
   • If δ > δ ∗ (p) then the stage-strong, Markov-perfect equilibrium will be representative if
     the median voter of the middle district is a low type for at least two periods.
If institutional change is fast, then equilibria in each period will be representative.

Proof of Proposition 6: In order to consider the most interesting scenario, assume that
at γ = 1, η is such that (4) does not hold. Let us first consider an equilibrium in which a
hight-type median voter always elects a high-type legislator who will set γ = 1 for the next
period, and a low-type median voter always elects a low-type legislator who will set γ = 0
for the next period. We can compute value functions for these strategies


 Vl (L|L, H; γ = 0) = Ul (L|L, H; γ = 0) + δ (pVl (L|L, H; β = 1) + (1 − p)Vl (H|L, H; γ = 0))


Vl (H|L, H; γ = 0) = Ul (H|L, H; γ = 0) + δ (pVl (L|L, H; γ = 1) + (1 − p)Vl (H|L, H; γ = 1))

 Vl (L|L, H; γ = 1) = Ul (L|L, H; γ = 1) + δ (pVl (L|L, H; γ = 0) + (1 − p)Vl (H|L, H; γ = 0))

Vl (H|L, H; γ = 1) = Ul (H|L, H; γ = 1) + δ (pVl (L|L, H; γ = 1) + (1 − p)Vl (H|L, H; γ = 1)) ,

and a low-type median voter will always elect a low-type legislator who will set β = 1 if and
only if
                            Vl (L|L, H; γ = 1) > Vl (H|L, H; γ = 1),

which implies
                            Vl (L|L, H; γ = 0) > Vl (H|L, H; γ = 0).

To save on notation, let

                                                 α   L α                                 α                  !
                                                                                  H
                                                                                             ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                              1−α                                   1−α
                                              y     π2L1−α (η − α)               π2H
∆1 ≡ Ul (H|L, H; γ = 1)−Ul (L|L, H; γ = 1) =                                               −
                                              yl             1
                                                        αη 1−α
                                                                                  L
                                                                                 π2L         ul (τh∗ ) − yl
                                                                                                                γ=1


                    α                                          α
                 1−α                                      1−α     1
                                                                                 !
                 y         (η − α)                η(η + 2)         η 1−α (1 − α)
              =                  α     1                         −                 >0
                 yl    α(η + 2) 1−α η 1−α          2η + 1              η−α
                                                   α                                     α
                                                1−α                                 1−α      !
                                                y        1−α                    η+2
∆2 ≡ Ul (L|L, H; γ = 0) − Ul (L|L, H; γ = 1) =                  α                             −1     >0
                                                yl    α(η + 2) 1−α               3

                                                                                        Appendix–13
                                                 α                                                                      α
                                              1−α                                                                  1−α !
                                              y       η−α                                                      3η
∆3 ≡ Ul (H|L, H; γ = 0)−Ul (H|L, H; γ = 1) =            α     1                                     1−                         <0
                                              yl    α3 1−α η 1−α                                             2η + 1

Since at γ = 1, (4) does not hold it follows that ∆1 < ∆2 < −∆3 . Furthermore, we have
that Vl (L|L, H; γ = 1) > Vl (H|L, H; γ = 1) if and only if

                                              ∆1                     ∆1 − ∆3
                     δ > δ ∗ (p) =                      and p > p∗ =
                                        p∆2 + (1 − p)∆3              ∆2 − ∆3

where δ ∗ (p∗ ) = 1 and δ ∗ (p) is decreasing in p for p ∈ (p∗ , 1). Substituting, we get

                                                                     α
                                                                    1−α         1
                                                         η(η+2)                η 1−α (1−α)
                                                          2η+1
                                                                           −       η−α
         δ > δ ∗ (p) =       1                     α                                       α
                                                                                                            α
                                                                                                            1−α              (9)
                            1−α (1−α)
                         p η η−α            η+2                                      η+2                3η
                                                  1−α                                     1−α
                                             3
                                                         − 1 + (1 − p)                3
                                                                                                   1 − 2η+1


and                                                                  α
                                                                    1−α
                                                              3η
                                                             −1
                                                             2η+1                1
                p > p∗ =            1
                                                       α
                                                                      α
                                                                              >
                                 η 1−α (1−α)
                                                 
                                                   3
                                                      1−α         3η
                                                                       1−α      2
                                     η−α
                                              1 − η+2        −    2η+1
                                                                            −1

It is easy to check that a high-type median voter will always elect a high-type legislator who
will set γ = 1. Hence, when (9) holds, there is an equilibrium such that if the median voter
of the middle district is a low-type, she will elect a low-type legislator, and the legislature
will set γ = 0 in the next period. Whenever the median voter of the middle district is a
high type, she will elect a high-type legislator, and the legislature will set γ = 1 in the next
period. However, since Vl (H|H, H; γ = 1) > Vl (L|H, H; γ = 1), there is also an equilibrium
where the legislature will consist of two low types and a high type until the first period
when the median voter of the middle district is a high type. Thereafter γ = 1, and all three
districts will elect high-types, who will set tax τh∗ . An argument similar to the one used in
Proposition 1) is enough to conclude that only the former equilibrium is stage-strong.
   When (9) is violated, Vl (H|L, H; γ = 1) > Vl (L|L, H; γ = 1). Hence the legislature will
consist of two low types and a high type and γ will be equal to 0 until the first period when
the median voter of the middle district is a high type. Thereafter γ = 1, and all three



                                                                                                                Appendix–14
districts will elect high-types, who will set tax τh∗ . This equilibrium is stage-strong if and
only if Vl (H|H, H; γ = 1) > Vl (L|L, H; γ = 1), which is true for η large enough, or δ small
enough.
      The result for fast institutional change follows immediately from the discussion in the
text.                                                                                                      




B.2        Improving the Efficiency of Policy

Another plausible explanation for the over-representation of high types in legislatures is that
they are simply skilled at creating more efficient policy. In this subsection we consider this
possibility, and show that while it would lead to an over-representation of high types, low
types will generally comprise a minimal winning majority of the legislature.
      To model this efficiency in our setting we can modify (1) to:

                                                         (κcount(H) πτ y)α
                                    uij = (1 − τ )yi +
                                                                 α

with count(H) the number of high-type legislators in the legislature, and κ0 < κ1 < · · · <
κn < κn+1 · · · < κ2n+1 . To explore the difference between this “quality” explanation, and
our main focus—the ability to direct funds to one’s district—we set π = 1/3 for both high-
and low-type legislators.
      The incentives given in Table 1 remain similar, and so does the structure of equilibria.
In particular, high-type median voters will always want to elect high-type legislators as they
have the same preferences and make government spending more valuable. A low-type median
voter who knows that he will not be pivotal over the majority type in the legislature will
also want to elect a high type as this will improve the utility of spending without lowering
the tax rate. The only conflict comes when a low-type median voter knows that he is pivotal
                                                                                             κn+1 1
over the majority type in the legislature. In this case (4) will change to η >                κn
                                                                                                 .    To put
  1
      If high types had both a “quality” difference and were better at targeting funds to their districts then



                                                                                              Appendix–15
this in concrete terms, if the income of the rich is three times that of the income of the
poor, η = 3, then in order for an unrepresentative equilibrium to obtain, the addition of
a single high-type legislator would have to make the entire legislature at least three times
more efficient. If this relative increase is constant, than a 435-member legislature will be
3.5 × 10207 more efficient if composed only of high types versus only low types.2
    This highlights the difference between a model in which high types convey a general
“quality” difference in policymaking, and our model, in which high types are better at
negotiating resources for their districts. In the former, because both efficiency and taxation
are general policies that apply to everyone, the increase in efficiency has to be proportional
to the decrease in taxes for low types to want to elect high types. This, in turn, has massive
effects on general outcomes, in equilibrium. In the latter, ability at negotiating resources for
one’s district affects local outcomes much more than general outcomes. Thus, the negotiating
advantage can be much smaller, and will not, in and of itself, affect equilibrium outcomes
much: the broad effect comes through the prisoner’s dilemma logic, discussed above.


B.3      Low Types lead to More Efficient Spending

Another avenue of exploration would be to examine what would happen if low-type legisla-
tors had an advantage in increasing the efficiency of taxation and spending, and high-type
legislators had an advantage in directing funds to their districts. This can be modeled by
recoding the model in Section B.2 with κ2n+1 < κ2n < · · · < κn+1 < κn · · · < κ0 . The
analogous condition to (4) would then be:

                                                       α
                                                     !1−α
                                            H
                                      κn+1 π(n+1)H          ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                                        <
                                           L
                                       κn π(n+1)L           ul (τh∗ ) − yl

Given the logic in Section B.2, the ratio κn+1 /κn will be less than, but close to, one. As such,
the condition will hold for slightly greater values of γ, leading to somewhat representative
this would reduce the cost to a low-type median voter of electing a high type, and thus the unrepresentative
equilibrium would obtain for lower values of γ.
   2
     Under such conditions τ = 1 even with few high-type legislators.


                                                                                            Appendix–16
equilibria for more values of γ. However, the unrepresentative equilibrium will now have less
efficient government spending. Intuitively, this would be because n + 1 low-type legislators,
who can improve the efficiency of government spending, would be replaced by n+1 high-type
legislators, who cannot.


B.4       Baron-Ferejohn Bargaining

The distribution between districts in Section 2.2.1 can be motivated using the bargaining
model of Baron and Ferejohn (1989). Specifically, assume that high types are able to propose
with higher probability, that is, proposal probabilities pj are given by
                                
                                       (1−γ)+γ∗1
                                                     if legislator j is a low type
                                
                                        P j
                           j               jp
                         p =                                                                           (10)
                                       (1−γ)+γ∗η
                                
                                        P j         if legislator j is a high type.
                                           jp




Then, in the limit where legislators are very impatient, the expected share will be given
by (3).3 However, rather than this share being guaranteed, as it is in our core model, the
legislator gets all of the tax revenue with probabilities given in (3). As such, this changes
(4) to:
                                                       1
                                                H
                                                           ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                                    1−α
                                               π2H
                                                         ≤                .
                                                L
                                               π2L         ul (τh∗ ) − yl
                      α         1
    As α ∈ (0, 1),   1−α
                           <   1−α
                                   ,   which implies that (4) will only hold for smaller values of γ
than in the core model. This occurs because the bargaining model introduces risk into the
distributive process, which, given the concave utility of government spending, makes it more
valuable to have a high-type legislator.


B.5       More on Common Pool Problems

In our model, the tax rate is strictly decreasing in the number of districts. However, this is
due, in part, to the way we have modeled the utility of government spending: the functional
   3
     Higher proposal power leads to higher expected shares only when legislators are sufficiently impatient,
see Eraslan (2002).



                                                                                            Appendix–17
form implies spending is on local public goods. Thus, as districts become smaller, the
effectiveness of this spending goes down. To remove this additional factor, and emphasize
the role of the unrepresentative equilibrium in reversing the common pool problem, we thus
examine a slightly different citizen utility function. That is, we replace (1) with:

                                                                                     α
                                                                      πj τ y
                                                              
                                                   1  i
                                 uij = (1 − τ )y +                                                            (11)
                                                   α               1/(2n + 1)

Then, defining τn∗ as the tax rate implemented when there are n legislators, we have:

Proposition 7. τn∗ is decreasing in n when citizen utility is given by (11).

Proof of Proposition 7: Using the utility function in (11) we have that

                                            1                                      1
                                     yα                                    yα                τl∗
                                         1−α                                  1−α
                       τl∗   =                   and         τh∗   =                    =     1
                                     yl                                    ηyl              η 1−α

and that equilibria will be somewhat representative when

                                                        α
                                                      !1−α
                                             H
                                            π(n+1)H            ul (τl∗ ) − yl
                                                          ≤
                                             L
                                            π(n+1)L            ul (τh∗ ) − yl

Note that the equilibrium tax rate in the minimally representative equilibria will be ((2n +
           α
   L
1)π(n+1)L ) 1−α τl∗ , which will be decreasing if (2n + 1)π(n+1)L
                                                           L
                                                                  is decreasing. Thus, to show this
is true we have:

             L
   d(2n + 1)π(n+1)L
                                                                      
                         d               2n + 1                                           γ(1 − η)
                      =                                                    =                                < 0.
          dn            dn       n(1 − γ + γη) + (n + 1)                         (n(1 − γ + γη) + (n + 1))2

We now turn our attention to the case where the equilibrium passes from minimally repre-
sentative to unrepresentative as n increases above n∗ . At n∗ the condition for a minimally
representative equilibrium gives

                                 1
                                     L            α
                                                         H                       α   η−α
                             η 1−α (π(n ∗ +1)L ) 1−α = (π(n∗ +1)H ) 1−α
                                                                                     1−α


                                                                                                     Appendix–18
                                  α
and ((2n∗ + 1)π(n
               L
                 ∗ +1)L )
                          1−α τ ∗ > τ ∗ if and only if
                               l     h


                                                                α          1
                                          ((2n∗ + 1)π(n
                                                     L
                                                        ∗ +1)L ) 1−α >     1
                                                                         η 1−α

or, if and only if                                                    α
                                         (1 − γ + γη)(2n∗ + 1)
                                                                   1−α
                                                                           η−α
                                                                               >1
                                      (n∗ + 1)β(1 − γ + γη) + n∗           1−α

Note that                                                      α
                                  (1 − γ + γη)(2n∗ + 1)
                                                            1−α
                                                                    η−α   η−α
                                                                        >     >1
                                (n∗ + 1)(1 − γ + γη) + n∗           1−α   1−α
       (1−γ+γη)(2n∗ +1)
as   (n∗ +1)(1−γ+γη)+n∗
                            is increasing in γ, so is minimized at 1 when γ = 0, and η > 1 > α.
                                           α
Therefore, ((2n∗ + 1)π(n
                      L
                        ∗ +1)L )
                                 1−α τ ∗ > τ ∗ .
                                      l     h                                                                




B.6           Legislative Professionalization

Many scholars have suggested that professionalization of legislatures may improve aggregate
outcomes and the quality of government (see, for example Besley, 2007). In our model,
increased professionalization through increased compensation creates a political class that
has less in common with its constituents. Low- and high-type legislators in this class will
have more in common with each other than their constituents, which will bias policy. If the
political class is distinct enough, low-type median voters will opt for high-type legislators
due to their superior negotiating abilities.
         While it may seem reductionist to model increased professionalization through compen-
sation, we note that even though legislative wages are nominally quite low, former legislators
often go on to lucrative careers in lobbying or banking. Knowledge of these future wages
may shape current preferences over taxes.4
         Each legislator is paid a wage w
                                        e = wyl , with w > 0. This wage is in addition to the
legislator’s private sector earnings, and is subject to taxation. As legislators are citizen
     4
         This may shape both their preferences over tax levels and types of taxes, see Section 7.



                                                                                                    Appendix–19
candidates, this wage will drive a wedge between the ideal tax rate of a legislator of a given
type and a citizen of the same type. If this wage is high enough, low-type and high-type
legislators’ tax preferences will be similar. This will result in low-type voters favoring high
types even when the difference in legislative ability is quite small. Given a legislative wage
w, the ideal tax rates of low- and high-type legislators are:

                                           α
                                         !1−α                                                   α
                                                                                              !1−α
               ∗           y                                     ∗                 y
             τlw =                   1                          τhw =                     1          .
                     3((1 + w)yl )   α                                      3((η + w)yl ) α

The ideal tax rates of both types decrease with the legislative wage. This leads to the
following result.

Proposition 8. If γ > 0, and the legislative wage w is high enough, then the unique equi-
                                             ∗
librium is unrepresentative with a tax rate τhw .

Proof of Proposition 8: Reducing the right hand side of (12) to primitives we have:

                                                                               1
                                  ∗
                            ul (τlw ) − yl   (1 + w − α)(η + w) 1−α
                                 ∗
                                           =                     1
                            ul (τhw ) − yl   (η + w − α)(1 + w) 1−α

and the limit of this quantity, as w → ∞ is 1, so for w high enough, it will be less than the
left-hand side (which is greater than 1), and thus, the unique equilibria will be the unrep-
resentative equilibrium. Furthermore, the left-hand side of (12) is greater than 1 for γ > 1.
Thus, as w grows, the left-hand-side will eventually be less than the right-hand-side, which
guarantees that (12) will not hold, and then all pure-strategy subgame-perfect equilibria will
be as described in the second part of Proposition 1.                                                          


   To understand the intuition, note that a low-type median voter who is pivotal over the
composition of the legislative majority will want to elect a low type when:

                                                     α
                                              H                ∗
                                                  1−α
                                             π2H         ul (τlw ) − yl
                                              L
                                                       ≤      ∗
                                                                        .                                   (12)
                                             π2L         ul (τhw ) − yl



                                                                                                     Appendix–20
Note that the left-hand side of (12) is greater than one, but as w grows, the right-hand side
converges to one. Thus, as w grows, eventually (12) will not hold.
       Globally, increasing legislative wages will make low-type citizens worse off, however, this
may not be true locally. It is possible that (12) does not hold at w = 0, but does for a
relatively small wage—leading to a somewhat representative, rather than unrepresentative,
equilibrium. This occurs because when w = 0, the numerator of the right-hand side of (12)
is a low type’s utility function at its maximal value (minus yl , a constant). This implies that
a small increase in the wage rate will not change the numerator at w = 0, but it will decrease
the denominator. Thus, increasing w from zero may cause the equilibrium to change from
unrepresentative, to somewhat representative, and then back to unrepresentative. Low-type
utility is highest somewhere in range of parameters that lead to a somewhat representative
equilibrium.
       Overall, this suggests that there is a downside to paying legislators more: it will make
them sufficiently different from the people they represent, resulting in lower taxation than
the median voter prefers. Moreover, if the legislative wage is high enough, it will shrink the
difference between all legislators sufficiently that low-type median voters, (correctly) view
low- and high- type legislators as close enough substitutes on tax policy, and opt for the
high-type legislator’s superior ability to direct tax revenue to their district, depressing tax
rates even further.


B.6.1       Wages and Candidate Selection

Most work that considers legislative professionalization has focused on the idea that it will
attract better types—those with more human capital, perhaps—to political office. To take
this into account, we use a crude model of candidate entry. In particular, we assume that
in each district a single high-type candidate runs with independent probability ρ(w), with
ρ0 (w) > 0.5 Lower wages will then make equilibria more representative:

   5
    The usual justification for this reduced form—that those with higher skills have higher outside options—
does not hold in this case because legislators are assumed to continue to collect their private sector wages.
However, assuming that high types value leisure more highly, for example, will lead to the same reduced


                                                                                             Appendix–21
Proposition 9. Suppose γ is high enough so that (12) does not hold for any wage. Then,
if a high type runs in any district, he will be elected. Thus:

   1. The probability of a representative equilibrium is (1 − ρ(w))3 .

   2. If a high type is elected in any district, low types in other districts would be strictly
      better off if a high type ran in their district.

Proof of Proposition 9: As (12) does not hold, any district in which a high-type ran
would elect a high type by Proposition 8. Part 1) is then immediate from the fact that with
probability (1 − ρ(w))3 no high types run in any district, so low types are elected to the
legislature, and set tax rate τl∗ .
   Part 2) follows from the proofs of Proposition 1 and Proposition 8. When (12) does not
hold, then the equilibrium would be unrepresentative if high types ran in each district. The
proof of Proposition 1 shows that in those conditions, each district strictly prefers to elect a
high type legislator because it will improve the utility of the low types in that district.   


   The first part of the proposition is straightforward: if high types need wages to be
convinced to run, and wages are low enough that no high types end up running, then all
legislators will be low types. Moreover, if this is the case, then raising w will only increase
the probability of somewhat representative or unrepresentative equilibria as high types begin
to run with increased frequency in all districts.
   The second part is equally intuitive: if (12) does not hold, then according to the incentives
in Table 1, low-type median voters in all districts would prefer to elect high types, implying
that they would be better off with high-type representation. This shows a channel through
which middling legislative wages may make low types worse off: once one district has a
high-type legislator, then all low types would like to be represented by a high-type legislator.
This reinforces the prisoner’s dilemma logic discussed earlier, and can be seen as an “arms
race” between low-type voters.




form.


                                                                                  Appendix–22
