NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUILIBRIUM POLITICAL BUDGET CYCLES

Kenneth Rogoff

Working Paper No. 2428

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1987

Support from the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2428
November 1987

Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles

ABSTRACT

Prior to elections, governments (at all levels) frequently undertake a

consumption binge. Taxes are cut, transfers are raised, and government
spending is distorted towards highly visible items. The "political business
cycle" (better be thought of as "the political budget cycle") has been

intensively examined, at least for the case of national elections. A number
of proposals have been advanced for mitigating electoral cycles in fiscal

policy. The present paper is the first effort to provide a fully-specified
equilibrium framework for analyzing such proposals. A political budget cycle
arises here via a multidimensional signalling process, in which incumbent
leaders try to convince voters that they have recently been doing an excellent

job in administering the government. Efforts to mitigate the cycle can
easily prove counterproductive, either by impeding the transmission of inf or-

mation or by inducing politicians to select more costly ways of signalling.
The model also indicates new directions for empirical research.

Kenneth Rogoff
Economics Department
1180 Observatory Drive
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706

(608) -263—3876

1

I.

Introduction

Economists and political scientists have tried for some time to understand

the apparent coincidence of macroeconomic policy cycles and elections. But
although researchers have detected some notable empirical regularities1 (particularly concerning pre—election tax cuts and government spending increases),

progress has been impeded by the lack of a solid theoretical foundation. The
present paper is an effort to remedy this situation.

My analysis is based on an intertemporal equilibrium model in which both

voters and politicians are rational, utility-maximizing agents.2 A "political
budget cycle" arises due to temporary information asymmetries about the
incumbent leader's competence in administering the production of public goods.

Equilibrium is characterized by a multidimensional signalling process. The
model is useful in part because it delivers sharp empirical predictions concerning the timing of budget cycles and elections, and the nature of the induced

fiscal distortions. Prior to elections, taxes tend to be suboptimally low
and government consumption spending suboptimally high. This public and
private consumption binge comes at the expense of government investment.
The model also provides a welfare-theoretic framework for analyzing

various reforms aimed at alleviating the political budget cycle.3 One can
explicitly analyze the effects of balanced-budget amendments and of constftutional limits on the legislature's ability to undertake new tax and expenditure
initiatives directly prior to elections.

I also consider the effects of

increasing central bank independence and of trying to channel pre—election

signalling into campaign expenditures. Fairly direct extensions of the
model can be applied to analyze changes in the length of politicians' terms

2

in office, and the adoption of more sophisticated rules for governing the
timing of elections.

The popular perception is that political budget cycles are a bad thing.
But a central conclusion of this analysis is that the pre—election budget
antics of incumbent politicians may be a socially efficient mechanism for

diffusing up—to-date information about their competence. Efforts to mitigate
the political budget cycle can easily reduce welfare, either by impeding the
transmission of information or by inducing politicians to select more costly
(to society) ways of signalling.4

In section II, I present the model, including the constitutionally—imposed

election structure. Section III gives the equilibrium under full information,
and sections IV - VI characterize the fiscal policy distortions which occur

under asymmetric information. There are multiple sequential equilibria but,
following Milgrom and Roberts (1986), I apply some refinements of sequential

equilibrium to obtain a unique equilibrium. In section VII I critically assess
some proposed reforms of the political budget cycle process.

II. The Model

A. The Preferences of a Representative Agent
The economy is composed of a large number of (ex-ante identical) agents,
each of whom derives utility both from public goods and from a private

consumption good. The representative voter i is concerned with his expected
utility:
I

(1)

I

i

L
•=E(r+ s=t

r

st

i

s—t

'

EU(c, ; + V(k5)

+

]

S-t,

3

where c1 is the agent's consumption of the private good, g is the public

"consumption" good, and k is the public "investment" good. U and V are
both regular strictly concave functions, with U1, U2, V' > 0.

In addition

to assuming the usual Inada conditions, I make the further assumption that
lim V(k) =

— [e.g.,

V(k) =

log

k]. The latter assumption is sufficient to

k-sO

insure

an interior solution in the asymmetric information case.

< 1 is

the representative agent's discount factor, E' is the expectations operator
(conditional on agent i's information set), t subscripts denote time, and I
is the agent's time horizon which may be infinite,

is a random shock, which

will later be identified with nonpecuniary leader-specific factors such as

the leader's looks. Finally, x1 = 0 if agent i is a private citizen in
period s, and x' = X if agent i is the country's leader in period s. X repre-

sent's nonpecuniary ego rents which accrue to the country's leader. I discuss
both r and X in more detail below.

B. Technology
At the beginning of each period, all agents exogenously receive

units of

a nonstorable good, which can either be privately consumed or used as an input

into the production of public goods. Out of this endowment, agents must pay
in lump-sum taxes; they consume the remainder.
The technology f or providing public goods is such that exactly one agent

(a "leader") is needed to supervise production; output goes to zero if more

supervisors are added. The production function for g and k is given by5

(2)

+ kt+i =

Tt

+

(Both g and k are measured in per capita units; population is constant

throughout.) The relative cost of producing g and k is unity, but to have the

4

public "investment good" k in period t+l, the government must invest in period

t. g is nonstorable, and the stock of kt+l melts at the end of period t+1.
There are two variable inputs into the public goods production process: taxes,

r, and the leader's administrative competency, c. A competent administrator
(high e) is able to provide a given level of public goods at a lower level of

taxes than an incompetent administrator can. Competency is not a choice
variable for the leader, but an individual characteristic. c should be thought
of as administrative IQ.

C. Stochastic Structure
All agents are capable of serving as the leader. However, at any
given point in time, they differ according to their administrative competency.
For each agent i, competency evolves according to the serially-correlated
stochastic process
(3)

=

+ a11

where each a' is an independent drawing from a Bernoulli distribution with

p a prob(& = aH), and 1-p

prob(a1 =

a),

aH >

> - 7/2.

The a shocks are

independent across agents as well as across time. One reason why competency
might realistically be thought to vary over time is that leadership abilities
well-suited to dealing with one set of historical circumstances may be poorly

suited to dealing with other types of problems. Also, in a more general

model, a leader's competency may change as his subordinates turn over. The
restriction that

follow a first-order moving average (MA(1)] process will

turn out to simplify the analysis below considerably, as it effectively breaks

structural links between elections. However, the analysis can be extended to
allow for more general stochastic processes along the lines of Terrones (1987).

5

In addition to the competency shock, each agent i experiences a "looks"
shock 17, which also follows on MA(1) process:

=

(4)

+ q1

where q' is a continuously distributed i.i.d. random variable on [-, ].

q and q are independent for all s
probability distribution of q13
results.
mean zero.

t, i

q1 - q3, i

j. In what follows, it is the
j, which matters for all the

I assume that q13 has probability distribution function G(q); it has
17 is intended to capture factors relevant to an agent's leadership

ability but uncorrelated with his competence in administering the public goods

production function; e.g., his "looks". Neither c' nor

matter for anything

when agent i is a private citizen. In eqs. (1) and (2) and in what follows
below, whenever £,

, a or q are written without a superscript, they refer to

the incumbent.

0. The Structure of Elections
In order to determine which agent gets the honor of administering the
production of public goods, the country's constitution specifies that elec-

tions be held every other period. The incumbent leader is allowed to run for
re-election an indefinite number of times,6 whereas the opposition candidate

is chosen at random from the rest of the population.7 Under the information
structure specified below, the essential difference between the incumbent
leader and his opponent is going to be that the public can infer something
about the incumbent's most recent competency shock, but it has no way of

inferring anything about his opponent's competency. For voters, the choice
is essentially between re-electing the incumbent or selecting an agent from

6

the population-at-large, all of whom appear identical cx ante.

E. The Leader's Utility Function
All agents, including the country's leader, share the same utility

function (1). Recall that the oniy difference is that x1 = 0 during periods
agent i is a private citizen, and x1 = X during periods he is the leader. As

leader, an agent enjoys "ego rents". (There is no way to have public goods
produced without yielding ego rents as a byproduct of the production process).
Although the typical citizen would like someday to be the leader, unfor-

tunately for him E(x') = 0

'v' s ) t, and V I

j, with j denoting the country's

leader. There are a very large number of agents, and so a private citizen

attaches infinitesimal value to his chances of ever becoming leader. Thus
for a representative private citizen, the utility function (1) effectively reduces to

(5)

=

E(r),

where "P" superscripts denote the "public". An incumbent politician, on the
other hand, has a finite probability 1r of being in office in period 5;

will

be derived later on. Using this notation, the leader's utility function

is given by8

(6)

=

E() st Xir
+

In the present model, I assume that a leader's motivations are entirely

selfish. But it should be clear from inspection of eq. (6) that all of the
(positive) results below would be the same under a more "generous" assumption
Specifically, one can interpret eq. (6) as saying that the leader puts some

weight on social welfare, r, and some weight on the rents he gets from

7

being in office. (The model is also readily extended to the case where the
leader's rents depend on his plurality).

F. The Information Structure and the Timing of Events
Voters observe taxes i and government consumption spending g contem-

poraneously. They also form inferences concerning government investment
spending k and the incumbent's competency shock a, but they cannot directly

confirm these inferences until the following period. In period t+1, the
government's period t investment comes on line9; voters also see

a directly

in t+1.

The incumbent has a temporary information "advantage" over voters in
that he sees his competency shock immediately.

I use "advantage" in quotation

marks because in fact, it will turn out that voters can use g and Tt to infer

and their inferences are always correct in equilibrium. The information
structure assumed here seems plausible since it would be costly for an indivi-

dual to closely monitor the government's performance. Moreover, there is
little private incentive for an individual to undertake such monitoring since,
in equilibrium, he can infer a costlessly using his information on

and i.

Government consumption spending and taxes are variables which individuals need

to know and realistically can observe quite easily. Of course, if some group
were able to monitor the government, and credibly transmit that information to
individuals in a way which would be costless for them to process, that would

preclude a political budget cycle in the analysis below. Clearly, neither the
opposition candidate nor the incumbent can provide this service, since their

statements cannot be trusted. The results below should go through in a more
general setting in which some voters monitor
of "uniformed" voters who infer

instead.

as long as there is a pool

8

The public, of course, has no way of inferring a, where "o" superscripts
denote the opponent. (The opponent has no way of knowing a0 either, until he
actually tries his hand at running the government.) All voters know about the
opponent's competency is the probability distribution of a. Prior to Voting,
voters do observe both

and q, the "looks" shocks.

The incumbent sets g and T prior to observing the q's. The rationale for
this assumption is that it takes time to collect taxes and to operate the

government production function. The q shocks, on the other hand, capture
information revealed in the election-eve debates or uncertainty about a last-

minute scandal concerning one of the candidates. In an alternative version of
the model, q might represent uncertainty about election-day weather, and hence

about the composition of voters who come to the polls. Table 1 presents the
timing of events.

In deciding his vote, the representative voter compares his expected Utility under each of the two

candidates.

If u = 1 denotes a vote for the

incumbent, and u = 0 a vote for his opponent, then

I'

(7)

I

t 0,

) E' r
otherwise.

III. Equilibrium Under Full Information

Before proceeding, it is useful to analyze the equilibrium which would

arise if voters could directly observe a prior to voting. In this case, the
incumbent's pre-election fiscal policy cannot possibly affect voters' expectations about his post—election competency, and thus can have no effect on his

chances of remaining in office. With the r terms in (6) exogenous, the
incumbent's decision problem becomes equivalent to maximizing the welfare of

the representative agent, r. Given the simple production and storage tech—

9

nology, this intertemporal maximization problem can be broken down into a
sequence of static maximization problems:

max

(8)

+ V(kt+i), V t

U(ct,

subject to (2) and

(9)

Cty-Tt,

(10)

kt+i, gt ) 0.

Equation (9) is a private agent's budget constraint. Note that r is allowed
to take on negative values (there can be transfers as well as taxes))0
It is convenient to rewrite the above maximization problem by substituting
the constraints (2) and (9) into (8) and (10):

(11)

max W(g, r, €) i

U(

-

r,

g) + V(r

+ £ -

g)

T,g
s.t.

0, T + £ — g

0.

(t subscripts will henceforth be omitted where the meaning is obvious.) The
first-order conditions for an interior solution to (11) imply

(12)

U1( — T, g) =

U2(

—

r,

g) =

V'(T

+ c —

g).

That the solution must be interior follows from the Inada conditions on U

and V. It is readily confirmed that there is a unique (g*(e), r*(c)] which

satisfies (12), and that this point is a global maximum) Clearly

W*(e)

W*(g*(c), T*(C), ci

10

is strictly increasing in c and, if all goods are normal, then c*(c), g*(c)

and k*(e) are also increasing in c. Then by (9), T*(c) must be decreasing.
If t is an election period, then by eqs. (3), (4), (5), (7) and (11), the
incumbent will be re-elected (u = 1) if

E[W*(Ct+i)] —

(13)

Because c and

E[W*(c1]

+

—

q

0.

follow MA(1) processes, voters' expected utility is the same

under either candidate for periods t+2 and beyond, and thus only expectations
(Recall from Table 1 that voters observe

over t+1 enter into (13).

and

q prior to the election.)
If voters observe

prior

=

to voting, then the first term in eq. (13)

is given by

QH

E(W*(ct+i)1at =

(14)

=

If voters instead observe

E[W*(ct+i)Iat =

(15)

at]

= pW*(2at) + (l_p)W*(aH + aL).

aL, then
QL = pW*(aH + aL) + (1-.p)W*(2a1).

Voters have no observations on the opponent's competency; hence

(16)

E(W*(e1)]

Clearly,

QO =

p2W*(2aH) + 2p(l_p)W*(aH + aL) + (1_p)2W*(2aL).

> QO >

IV. Optimality for Voters and Leaders Under Asymmetric Information

I now return to the asymmetric information structure summarized in table

1. Although the public cannot directly observe a until period t+1, they can
form "beliefs" about a given their observations on

and Tt. These beliefs

11

can be parameterized as P(gt. Tt), where p is the probability weight the
=

public attaches to the possibility that

a1

(Since a_1 will be a fixed,

known parameter throughout the next three sections, I abbreviate

Tt;

a1) as p(g, T).] The incumbent will be described as a "type H" (or

"competent type") if a = aH, and a "type L" (or "incompetent type") if

It

=

is also convenient to define

+

aH, and

=

+

We will initially focus our attention on the final election period, t =

1-2.

Clearly, the winner of the T-2 election has no incentive to distort in T-1 or T.

Thus E(W(E11)] =

E[W*(CT_l)]

if the incumbent wins and similarly for his

opponent. By eqs. (13)—(16), voters with priors p(g,r) will set

(17) v=

jf

1

(

( 0,

+ (1_)QL - Qo + q - q°

0,

otherwise.

The incumbent can infer p(g, T) when formulating his election-year fiscal
policy, but he must act before observing q -

q° (see again table 1). The

incumbent's estimate of his probability of re—election, conditional on his
information set, is given by

(18)

E'(u((g,r), q -

1

- G(&7° -

q°j}

•

(g,T)QH

Jr((g,T)]
- (1 -

=

p(g,T)]QL)

where G is the probability distribution function of q - q0.

If the

incumbent knows p(g,r), he can calculate for any fiscal policy the probability
that q - q0 will be high enough for him to win. The possibility for signalling
arises here because by eq. (6), there is a limit to how much an incumbent
would be willing to distort fiscal policy in order to fool the public about

his competency type. (As a representative agent, he too cares about the mix
of consumption and investment.)

12

Using eqs. (3), (4), (6), (11) and (18), one can write an incumbent of type
i's maximization problem as:

x'n((g,r)] + W(g,T,c1); i = L,

max Z(g,T,p(g,T),']

(19)

H,

g,1

s.t. to (10), where
—

[X(1+) +

(20)

fl0),

i= L, H.

The first term on the right-hand side of (19) is the incumbent's expected
chance of winning, ir,

multiplied

by his surplus from winning c'.

Examining

eq. (20), we see that this surplus consists of two components: The term X(+2)
captures the (discounted) ego rents for periods t+1 and t+2, and the term
-

O)

is the amount by which the representative agent's expected

utility would be higher if the incumbent wins instead of his opponent.
Two features distinguish the objective functions of a competent type and an

incompetent type in (19). First, a competent type knows that expected social
welfare will be higher if he is re—elected than if his unknown opponent wins.
An incompetent knows the opposite to be true.

I assume that xL >

0.

Other-

wise an incompetent simply will not run for re—election, in which case both
types are free to pursue their optimal full-information fiscal policy.12
The second difference between the two types is that at any given level of r a type H is investing

-

=

more units into kt+i than a type L is,

—

by eq. (2). By eq. (11), the utility value of this difference is

(21)

W(g,T,eH) — W(g,T,EL) =

Since V" <

(V(r

+

- g)

—

V(T + EL

—

gfl.

0, a type H can raise government consumption spending or cut taxes

at lower marginal cost than can a type L, at any given (g, r).

g,

13

V. Sequential Equilibria

The interaction between incumbent politicians and rational voters here can
be thought of as a multi-dimensional signalling problem, with g and T as
signals of the incumbent's (contemporaneously) unobserved competency.
Multidimensional signalling games have recently been analyzed in the
industrial organization literature by Milgrom and Roberts (1986), and by Bagwell

and Ramey (1987). In this section, I will follow these authors' general
approach for characterizing an equilibrium. First, I consider all sequential

equilibria (see Kreps and Wilson (1982)] which are separating. In a separating
equilibrium, voters can exactly infer the incumbent's competency shock from his

fiscal policy. There turn out to be a multiplicity of separating equilibria
but, by using a refinement of sequential equilibrium (sequential elimination of
dominated strategies; Moulin (1979) and Milgrom and Roberts (1986)], it is
possible to rule out all but one.

I then consider pooling equilibria, in which

incompetent types might mimic the fiscal policy of competent types. Using a
further refinement, due to Cho and Kreps (1987), one can rule out any

undominated pooling equilibria. The unique equilibrium which survives both
refinements is separating. Competent types set taxes too low and government
spending too high before elections, whereas incompetent types pursue their fullinformation policy.

A. Definition of Equilibrium
For the moment, we will restrict attention to pure strategies. For
= L, H, let (g1, T1) describe a strategy for the incumbent leader, and let
q -

q0] describe a strategy for voters.13 Then the pair

((g1, r1), i =

L, H; u((g,T), q —

(in pure strategies) if:

q°]}

describes a sequential equilibrium

14

(a) Voters set v accordin9 to (17); (b) an incumbent of type i chooses
to solve his maximization problem (19); and (c) agents'

(g', r1)

beliefs are Bayes—consistent:

If (9L, rL)

(gH, rH), then (9L, Tt) =

If (9L, TL) = (gH, rH),

o, (9H

then (91, T') = p,

i =

TH)

L,

= 1.

H.

For the remainder of section V I use the term "equilibrium" as an abbreviation
for "sequential equilibrium."

B. Separating Eguilibria
In a separating equilibrium, (gL, TL)

(9H, TN) (gL, TL) = 0 and

(9H TH) = 1.
[g*(CL), l.*(€L)].

Theorem 1: In any separating equilibrium, (9L., TL)

Proof:

(L L)

Suppose, in contradiction to the theorem, that (gL, TL)

(g*(cL), T*(€Lfl. This would violate optimality condition (19)

since for any p(g*(EL), T*(€L)],

Z(g*(CL), T*(L) (g*(cL) T*(CL)] L} —

Z(,

L o,

EL) > 0.

Q.E.D.

In other words, jf (,

L)

were indeed a separating equilibrium fiscal policy

for a type L then, by definition, voters must know that he is incompetent, i.e.

L) = 0.

So a type L can only gain by defecting and choosing his full

information fiscal policy, (g*(EL), T*(CL)].
To demonstrate the existence of any particular separating equilibrium, it

is necessary to specify what voters would believe if they saw a (g, i)

15

different from (gL, TL) or (9H TH). Sequential equilibrium (without the
refinements I will later apply) places no restrictions whatsoever on these
"off—the—equilibrium" path beliefs, except that they must be sufficient to
induce the incumbent leader to choose

his equilibrium fiscal policy. For

the present, the most convenient specification of off-the—equilibrium path
beliefs is that p(g, T) = 0 1 (g, r)

(g'1,

(19) is satisfied for a type L if (gH

TH)

(22)

A

((9H, TH)IZ(g*(CL) r*(CL) Q,

Given these beliefs, condition
A, where

—

Z(gH, H, 1,

( 0).

In figure 1, set A is contained within the dashed ellipse, and point I is
(g*(CL), .r*(EL)]. The set A is necessarily convex as drawn, since W is
strictly concave in T and g. A type L would prefer to choose any point
within the dashed ellipse instead of choosing point I if by doing so, he

could fool the public into thinking that he is a type H. Our assumption
the U and V obey Inada conditions, together with the assumption that
urn V(k) =
k-O
g > 0, r <

-, insure

V

that the dashed ellipse lies inside the boundaries

r + cL — g >

0.

Point J in figure 1 corresponds to

(g*(), T*(EH)]. Because all goods are normal, point J must lie southeast of
point I. Whether point J lies within the dashed ellipse (in which case it cannot be a separating equilibrium strategy for a type H) depends on a number of

factors. It is more likely to be interior the larger X (ego rents), the
-

smaller

and the lower the variance of q -

q°.

By optimality condition (19), another necessary condition for separating
equilibrium is that

(23)

6

TH)€ B, where

((g11, H)z(gH, T11, 1,

LH) — Z[g*(CH), T*(CH), o, Hi 0).

The large solid ellipse in figure 1 contains the convex, compact set 8. The

16

shaded area is 8 fl At, where A' is the complement of A. Any point in the
shaded region can be a separating equilibrium strategy for a type H.

Definition 1: A separating equilibrium is given by
((gH, TH)

B

A', (gL, 1L) =

(g*(CL),

T*(CL)]).

Theorem 2: 8 fl A' is a nonempty, compact set.

Proof: Using the definition of Z in (19) and (20), the theorem follows
directly from the fact

>

and V" < 0.

Q.E.D.

C. Undominated Separating Equilibria
The multiplicity of equilibria in figure 1 can be drastically reduced
(to a single point) by placing a very plausible restriction on voters' off-the-

equilibrium path beliefs. Consider point E in figure 1, for example, and point

o which lies along the ray JE. Clearly, if p =

1

at both 0 and E, a type H

would never choose E over D. Point E can only obtain as a separating
equilibrium if voters think that for some reason, a type L might choose point

D. But such beliefs are implausible because a type L would be better off
choosing point I than point 0, no matter what the difference is between

p at I versus 0. Formally, a point (,

(24)

Z(g*(c'), r*(c'), 0, c] —

) is dominated for type i, I =

Z(, ,

L, H if

1, e) > 0.

Ln figure 1, any point outside the dashed ellipse is dominated for a type L,

and any point outside the large solid ellipse is dominated for a type H. We
shall rule out dominated equilibria by requiring that p =

1

at any point such

that (24) holds for L but not for H, and p = 0 if (24) holds for H but not

for L. The set of points which are dominated for L but not H is precisely 8

fl A',

17

the shaded region in figure 1. Thus, for any (9, r)E Bfl A', p = 1.
(g, r)

B nA', we shall assume p = 0.

For all

In an undominated separatinq

equilibrium, condition (19) will hold if (9H, TH) is chosen to solve

(25)

max W(g, r,
g,T

st. (10) and (g, T)

A'.

Theorem 3: There exists a unique, undominated separating equilibrium, and in
this equilibrium U1(y - T, g) = U2(y —

T,

g).

Proof: See Appendix.
Note that the condition U1 =

is

U2, which implicitly defines the curve T =

precisely the same as one of the first-order conditions for the full

information optimum, given by eq. (12). Hence p' < 0, and 4(g) passes through

points I and J in figure 1. The undominated equilibrium is given by point C

in figure 1 where g > g*(6H) and r < T*(€). The second-order conditions are
met at point C, but not at point F.14
Note that in the unique undominated separating equilibrium, there is a

political budget cycle (on average). Taxes are suboptimally low at point C and
government consumption spending is suboptimally high. Although government
investment is too low, signalling is "efficient" in the sense that a reallocation of expenditures between private and government consumption cannot yield
voters higher welfare.15

0. Pooling Equilibria
Sequential elimination of dominated strategies is not necessarily

sufficient to rule at all pooling equilibria. For example, if p is large

18

enough, then (gL, TL) = (9H, TH) =

[g*(H),

T*(EH)]; (g*(H) r*(cH)] =

can be an undominated pooling equilibrium. Here, by applying a further ref mement of sequential equilibrium, I show that one can rule out undominated pooling
equilibria (in both pure and mixed strategies).
Following Cho and Kreps, an equilibrium {(9L, TL), (gH, TH)) is

unintuitive if there exists a point (,

(26)

Z(, , 1,

) such

that

£H) - Z(gH, TH, (gH, TH), CH] >

0,

and
(27)

Z(, ,

i,

—

Z(gL, L, (gL, T1), EL]

<

0.

Condition (26) states that a type H would prefer to select (g, )

over

(OIl, 1.H if, by doing so, he could convince the public of his true type.

Condition (27) states that a type L would prefer to select (9L, t.L) and

elicit voters' equilibrium response p(gL, 1L), than to choose (,

p(, ) = 1.

) even

if

An equilibrium is intuitive if it is not unintuitive.

Theorem 4: All pooling equilria are unintuitive.
Proof: See Appendix.
One can easily confirm that the unique undominated separating equilibrium

is also an intuitive equilibrium. Henceforth, I reserve the term "equilibrium"
to refer to the unique, undominated, intuitive, sequential equilibrium.

VI. Multiple Elections

The extension to the case where there are many elections is straightfor—
ward, given the "overlapping generations" MA(1) stochastic structure of the

model. We first observe that equilibrium strategies in period T-2 depend on

19

but are otherwise independent of all variables dated 1-3 or earlier.
Since k and a are observed by voters with a one-period lag, a leader's actions

in T-3 have no effect on E_2(a1_3), and thus no effect on his chances of reelection in 1-2. Therefore, the leader's maximization problem in the offelection year 1-3 reduces to the full information problem (11). This argument
is readily extended to prove

Theorem 5: For finite I and for any integer s, 0 <

ICT_2s+1)? T(C1_251)]

=

s

(g*(c121),

1/2,

T—2s+1

In off-election years, the incumbent follows his full-information fiscal policy.

There is no incentive to distort in a pre—election year because information

asymmetries are temporary. Voters are able to monitor the government perfectly
with one-period lag.
Given that W..3 =

W_3, the incumbent's problem in the penultimate election

year 1-4 is exactly the same as in 1-2, except that we replace x1 in eq. (20)

with , where
(20')

=

(X(1+)

+

- Q]

+

X(3

+

$4)[pir(1)

+

(1—p),r(0)].

The first term on the RHS of eq. (20') is the same as in eq. (20). It captures the ego rents the leader would get in 1-3 and 1-2 if re-elected in 1-4,
and the expected welfare difference in T-3 and 1-4 for the representative

voter. The second, additional, term in (20') captures the ego rents the
leader would get in 1-1 and 1, if re-elected twice. The term pir(1) +

(l-p),r(0)

is incumbent's equilibrium expected chance of winning in T—2,

conditional on winning in 1-4. Eq. (20') extends trivially to the case of n

20

elections. Obviously, an incumbent will care more about getting re—elected
the longer his expected term and the lower his discount rate.

We have considered the case of finite T. When I is infinite, there can be
trigger-strategy (or "bootstrap") equilibria, as Rogoff and Sibert (1988) have

illustrated in a related context. The equilibrium studied here remains an
equilibrium for I infinite, but it is also possible to have equilibria in which
there is little or no political budget cycle if (a) the leader's rate of time
preference is close to one, (b) exogenous uncertainty (the variance of q here)

is not too large, and (c) elections are spaced closely together.16 Since
elections are typically spaced many years apart, and since exogenous uncertainty is probably quite high, even the optimal trigger—strategy equilibrium

may not be too different from the non-reputational equilibrium I have analyzed

here. Certainly the case for focusing on optimal trigger-strategy equilibria
is weaker in a political budget cycle context than it is in the context of

monetary policy. In setting the nominal money supply, prices, and interest
rates, the government and the private sector interact on a continuous basis.17

VII. Welfare Implications of Political Budget Cycles

Certainly a major reason for trying to develop a fully—articulated
equilibrium model of political budget cycles is to be able to generate well-

motivated empirical predictions. But perhaps the strongest argument for the
equilibrium approach here is that it allows one to consider the welfare impli-

cations of alternative shocks and of alternative regimes. In this section,
I briefly sketch some illustrative examples.

21

A. A Constitutional Amendment to Prevent Political Budget Cycles
A natural question is whether it makes sense to pass a constitutional amendment which prevents the government from undertaking changes in fiscal policy

during election years. (Tufte (1978, p. 152) suggests a change in the timing
of the Congressional budget cycle.] Consider an amendment whereby the
government would have to commit to both

r1)

and

election period t—1. If forced to bind himself to

Tt) in of f-

r)

in period t—1, it

is easy to see that the incumbent leader would always solve

(28) max E_1W(g.

Forcing

) = Pw(g

H
+ a ) +

L

(l_p)W(gt, Tt, a_1 + a ).

the incumbent to commit in advance to election-year fiscal policy

precludes signalling, and thus eliminates the political budget cycle. There
are two costs. First, the public no longer has any way of distinguishing
between H and L types when voting. If for simplicity we ignore the q-q0 shock,
then the mean cost of this lost information is p(d1 -

°). The

second cost is

that the leader is constrained from reacting to period-t information in setting
his period-t fiscal policy.

The relative costs and benefits of the constitutional amendment are
transparent in two extreme cases. If X = 0 and there are no ego rents, then
in the absence of restrictions the incumbent always sets fiscal policy opti-

mally. In this case, a constitutional amendment makes no sense. More
generally, as long as point C lies near point J in figure 1 (and p is not too

large), the unrestricted signalling equilibrium is to be preferred. At the

opposite extreme, as X , election—year fiscal distortions are catastrophic
whenever

=

(Even so, the public tends to vote for him! By the time they

go to the polls, election-year fiscal policy is a sunk cost, and they vote

22

based only on expected future welfare). In this case a constitutional amendment
is the lesser evil. One can also show that the constitutional amendment is
always preferred for p sufficiently close to one, though I will not go into

details. (Note that a type H must signal by the same amount to prove that he is
competent when p = .999 as when p =

.001).

C. Risks of a Constitutional Amendment
The analysis of the preceding subsection, if anything, overstates the eff i-

cacy of placing constitutional constraints on election-year fiscal policy.
Realistically, the incumbent has a wide array of fiscal actions with which he
can signal, and it is probably impossible to constrain him in all dimensions.
Here I show that to be welfare improving, a constitutional amendment must be
strict enough to prevent a type H from finding any way to use fiscal policy to

signal his type. Otherwise, a constitutional amendment can only exacerbate
the welfare costs of the political budget cycle. The intuition for this result
is simple. In the absence of legal constraints, a competent incumbent will
maximize the welfare of a representative agent subject to the incentive—
compatibility constraint that his action be one a type L would not

choose to imitate (program (25)]. A constitutional amendment, if it does not
preclude all separating equilibria, will only have the effect of inducing a

competent incumbent to solve (25) subject to an additional constraint. The
informal argument I have just presented does not take into account the effects
of the constitutional constraint on the incentive-compatibility constraint.
The argument is completed below:

Consider a constitutional constraint of the type

(29)

T

= qi(g),

j,' >

0.

23

In figure 2, the bold curve is j(g). s is drawn as a continuous, monotically
increasing function; e.g., a balanced budget amendment. However, qs(g) may take

on virtually any form. In fact, the main result below would still hold if (29)
were an inequality constraint.

Given the constitutional constraint but in the absence of temporary information asymmetries, the incumbent would set (g,T) to maximize (11) subject to
(29). Denote the solution to this problem as (g**(E1), T**(e1)], I = L, H.
The incentive—compatibility conditions for the constitutionally-constrained
case, given below, are analogous to (22) and (23)

(30)

Z(g**(CL), T**(CL), 0, L] — Z(gH, TH, 1

(31)

Z(gH, TM 1,

-

6L) > 0,

Z(g**(CH), T**(CH) 0, c] 0.

In figure 2, the large dashed ellipse represents the set of points (gH, TH)
such that (30) holds with equality, and the solid ellipse is the set of points

such that (31) holds with equality. A crucial fact is that the smaller dashed
ellipse, which corresponds to the dashed ellipse in figure 1 and borders set A,
must be constained within the larger dashed ellipse, since Z(g*(EL), .I.*(EL)

> Z(g**(eL), r**(EL), 0,

o, L]

Point C in figure 2, as in figure 1, denotes

the undominated intuitive equilibrium strategy for a type H in the absence of

a constitutional constraint. Point F in figure 2 is (g**(EL), T**(EL)] and
point G is (g**(EH), T**(EH)]; both points lie along the constitutional

constraint (29). Point M is the constitutionally-constrained equilibrium level
of (gH, rH).l8 Clearly, the representative voter worse off at II than at C.
Other efforts to dampen the political budget cycle can also prove counter-

productive. For example, it is well known that there can be strategic
advantages.to having a politically independent central bank.19 However,

24

contrary to popular belief, central bank independence can exacerbate the welfare

costs of political budget cycles. If the number of instruments at the
government's disposal is reduced, signalling becomes less efficient.

0. Self-Financed Campaign Advertising as a Substitute Signal
Might there exist a less socially—destructive mechanism via which competent

incumbents can signal their abilities? In this section, 1 consider whether a
competent type would be willing to spend money out of his own pocket on campaign

advertising, instead of signalling solely via fiscal policy. Of course, the
incumbent has no incentive whatsoever to be honest in his advertisements. He
will always claim to be a type H. All the public can actually learn from advertising is how much the incumbent is willing to sacrifice from his own consump-

tion in order to be re-elected. Formally, campaign advertising here will
correspond to having the incumbent publicly destroy a units of his own personal

endowment of the private good.2° This dissipative action need not take the form
of campaign advertising. Any form of (publicly observable) self-flagellation
will do.

With campaign advertising, W in (11) is replaced by

(32)

(g, T, a, c) = U(y

-

— a, g) +

V(T

+

c -

where a ) 0. Under full information, a*(c') = 0 for i = L, H, and g*(c),
are the same as before. Let

(g, T,

a, p, c') be the same as Z in

eqs. (19), except with W replaced by , and p(g,r) replaced by p(g, T,
conditions for a separating equilibrium are the same as before, except
replaces Z in (22) and (23).

a).

The

25

Following the same approach as in section V.C, one can show that in an
undominated separating equilibrium, a type H sets (gH, TH, aH) to solve

max (g, T, CH)

(33)

g,r,a

s.t.
(34)

(g*(cL), T*(CL) L)

(35)

g, a, (T + C -

g)

g, T a 1, CL)

0,

0.

Theorem 6: In an undominated separating equilibrium, (9L 1L aL)
=

(g*(cL),

T*(CL), 0]

a11 =

0,

and (g11

TH) solves (25).

Proof: See Appendix.
A type H incumbent could use advertising to signal his type but by Theorem 6,

he will always prefer to do it with fiscal policy alone. The option of advertising has no effect on the political budget cycle. A type H finds it
inefficient to set a > 0 because he has no comparative advantage in self—

advertising. His marginal cost to raising a one unit is U., the same as for a
type L.

E. Reducing Ego-Rents
If there exists some way to eliminate the leader's ego rents without other-

wise distorting his behavior, that would be the first-best policy. Society
could pass a constitutional amendment which forces any incumbent running for

re-election to pay a fee. This is equivalent to legislating a )
preceding section. It is easily shown that such a scheme

> 0 in the

be welfare

improving, though not enough to attain the full-information equilibrium. (If
is large enough, only competent types will run for re—election. However,
they will then distort fiscal policy towards having low taxes.) As a practical

26

matter, incumbents differ greatly in wealth and future earning power, and it
may be difficult to properly index a.

F. Endogenous Elections
A very interesting extension of this analysis is to the case where the
incumbent has the option of calling a new election after the first period of

his term. Such an option is characteristic of the political system in many
countries. A call for early elections can itself be a signal, and one can
show that a type H will not need to distort as much during an "early election"

as he does during a regular election (see Terrones (1987)]. However, a system
with endogenous elections is not necessarily better because political budget

distortions tend to occur more frequently. It is not possible to include a
thorough analysis of endogenous elections here, but I have mentioned it as an
example of the usefulness of this general framework.

VIII. Conclusions
This paper does not fully resurrect the theory of political business
cycles.

I do, however, present a theory of what I term "political budget

cycles."21 Indeed, it seems that earlier (Keynesian) political business cycle
models may have mislead researchers into focusing excessively on tests for

cycles in national unemployment and output statistics. Not only do these
models rely on questionable Phillips curve foundations, but by restricting
attention to national elections, they lead empirical researchers to conduct

tests based on only a very limited number of data points. In contrast, the
equilibrium theory developed here applies to state and local as well as to

national elections. Thus one should ultimately be able to construct an
extensive cross-sectional data set with which to test the positive predictions

of the model. After extending the analysis to allow for the endogenous timing of

27

elections, as discussed in section VII, it will also be possible to study
countries which do not have fixed—term elections.

It may seem odd to try to analyze elections and macroeconomic policy

cycles within a representative-agent paradigm. But this simplification cuts
to the core of the issue, which is that (a) politicians of all stripes enjoy
the status they derive from holding high office, and (b) other things equal,

all voters prefer to see the government managed efficiently. Any incumbent
will try to look competent prior to an election. By employing the representative agent paradigm, one can precisely analyze the welfare implications of a

broad number of interventions within an equilibrium framework. However, in
future research, it would certainly be desirable to try to integrate the present
analysis with heterogeneous-agent models, which have been explored by Alesina
(1987) and Ferejohn (1986).

28

Appendix
Proof of Theorem 3

+

where

K0

U(

-

X(ac0

x'1r(O)

-

r,

,r(1)]

-

+

V(T

g) -

W*(eL).

+

- g)],

Then the Kuhn-Tucker conditions are

(Al)

U1 —V—A(U1 -$V1)0

(=0if-T>0),

(A2)

U2_VA_A(U2-V) 0

(=0 ifg>0),

(A3)

K0-U(-T, g) _$V(T+CL_g) 0 (=0 ifA>0),

where

V = V'(T+

- g).

The Inada conditions insure an interior solution, and hence (Al) and (A2) imply

U1( - T, g) =

(A4)

U2(

- T, g).

Eq. (A4) is the same as eq. (12) and defines the income expansion path
=

•(g).

Since both goods are normal, $' < 0, and (A3) and (A4) are

satisfied with equality at exactly two points. At point C in figure 1,
—
i = H, L, and A =
(U1

—

$V)/(U1

V1)

< 1. At point F,

< U1 and A > 1.

To check the second-order conditions at points C and F, form

G

G

G

A

TT

A

G
g

A
AT

A

0

T

T

g

Tg

gg

> U1,

29

where G

(01) =

K0

-G

U(

-

T, g)

—

V(T

+ L - g)•

< 0,

-

-

(02) = (1-A)(2U12

since 2U12 -

-

U11
-

U11

U22

U](U1

—

V)2

0 as A

1,

> 0 because c and g are normal goods. Q.E.D.

Proof of Theorem 4
Suppose (gP, TP) is any point which is selected with positive probability

by both types in a pooling equilibrium. Let R1(g, r)

zgP, T, (gP,
(a) 4) -

c'], i = L, H. Select the unique pair [,

< T*(eH) -

g*(CH) and (b) RH(, $()] = 0.

pair is assured by V'(O) =
-

g

=

- gP,

Z(g, r, 1, £) —

-. Since

U( - cp(g),

g]

$()] such

The existence of this
U(V -

and since ir(i) > ir(), then by (b), •()

T,

gP) whenever

-

<

Hence by V" < 0, RLIj, 4(i)] < 0. By the continuity of R1, there

that RHE - 8,

4 - 6)]

> 0 and RL[ - 5

q - 8))

that

< 0.

-

gP.

8 > 0 such
Q.E.D.

Geometrically, there must always exist some point on •(g) sufficiently
far southeast of J in figure 1 such that both (26) and (27) hold.

30

Proof of Theorem 6

-T

A =
+

A[K0

-

a,

g) +

V(T

U( - T - a,

-

+

9) -

g)

V(T

+

- g)]

+

ea.

(A5) U2-V=A(U2-V),
(A6)

-

(A7)

(A —

(AS)

K0

(A9)

a

U1

=

+

1)U.

- U(
0

A(—U1

9

+

- T

+

0

-

(= 0 if a >

+T+

a, g) -

(=

0 if 9 >

0),
- g)

hold with equality, and hence A = 1.

- g)

=

V'(T

+

0),

0).

Assume in contradiction to the theorem that a >

V( +

(= 0 if A >

0

0.

Then 9 =

0, (A7) must

But then (A5) and (A6) require

— g)

which is impossible. Hence a = 0 is the only solution, in which case U1 = U2.
The proof that second-order conditions hold at the optimum is similar to
the proof of theorem 3.

Q.E.D.

31

REFERENCES

Alesina, Alberto, "Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a Repeated
Game," Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (August 1987), 651-78.
Alesina, Alberto, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, "Political Parties and the Business
Cycle in the United States, 1948—1984," Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 19 (1987), forthcoming.

Alt, James E., and K. Alec Chrystal, Political Economics (Sussex: Wheatsheaf
Books Ltd., 1983).
Bagwell, Kyle, and Garey Ramey, "Advertising and Limit Pricing," mimeo, Stanford
University (April 1987).

Beck, Nathaniel, "Elections and the Fed: Is There a Monetary Political Cycle?"
American Journal of Political Science 31 (1987), 194-216.
Chappell, Henry and William Keech, "Welfare Consequences of a Six-Year
Presidental Term Evaluated in the Context of a Model of the U.S. Economy,"
American Political Science Review 77 (1983), 75-91.
Cho, In—Koo, and David M. Kreps, "Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (May 1987), 179—221.
Cukierman, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer, "A Positive Theory of Discretionary
Policy, the Cost of Democratic Government, and the Benefits of a
Constitution," Economic Inquiry 24 (July 1986), 367-88.

Fair, Ray C., "The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President: 1984
Update," NBER Working Paper No. 2222 (April 1987).
Ferejohn, John A., "Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control," Public
Choice 50 (1986), 5-25.

Golden, David G. and James M. Poterba, "The Price of Popularity: The PoliticalBusiness Cycle Reexamined," American Journal of Political Science 24 (1980),
696—714.

Lindbeck, Assar, "Stabilization Policy in Open Economies with Endogenous
Politicians," Papers and Proceedings of the American Economic Association
(May 1976), 1—19.
Haynes, Stephen E. and Joe Stone, "Does the Political Business Cycle Dominate
United States' Unemployment and Inflation," in Thomas Willet (ed.) Political
Business Cycles: The Political Economy of Money, Inflation and Employment
(Pacific Institute: Claremont, CA) forthcoming.
Keech, William, and Carl Simon, "Electoral and Welfare Consequences of
Political Manipulation of the Economy," Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 6 (1985), 177—202.

32

Kreps, David M., and Robert Wilson, "Sequential Equilibria," Econometrica 50
(July 1982), 863-94.
Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts, "Price and Advertising Signals of Product
Quality," Journal of Political Economy 94 (August 1986), 796—821.
Moulin, Hervé, "Dominance Solvable Voting Schemes," Econometrica 47 (November

1979); 113751.
Nordhaus, William D., "The Political Business Cycle," Review of Economic
Studies 42 (1975), 169—190.
Rogoff, Kenneth, "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary
Target," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (November 1985), 1169-89.
Rogoff, Kenneth, "Reputation, Coordination and Monetary Policy," forthcoming in
Robert J. Barro (ed.), Handbook of Modern Business Cycle Theory (John Wiley:
New York).
Rogoff, Kenneth, and Anne Sibert, "Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles,"
Review of Economic Studies 55 (1988), forthcoming.
Terrones, Marco, "Parties, Administrations and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles,"
mimeo, University of Wisconsin (October 1987).

Tufte, Edward R., Political Control of the Economy (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1978).
Williams, John 1., "Vector Autoregression Modelling of the Macro—Political
Economy," paper presented at the American Political Science Association
Meetings (1987).

Willett, Thomas D. (ed.), Political Business Cycles: The Political Economy
of Money, Inflation and Employment (Pacific Institute: Claremont, CA)
forthcoming.

33

FOOTNOTES

*

This research has been supported by the National Science Foundation and
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Much of the work on this paper was conducted
while the author was on leave as a National Fellow at the Hoover Institution.
I am grateful to Marco Terrones for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
1See, for example, Nordhaus (1975), Tufte (1978), and Golden and Poterba
(1980). Recent examples of the extensive empirical literature on "political
business cycles" include Alesina and Sachs (1986), Beck (1987), Haynes and Stone
(1987), and Williams (1987).
2Rogoff and Sibert (1988) show that political budget cycles can be the
outcome of an equilibrium signalling process. The model provided in that
paper is not sufficiently articulated, however, to analyze the normative
issues raised here. Also, the Rogoff-Sibert model allows only for unidimensional signalling. The generalization to multidimensional signalling
provided here turns out to be critical for analyzing electoral and constitutional reforms.
number of previous authors have addressed normative aspects of political
budget cycles. See Lindbeck (1976), Tufte (1978), Chappell and Keech (1983),
Keech and Simon (1985), Cukierman and Meltzer (1986), and Willet (1987). None
of these analyses are based on fully-specified equilibrium models, however.
4Tufte (1978, p. 149) also suggests that political business cycles may be
socially beneficial. He argues that the government may tend to distribute
income more equitably prior to elections than it does at other times.
5The analysis would be similar in most respects if c entered the production
function multiplicatively, either multiplying g + k or k alone. There would be
some differences since a change in c then has price effects as well as income
effects, but the welfare results in section VII would be qualitatively unchanged.
61f the incumbent can only run for re—election a finite number of times, the
model predicts that there will be no political budget cycle in his last term.
In Rogoff and Sibert (1988), there are two competing political parties instead
of individual candidates.

7me MACi) stochastic structure here is consistent with Fair's (1987)
finding that for U.S. presidential elections, voters do not take into account
the opposition party's economic performance when it was last in power.
81n (6), the leader cares about his "looks" shock just as much as private
citizens do. All the results below would be exactly the same if 1? did not
enter into an agent's utility function during periods he is the leader. Also,
an implicit constraint in (6) is that the leader is not legally allowed to tax
himself differently from other individuals.
k may be thought of as investment in defense, vesting of public pension
funds, off-budget loan guarantees and, in general, any type of government expenditure whose effects are observed by the typical voter only with a lag.

34

is

not the only signal, there always exists a separating
101n part because T
equilibrium in the asymmetric information case, even if T is constrained to be
positive.

That (g*(c), T*()] is the unique global maximum follows from the fact that
U and V are strictly concave, and the constraint set (governed by eqs. (2) and
(9)] is convex.

120ne can extend the present analysis to allow for a continuum of types. In
0 run for re-election.
this case, types x1 < 0 drop out and all types x'
There is still (on average) a political budget cycle, as any incumbent running
for re—election has an incentive to pose as a higher type than he actually is.

13i am abbreviating (g1, T;

at_i)

as (g', rt).

level set of W(g, r, LH) passing through point C has greater curvature
than does the level set of W(g, T, cL) passing through C, and vis-versa at F.
The formal proof is in the appendix.
151f the ego rents (X) are large enough, the election—year fiscal policy of
a type H can be so distortionary that the public would be better off drawing a
type L. This is true even taking into account that expected post-election
social welfare is unambiguously higher under a type H. Of course, the public
does not re—elect a type H out of masochistic tendencies. By the time they go
to the polls, election-period fiscal distortions are a sunk cost, and they
vote based only on expected future welfare.
16Ferejohn (1986) considers trigger—strategies in a model of voter control
over politicians.
17See Rogoff (1987) for a survey of reputational models of monetary policy.
18There may not exist any fully separating equilibrium under a
constitutional constraint. Of course, no pure—strategy pooling equilibrium
can yield higher welfare than the solution to (28). Here I restrict attention
to constitutiona} constraints which admit at least one separating equilibrium.
19See Rogoff (1985).

20Milgrom and Roberts (1986) model advertising this way. In their model,
advertising may be used as a signal even in an undominated equilibrium. In
Bagwell and Ramey's (1987) analysis, advertising is used in the undominated
equilibrium only if it would have a direct positive effect on demand under
full information.
may be possible to extend the model to generate electoral cycles in
employment. In the present model, taxes are lump sum, but suppose instead
taxes distort the labor-leisure decision. One might then expect labor supply
to rise during election years when tax rates are low, and to fall in of felection years.

35

Table 1. The Timing of Events.

The incumbent
observes

and

The winner of the period

Tt, 9t' kti i'

t election takes office for

q, and then

sets Tt,

and

Voters observe

kt+l.

vote.

two periods. The timing of
events is the same as in t
except there is no
election until t + 2.

Election

period t

period t + 1

36

Figure 1

fl A')
F

/

L.

/

I

T*(

/

g

37

Figure 2

'P( g)

—

4.

I I

I,

/

ii
i,
/ /

I

/
/

