NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL TRANSMISSION BIAS AND INVESTOR BEHAVIOR
Bing Han
David Hirshleifer
Johan Walden
Working Paper 24281
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24281
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
February 2018, Revised January 2020

A previous version of this paper was entitled, “Self-Enhancing Transmission Bias and Active
Investing.” We thank seminar participants at Cambridge University, Central University of Finance
and Economics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia University, Emory University, the
Federal Reserve Board of New York, Nanyang Business School, National University of Singapore,
New York University, Oxford University, Princeton University, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance,
Singapore Management University, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, UCLA,
UCSD, University of Hong Kong, University of North Carolina, University of Toronto, University of
Washington at Seattle, Washington University in St. Louis, Xiamen University, Yale University, and the
Institute for Mathematical Behavioral Sciences at UC Irvine; participants at the National Bureau of
Economic Research behavioral finance working group meeting in Chicago, the American Finance
Association annual meetings, the Applied Behavioral Finance Conference at UCLA, the Linde
Conference at Caltech, the BYU Red Rock Finance Conference, the SITE conference at Stanford
University, and the 2nd China International Forum on Finance and Policy; Jennifer Conrad (Editor), an
anonymous referee, the NBER discussant, Nick Barberis; the AFA discussant, Blake LeBaron; the
ABF discussant, Andrea Eisfeldt; the Five Star discussant JuanJuan Meng; Markus Brunnermeier,
Terry Burnham, Jean-Paul Carvalho, David Dicks, Jakub Jurek, Edward Rice, Nikolai Roussanov,
Martin Schmalz, Siew Hong Teoh, Paul Tetlock, Rossen Valkanov, Michela Verardo, Ivo Welch, Jeff
Wurgler, Hongjun Yan, Liyan Yang, and Wei Xiong for very helpful comments; and Jason Chan,
SuJung Choi, and Major Coleman for helpful research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Bing Han, David Hirshleifer, and Johan Walden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Social Transmission Bias and Investor Behavior
Bing Han, David Hirshleifer, and Johan Walden
NBER Working Paper No. 24281
February 2018, Revised January 2020
JEL No. D03,D83,D85,D9,D91,G02,G11,G12,G14,G4,G41
ABSTRACT
We offer a new social approach to investment decision making and asset prices. Investors discuss
their strategies and convert others to their strategies with a probability that increases in
investment returns. The conversion rate is shown to be convex in realized returns.
Unconditionally, active strategies (e.g., high variance and skewness) dominate, although investors
have no inherent preference over these characteristics. The model has strong predictions for how
adoption of active strategies depends on investors' social networks. In contrast with nonsocial
approaches, sociability, self-enhancing transmission and other features of the communication
process determine the popularity and pricing of active investment strategies.

Bing Han
Department of Finance
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario
Canada
Bing.Han@Rotman.Utoronto.Ca
David Hirshleifer
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu

Johan Walden
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
545 Student services building, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
walden@haas.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

A neglected topic in financial economics is how investment ideas are transmitted from person to person. In most investments models, the influence of individual choices on others
is mediated by price or by quantities traded in impersonal markets. However, more direct forms of social interaction also affect investment decisions. As Shiller (1989) put it,
“...Investing in speculative assets is a social activity. Investors spend a substantial part
of their leisure time discussing investments, reading about investments, or gossiping about
others’ successes or failures in investing.” In one survey, individual investors were asked
what first drew their attention to the firm whose stock they had most recently bought.
Almost all referred to direct personal contact; personal interaction was also important for
institutional investors (Shiller and Pound 1989). Furthermore, an empirical literature finds
that social interactions affect investment decisions by individuals and money managers,
including selection of individual stocks.1
We offer a new social approach to the theory of investor behavior by modeling how the
process by which ideas are transmitted affects trading strategies. We explore how biases
in conversation promote superficially-appealing personal investing strategies, focusing on
active versus passive investment behavior in security markets. Our goal is to provide an
integrated explanation for several well-known puzzles and stylized facts in the literature
while providing new insights and empirical implications.
Notably, individual investors trade actively and have invested in active investment funds
for decades, and thereby have on average underperformed net of costs relative to a passive strategy such as holding a market index—the active investing puzzle.2 Second is the
underdiversification puzzle, that investors hold individual stocks and active funds, thereby
1

Shiller (2000, 2017) discusses other indications that conversation matters for security investment decisions. The empirical literature includes Kelly and O’Grada (2000), Duflo and Saez (2002, 2003), Hong,
Kubik, and Stein (2004, 2005), Massa and Simonov (2005), Ivković and Weisbenner (2007), Brown et al.
(2008), Cohen, Frazzini and Malloy (2008, 2010), Shive (2010), Gray, Crawford, and Kern (2012), and
Mitton, Vorkink, and Wright (2018).
2
On underperformance in individual trading, see Barber and Odean (2000a), Barber et al. (2009).
Carhart (1997) and Daniel et al. (1997) find that active funds typically do not outperform the returns of
passive benchmarks. French (2008) documents very large fees paid in the aggregate by investors to active
funds. In recent years there has also been a shift from active mutual funds toward both indexing but also
to hedge funds. In any case, what is notable is how slow has been the shift from active funds toward
indexing over a period of decades.

1

increasing portfolio volatility without adequate compensating mean returns. For example,
the idiosyncratic risk exposure of Swedish households accounts for half of the return variance for the median household (Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini 2007). Third, individual
investors are attracted to stocks with high skewness—so-called lottery stocks—see Kumar
(2009), Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011), Han and Kumar (2013), and Boyer and Vorkink
(2014). This behavior is not consistent with standard investor preferences. A final feature
of investor behavior is that flows into funds are a convex function of past performance
(Chevalier and Ellison 1997; Sirri and Tufano 1998).
The leading explanations typically focus on a subset of these puzzles and stylized facts,
and do not address other dimensions of investor behavior. Naive active investing, for
example, has been explained by individual-level cognitive biases. Excessive individual
investor trading is typically attributed to investor overconfidence (DeBondt and Thaler
1995; Barber and Odean 2000a), the tendency of investors to overestimate their abilities.
However, there is also evidence that trading aggressiveness is greatly exacerbated by social
interactions, a fact that is not emphasized by this literature.3
Standard explanations for underdiversification include hedging motives and heterogeneous preferences, but several studies highlight the limitations of these explanations. Massa
and Simonov (2006) find that hedging motives for human capital risk, which is a fundamental source of individual investor risk, does not explain heterogeneous investment behavior
among individual investors well. Similarly, Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2007, 2009) find
that rational diversification and portfolio rebalancing motives do not suffice to explain
investors’ portfolio holdings well.
The leading explanations for the attraction of investors to lottery stocks have been based
on individual-level biases, and specifically on nontraditional preferences (Brunnermeier and
Parker 2005; Barberis and Huang 2008). Such explanations do not, however, explain why
higher intensity of social interactions is associated with stronger attraction of investors to
both high volatility and high skewness stocks, where this intensity is proxied by population
3

For example, participants in investment clubs seem to select individual stocks based on reasons that
are easily exchanged with others (Barber, Heath, and Odean 2003); select small, high-beta, growth stocks;
turn over their portfolios very frequently; and underperform the market (Barber and Odean 2000b). There
is evidence (mentioned in footnote 1) that stock picking by individuals and institutions, an active investing
behavior, spreads socially, and that stock market participation increases with measures of social connectedness (Hong, Kubik, and Stein 2004; Kaustia and Knüpfer 2012). Furthermore, during the millennial
high-tech boom, investors who switched early to online trading (and who were probably early participants
in online forms of social interaction) subsequently began to trade more actively and speculatively, and
earned reduced trading profits (Barber and Odean 2002; Choi, Laibson, and Metrick 2002).

2

density (Kumar 2009). Bali et al. (2019) find that lottery stocks are more overpriced when
there is greater intensity of social interactions, where the intensity is proxied by either
population density or the Social Connectedness Index from Facebook.
Huang, Wei, and Yan (2007) propose that the convexity of fund flow as a function of
performance derives from a combination of investor participation costs and learning about
fund managers’ ability from past returns. Our approach differs in focusing on the effects
of social interaction on investor decisions.
This paper offers a unified framework based upon social interactions that addresses all of
these stylized facts, and also provides several novel testable empirical implications at both
the aggregate and individual investor level. In our model, investors adopt either an Active
(A) or Passive (P) investment strategy. We interpret A as the riskier option, measured
by volatility and/or skewness. Investors transmit information about strategy performance
amongst each other and suffer systematic biases in the transmission process that end up
promoting active over passive investing.
Key features of the transmission process are the sending and receiving schedules. The
sending schedule gives the probability that the sender reports their return outcome as
a function of that return; and the receiving schedule gives the probability that a given
reported return will convert the receiver to the strategy of the sender. Investors like to
recount to others their investment victories more than their defeats. We call this sender
behavior self-enhancing transmission bias, or SET. We discuss the considerable evidence
suggesting that self-enhancing thought processes influence financial behavior.
Receivers do not fully discount for SET. The unified psychological underpinning of our
premises that receivers neglect selection bias in the reports they receive, and overextrapolate performance reports, is the representativeness heuristic of (Tversky and Kahneman
1974). The representativeness heuristic implies that investors (such as receivers) take small
samples of performance as highly representative of the underlying return process, resulting
in both overextrapolation of returns, and neglect of the selection bias toward reports of high
returns. Motivated by the psychology of salience, we also make a second key psychological
assumption, that receivers attend more to extreme outcomes.
We use these assumptions to analyze the interplay between the return distributions
of investment strategies and investor sending and receiving schedules. This interplay determines which investment strategies spread through the population. We find that the

3

relation between a strategy’s past returns and the conversion rate to that strategy is in
general convex, as documented in Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012). Furthermore, the degree
of convexity as determined by empirically measurable parameters of the social interaction
process. These results about the convexity of flows as a function of past returns provide
our first contribution.
We also study the aggregate evolutionary outcome without conditioning upon returns.
We find that high volatility increases the fraction of investors who follow the active strategy,
because senders tend to report high returns more often than low returns (i.e., there is SET).
Receivers do not fully discount for the biased sample of return reports they receive, and
naively think that past performance is indicative of future performance. Higher volatility
intensifies the effect of the selection bias toward high reports. The tendency for high
volatility strategies to spread is further reinforced to the extent that investors are highly
attentive to extremes.
Moreover, we show that high skewness strategies tend to spread—even after controlling
for volatility. The survival advantage of positively skewed strategies comes from the fact
that they more often generate extreme high returns, which in turn are most often reported
and attended to.
The attraction of investors to high variance and high skewness (lottery) stocks tends to
place an upward pressure on price, and can therefore induce return anomalies. The model
therefore offers an explanation for the overvaluation of volatile or lottery-like categories
of stocks, such as growth stocks, distressed firms, firms that have recently undertaken
Initial Public Offerings (IPOs), and high volatility and high beta firms; and heavy trading
and overvaluation of firms that are attractive as topics of conversation (such as sports,
entertainment, and media firms, firms with hot consumer products, and local firms). So
active investment strategies tend to spread through the population even if they suffer from
a return penalty—lower expected returns than passive investment strategies—so long as
the penalty is not too large.
Our findings that greater volatility and skewness encourage the spread of an investment
strategy, and that such strategies tend to spread even when they are subject to return
penalties, provide the second, third, and fourth key contributions of this paper, respectively. There are alternative theories based upon individual-level biases that offer piecemeal explanations for subsets of these aforementioned puzzles. In contrast, our framework

4

provides a unified explanation, as well as an extensive set of further empirical implications.
A further key implication of our analysis is that the effects described above are stronger
when the intensity of social interactions is greater. This provides a set of distinctive empirical implications about the effects of the communication process between investors about
the performance of their investment strategies. There is evidence supporting the hypothesis that these effects are associated with proxies for sociability.4 For example, in our
model greater sociability increases the slope and convexity of the transformation schedule
describing the adoption of the active investing strategy as a function of its past returns.
More generally, our framework offers several further testable implications deriving from
comparative statics on the parameters of sending and receiving schedules, which we jointly
refer to as communicability parameters. These include parameters for the strength of SET
in senders’ messaging about returns, and for the sensitivity of receivers to such return reports. The predictions about how communicability affects the aggregate spread of active
strategies provides our fifth contribution.
A natural extension of our model that embeds investors in a social network generates
various novel predictions about the behaviors of individual investors. We show that the
strategy an investor adopts depends on who the investor is connected to, the performance,
volatilities and skewnesses of network neighbors’ strategies, and the investors’ sociability.
These investor-specific predictions provide our sixth key contribution.
We are not the first to examine biases in the social transmission of behavior. Economists
have modeled how cultural evolutionary processes affect ethnic and religious traits, and
altruistic preferences Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001). Financial models have examined how
social interactions affect information aggregation, trading and prices.5 Our paper differs
from this literature in examining how social transmission biases such as SET affect the
social evolutionary outcome.
DeMarzo, Vayanos, and Zwiebel (2003) show that persuasion bias, the failure of receivers
to account for possible repetition in the messages they hear from others, plays an important
4

See, e.g., Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) and Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012) for stock market participation, and Kumar (2009) for preference for high skewness stocks and high volatility stocks.
5
Such models address how information flows in social networks affect asset markets (DeMarzo, Vayanos,
and Zwiebel 2001), crises and herd behavior (Cipriani and Guarino (2002, 2008)), IPO allocations and
pricing (Welch 1992), as well as information acquisition, liquidity and trading volume (Özsöylev and
Walden 2011; Han and Yang 2013). Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2016) apply an epidemic model
to explain booms and busts in the housing market; they do not examine transmission bias in conversation,
which is the focus of our paper.

5

role in the process of social opinion formation. Our paper differs in focusing on other types
of transmission biases—biases in what messages are sent, and in how they are interpreted;
and in exploring the spread of active investing. Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) provide
evidence that individuals who are more social participate more in stock market. However,
in principle social interaction could cause contagion of nonparticipation (e.g., people could
spread negative attitudes to others). Our paper examines explicitly whether it is favorable
or unfavorable information that is transmitted and used by others, and more generally
whether active or passive investing strategies spread.6

2

The Economic Setting

In this section, we discuss the psychological and social underpinnings of our approach
to viewing investment behavior as a process of “messages” being sent and influencing
receivers in the investor population. We capture this process formally by making technical
assumptions about sending and receiving behavior among investors and, in the second part
of the section, introduce a dynamic model with many investors in an economy.

2.1

Underpinnings of Approach

Our starting point is that investors experience self-enhancing transmission bias (SET). In
particular, an investor experiencing a high return likes to report this to others, i.e., the
probability of reporting returns to others is increasing in these returns.
There are good rational reasons for such behavior, though it can also be reinforced by
psychological bias. It is, for example, natural if investors like to report—i.e., send messages
about—high returns. In a review of the impression management field, Leary and Kowalski
(1990) discuss how people tend to avoid lying, but, consistent with SET, selectively omit
information “. . . to put the best parts of oneself into public view” (pp. 40-1).
There is substantial evidence of SET in financial settings. For example, consistent
with SET, in a Facebook-style social network for individual investors, Heimer and Simon
(2015) report that the frequency with which an investor contacts other traders in a given
week is increasing in the investor’s short-term return. In empirical work developed after
6

Also, in Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004), the knowledge and practices that social investors disproportionately acquire are useful. In contrast, our approach implies that more social investors will make better
decisions in some ways (e.g., participation) but worse decisions other ways (e.g., uninformed stock picking
or day trading).

6

this paper, Ammann and Schaub (2016) find strong evidence that posting by traders on
an online social trading platform, often about their own strategies, is increasing with the
performance of their trading strategies. Escobar and Pedraza (2019) find based on random
assignment of students across classrooms in a financial education initiative that individuals
share their most successful investing experiences, encouraging unprofitable stock trading
among peers. Lim, Ng, and Uzzi (2020) find that professional investors report their high
returns more than their low returns to others in instant messages. Furthermore, people
tend to direct greater attention to their high return experiences; Scandinavian and U.S.
investors reexamine their portfolios more frequently when the market has risen than when
it has declined (Karlsson, Loewenstein, and Seppi (2009) and Sicherman et al. (2012)).
Huang, Hwang, and Lou (2018) provide evidence of SET in investor communication about
firms in different industries. Consistent with SET, for a wide set of consumer products,
positive word-of-mouth discussion of user experiences tends to predominate over negative
discussion (see the review of East, Hammond, and Wright (2007)), perhaps because users
want to persuade others that they are expert at product choice (Wojnicki and Godes 2008).
Also potentially consistent with SET, Shiller (1990) provides survey evidence that people
talked more about real estate in U.S. cities that have experienced rising real estate prices
than those that have not.7
Our key assumption about the receivers of messages is that they are subject to the
representativeness heuristic of (Tversky and Kahneman 1974). This implies that they
overextrapolate past returns and are subject to selection neglect, meaning that they do not
adjust adequately for the fact that they disproportionately receive messages from others
about high rather than low experienced returns. Thus, message receivers do not account
for the SET of message senders. Selection neglect is to be expected when individuals
with limited processing power automatically process data in fast intuitive ways rather than
taking the effortful cognitive step of adjusting for selection bias.
The representativeness heuristic is the key psychological principle underlying the model,
but we also derive implications that rely upon the additional assumption that investors pay
7

There is also extensive evidence of internal self-enhancing thought processes, such as the tendency of
people to attribute successes to their own virtues, and failures to external circumstances or luck (Bem
1972; Langer and Roth 1975). Such processes encourage people to think more about their successes than
their failures, as in the model of Bénabou and Tirole (2002). Such self-enhancing thinking is likely to result
in self-enhancing bias in conversation. There has also been an experimental study of how agents report
return information that is already known to recipients (Choi 2019).

7

greater attention to more extreme returns. When cognitive processing power is limited, a
focus on extremes is a useful heuristic, as extreme news tends to be highly informative.
There is much evidence from the psychology of attention that extreme cues tend to be
more salient than moderate cues, and therefore are more often noticed and encoded for
later retrieval (Fiske 1980; Moskowitz 2004; Morewedge, Gilbert, and Wilson 2005).8
Many behavioral finance models of investor behavior assume overextrapolation of either
fundamentals or returns, and there is also extensive evidence of such beliefs.9 There is also
extensive empirical evidence that people do not adequately adjust for selection bias in the
data they observe.10

2.2

Sending and Receiving Functions

To formally capture SET, we assume that an investor reports the performance of his/her
investment strategy with a probability that increasing in investment returns. Specifically,
we assume a sending function, s, that is increasing in returns, and for simplicity we assume
it is linear:
s(R̃) = β R̃ + γ,

β, γ > 0,

(1)

where R̃ denotes investment returns.
The more tightly bound is the sender’s self-esteem or reputation to return performance,
the stronger is SET, and therefore the higher is β. The constant γ reflects the conversability
of the investment choice. When the investment is an attractive topic for conversation, the
sender raises the topic more often. Empirically, an investor’s self-enhancement parameter
β can be identified by psychometric testing, or based on other features of self-enhancing
behavior.
In equation (1), the sending probability is a continuous and increasing function of
returns, so that even low returns are sometimes reported and high returns are not always
reported. This is consistent with the idea that people are more eager to report high
8

Salience of extremes is consistent with evidence that individual investors are net buyers of stocks that
experience extreme one-day returns of either sign (Barber and Odean 2008), and that extreme gains or
losses at other time horizons are associated with higher probability of both selling and of buying additional
shares of stocks that investors currently hold (Ben-David and Hirshleifer 2012). It is also reflected in the
salience theory of choice under risk of Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012, 2013).
9
Theory: DeLong et al. (1990), Hong and Stein (1999), Barberis and Shleifer (2003), Barberis et
al. (2015), Hirshleifer, Li and Yu (2015), and Barberis et al. (2018). Evidence: (Smith, Suchanek, and
Williams 1988; Choi, Laibson, and Madrian 2010).
10
Evidence of selection neglect is provided, e.g., by Nisbett and Ross (1980) and Brenner, Koehler, and
Tversky (1996), and, in the financial context, Koehler and Mercer (2009).

8

returns than low returns, but are constrained by conversational norms. Owing to norms
against bragging, people do not always report high returns; and conversational norms for
responsiveness sometimes push senders to reporting even low returns. Research on selfpresentation and impression management finds that people seek to report positively about
themselves, as constrained by the need to be plausible and to satisfy norms for modesty
(Goffman 1961; Schlenker 1980).
The selection neglect on the receiving investor’s end of a message is modeled as a
quadratic function of reported returns. Specifically, the probability that a receiving investor
“listens” to the message received and adopts the investment strategy is r(R̃), where
r(R̃) = aR̃2 + bR̃ + c,

a, b, c > 0.

(2)

In the Internet Appendix, we show how the functional forms for s and r arise naturally
under reasonable assumptions. We assume that the support of the return distribution is
such that s(R̃) ∈ [0, 1] and r(R̃) ∈ [0, 1].
The positive parameter b captures the greater persuasiveness of higher sender returns.
So b reflects the degree to which receivers naively extrapolate past strategy returns. One
or a few recent observations of the performance of a trading strategy generally convey little
information about its future prospects. But according to the representativeness heuristic,
investors treat small samples as highly informative, consistent with b > 0. Furthermore,
other things equal we expect extreme returns to be more attention-grabbing, and therefore
more persuasive. This is reflected in the convexity of the receiving schedule, i.e., a > 0.
The parameter c captures a return-independent susceptibility of receivers to influence of
the sender’s report, reflecting a tendency to conform to or be swayed by the behavior of
others.11

2.3

Social Interaction and Investment Strategies

We consider a setting with a very large number, N , of investors. Time is discrete, t =
0, 1, 2, . . ., where we think of one time period as being fairly short.
There are two mutually exclusive investment strategies available to each investor at each
t
point in time, an active strategy A that generates returns R̃A
, and a passive strategy P
11

In our specification of the receiving function, conversion depends only on the sender’s reported return.
In reality, a receiver may compare this return with the receiver’s own return. As a robustness check, we
have verified that similar results apply when the receiver’s switch decision depends on the difference in
return between sender and receiver.

9

that generates returns R̃Pt . We will often suppress the t superscript. Investors who choose
the active and passive strategies are said to be of type A and P , respectively. The returns
t
of (R̃A
and R̃Pt ) are jointly i.i.d. across time periods.

The fraction of active investors among the population at time t is ft . Investors are
finitely lived. They are randomly replaced with new investors at the rate of λ per period. The fraction of new investors who initially choose an active strategy is exogenously
determined by a constant q ∈ [0, 1].
The expectation, volatility, and skewness of the returns to the A and P investment
strategies are µi , σi , γi , where i ∈ {A, P }. Here, we assume that µP = µA + D, D ≥ 0,
σA > σP , and γP = 0, whereas γA ≥ 0, in line with the stylized facts documented in
the literature about the returns on passive and active investments. For simplicity, we also
normalize expected returns by assuming that µP = 0. We call D the return penalty, rather
than the “cost” of active trading, because a major part of the welfare loss may come from
lack of diversification and excessive idiosyncratic risk-bearing. So even if it were the case
that D < 0, the A’s could be worse off than P’s.12
To summarize, active investing means choosing strategies with return distributions that
have higher volatility and possibly also higher skewness. This corresponds fairly well with
common parlance, but there are possible exceptions. For example, a long-short strategy
that achieved low risk, or a dynamic hedging strategy that generated a riskfree payoff,
would not be active in the sense we are using.
In each period, a (small) fraction 2κ of investors are randomly selected as potential
senders, and each such investor is matched with a randomly selected potential receiver
among the remaining investors. Each potential sender of type i ∈ {A, P }, sends a message
with probability s(R̃i ), where conditional on sender returns, the outcome that a message is
sent is i.i.d. across potential senders. This is a proxy for the intensity of social interaction.
It could, for example, reflect how often people meet with each of their friends and how
many friends they have, as examined more explicitly in the analysis of social networks in
Subsection 3.4. Each potential receiver listens to the message, if received, with probability
r(R̃i ), where conditional upon the level of return conveyed, whether a receiver chooses
to listen to a given message is i.i.d., across potential receivers. An investor who switches
investment strategy between time t and t+1 is called a time-t switcher, or simply a switcher.
12

Greater transaction costs of active trading (not modeled here) would also be reflected in D.

10

The transformation probability that a potential sender of type A with return RA converts a potential receiver of type P that he or she is paired to is TA (RA ) = r(RA )s(RA ),
and the probability that a sender of type P converts a receiver of type A is TP (RP ) =
r(RP )s(RP ). By assumption, r0 , s0 > 0, so TA0 (RA ), TP0 (RP ) > 0. We define the unconditional transformation probabilities
i ∈ {A, P },

T̄i = E[s(R̃i )r(R̃i )],
and also their difference T̄ = T̄A − T̄P .

Investors who are not selected as potential receivers do not change their investment
strategies (although they may be replaced by new agents with opposite strategies). Similarly, a potential receiver who is matched with a potential sender of the same type will not
switch. Only potential receivers who are matched with potential senders of the opposite
type are therefore potential switchers. The fraction of such potential switchers in a given
period is then 2κft (1 − ft ).
The (expected) transformation rate from P to A at time t is E[ft+1 − ft ], which, given
our previous assumptions, can be written
E[ft+1 − ft ] = (1 − λ)ft (1 − ft )κT̄ + λ(q − ft ),

(3)

It follows immediately that the expected transformation rate is linearly increasing in T̄ , a
fact that we will make heavy use of going forward.
The (steady-state) fraction of active investors is the f¯ that satisfies E[ft+1 − ft ] = 0,
i.e.,
0 = (1 − λ)f¯(1 − f¯)κT̄ + λ(q − f¯).

(4)

It follows from (4) that when T̄ > 0,
s
f¯ = x +
x =

1
2

x2 +
1−

λ̂
κT̄

λ̂q
,
κT̄
!
,

where
and

(5)
λ̂ =

λ
,
1−λ

(6)

whereas f¯ = q when T̄ = 0. Also, it is straightforward to show that f¯ is a strictly increasing
function in T̄ and κ.
When f¯ > q, we say that the active investment strategy dominates, relative to its
frequency without investor communication. We will usually assume that q = 12 , in which
11

case dominance is equivalent to A being more prevalent than P . The previous results then
imply that A dominates/is more prevalent when T̄ > 0.

3

Results

3.1

Convex Fund Flows

Our first result concerns the transformation rate from the passive to the active strategy,
conditioned on realized returns. Equivalently, this can be interpreted as the net flow of
capital into A.
Proposition 1
1. Conditional upon strategy return outcomes, the transformation rate from P to A is
increasing and strictly convex in the realized active return, RA .
2. The sensitivity of the transformation rate from P to A as a function of RA ,
and the convexity of this relationship,

∂ 2 E[ft+1 −ft ]
,
∂ 2 RA

∂ E[ft+1 −ft ]
,
∂RA

are increasing with SET as reflected

in β, conversability as reflected in γ, attention of receivers to extremes as reflected in
a, and the extrapolativeness of receivers b.
3. The sensitivity of the expected transformation rate from P to A as a function RA ,
∂ E[ft+1 −ft ]
,
∂RA

is increasing with the susceptibility of receivers c.

4. Each of the sensitivities and convex relationships in the first two parts are strengthened by increasing intensity of social interaction, κ. In other words,
∂3

E[ft+1 −ft ]
∂ 2 RA ∂κ

∂ 2 E[ft+1 −ft ]
,
∂RA ∂κ

and

> 0.

Part 1 of Proposition 1 provides our first main contribution, providing an explanation
for the convexity of fund flows as a function of realized past returns, along with further
implications for flow convexity. This intuition starts from the fact that higher realized
active returns make active investors more eager to communicate their performance, and
make passive investors more willing to listen and reevaluate their own strategy. These two
effects are multiplicatively reinforcing, inducing convexity. (Convexity is further reinforced
by the fact that receivers are especially attentive to extreme returns). Chevalier and Ellison
(1997) and Sirri and Tufano (1998) find that investor funds flow into mutual funds with
better performance (even though there is little evidence that performance is persistent).
12

Furthermore, the flow-performance relationship is convex; flows are disproportionately into
the best-performing funds. Lu and Tang (2015) find that 401(k) plan participants place a
greater share of their retirement portfolios in risky investments (equity rather than fixed
income) when their coworkers earned higher equity returns in the preceding period.
Furthermore, and consistent with Part 4, there is evidence that convexity of investment
flows derive from social interaction. Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012) report a strong positive
relation between new participation in the stock market in Finland and neighbors’ recent
stock returns in the range of positive returns. They find that the likelihood of entry does
not decrease as returns fall below zero, consistent with people not talking about inferior
outcomes. The greater strength of the effect in the positive range is consistent with the
convexity prediction.13
Parts 2-3 include untested predictions that are distinctive to our model. For example,
since past literature has provided empirical proxies for sociability, it will be valuable to
test whether greater sociability is associated with greater slope and convexity of the transformation of investors to active investing as a function of past returns on A. It is also
possible to test for the effects of variation in SET as reflected in β, using psychometric
testing or by exploiting findings from cross-cultural psychology to test for differences in
investment behaviors across countries or ethnic groups. For example, a nonsocial model
with extrapolative beliefs would not share the predictions of Parts 2 and 3 of Proposition 1.

3.2

Predominance of the Active Strategy

We show in this subsection that higher variance and skewness promote the spread of investment strategies (the second and third main contributions of this paper), and that the
active strategy can dominate even if it bears a positive return penalty (the fourth main
contribution of the paper). These findings derive from reinforcing effects. Owing to SET,
the spread of A over P is favored by increases in the volatility and skewness of A relative to
P. Furthermore, owing to greater attention to extremes (a > 0), the greater skewness of A
(γA ≥ γP ) also promotes the spread of A. The effect is strong enough that A can dominate
even if it (in contrast with our model assumption) A had lower expected returns (D > 0).
Proposition 2 In an economy with σA > σP > 0, γA ≥ γP = 0, there exists a D̄ > 0 such
that for all D < D̄, the active strategy dominates, f¯ > 1 .
2

13

Our model does not imply a literally zero effect in the negative range, but a weaker effect within this
range (as predicted by Proposition 1) would be statistically harder to detect.

13

Furthermore, the volatility and skewness of A promote its dominance :
Proposition 3 The steady state fraction of A, f¯:
1. Decreases with the return penalty to active trading, D;
2. Increases with active volatility, σA ;
3. Increases with active skewness, γA .
Based upon a plausible additional assumption about pricing—that the higher the demand
for a security, the higher its price and therefore the lower its expected long-run future
return, we can interpret the comparative statics from Proposition 3 as comparative statics
on the expected returns of active investors (also justified formally in the equilibrium model
in Section D of the Appendix). Part 1 says that if the average return penalty D to active
trading is larger, A will be less successful in spreading through the population.
Part 2 implies that there is greater investor demand for more volatile stocks (our second
main contribution). Consistent with Part 2, Goetzmann and Kumar (2008) document
that underdiversified investors prefer stocks that are more volatile. A further empirical
implication of Part 2 is that in periods in which individual stocks have high idiosyncratic
volatility, all else equal there will be greater holding of and volume of trade in individual
stocks. Intuitively, during such periods A’s have more extreme returns to report selectively.
This implication is in sharp contrast with the prediction of rational investing under
portfolio theory, which suggests that in periods of high idiosyncratic volatility, the gains to
holding a diversified portfolio rather than trading individual stocks is especially large. There
are theories of bubbles in which high return volatility might be associated with high stock
trading because investors are experiencing especially strong sentiment or misperceptions.
A distinctive implication of the prediction here is that when an increase in the volatility of
fundamentals is the driver of an increase in return volatility, there will still be an increase
in stock holding and trading volume.
The greater demand of investors for a higher-volatility stock implies that it will have a
higher price and lower expected return. This is consistent with the idiosyncratic volatility
puzzle that stocks with high idiosyncratic risk earn low subsequent returns (Ang et al.
(2006, 2009)). This apparent overpricing is stronger for firms held or traded more heavily
by retail investors (Jiang, Xu, and Yao 2009; Han and Kumar 2013), for whom we would
14

expect conversational biases to be strong. Thus, the theory offers a new social explanation
for the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle: the high returns generated by volatile stocks are
heavily discussed, which increases the demand for such stocks, driving up their prices.
A plausible nonsocial explanation for the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle is that realization utility or prospect theory with probability weighting creates a preference for volatile
portfolios and stocks (Barberis and Huang 2008; Boyer, Mitton, and Vorkink 2010). A
distinctive implication of our approach is that the effect derives from social interaction.
Consistent with social interaction playing a role, in tests using extensive controls, there is
evidence suggesting that the attraction to high volatility is greater among urban investors
(Kumar (2009)).
High volatility in general derives from factor loadings as well as idiosyncratic volatility.
So Part 2 also implies investors will tend to be attracted to high-beta stocks, pushing
their price upward (and thereby depressing their expected returns). This is consistent with
the anomaly that high beta stocks underperform and low beta stocks overperform (Baker,
Bradley, and Wurgler 2011; Frazzini and Pedersen 2014).
Part 3 implies that conversation especially encourages demand for securities with high
skewness (our third main contribution).

Mitton and Vorkink (2007) and Goetzmann

and Kumar (2008) document that underdiversified individual investors (presumably naive
investors—whom we would expect to be most subject to social influence) tend to choose
stocks with high skewness. Examples of skewed securities include options, and ‘lottery
stocks’, such as real option firms that have a small chance of a jackpot outcome. As more
investors adopt the strategy favoring purchase of positively skewed securities, the expected
returns of such securities is depressed. This is consistent with the empirical finding that ex
ante return skewness is a negative predictor of future stock returns (Conrad, Dittmar, and
Ghysels 2013; Eraker and Ready 2015).14
This implication for the attraction of individual investors to lottery stocks is among this
paper’s key contributions. Existing explanations for this phenomenon have focused solely
on an inherent individual characteristic—nontraditional preferences. In Brunnermeier and
Parker (2005), agents who optimize over beliefs prefer skewed payoff distributions. In
14

There is also evidence from initial public offerings (Green and Hwang 2012) and general samples (Bali,
Cakici, and Whitelaw 2011) that lottery stocks are overpriced, and that being distressed (a characteristic
that leads to a lottery payoff distribution) on average predicts negative abnormal returns (Campbell,
Hilscher, and Szilagyi 2008). Boyer and Vorkink (2014) find that the ex ante skewness of equity options is
a negative cross-sectional predictor of option abnormal returns.

15

Barberis and Huang (2008), prospect theory with probability weighting creates a preference
over portfolio skewness, which induces a demand for ‘lottery’ (high idiosyncratic skewness)
stocks that contribute to portfolio skewness.
A key difference of our approach from the approaches of these papers is that investors
are attracted to lottery stocks without any inherent preferences over beliefs or over portfolio
skewness. Instead, biases in the transmission process cause the purchase of lottery stocks
to be contagious. Indeed, in our approach, the attraction to variance and skewness derives
from investor responses to past realizations, so investors need not even understand the
statistical concepts of variance or skewness. The inherently social nature of our results offers
a possible explanation for the empirical association of high social interaction with gambling
and lottery behaviors. In our setting, greater social interaction increases contagion, thereby
increasing the holdings of lottery stocks.15

3.3

The Role of Communicability and Intensity of Social Interaction

Our model provides a natural link between the dominance of investment strategies and their
communicability, which we define as the characteristics of the social transmission process
that determine the probability that return messages about a strategy are conveyed to other
investors and cause those investors to adopt it. The parameters {β, γ, a, b, c} jointly capture
communicability in our model. Furthermore, κ, the meeting rate, measures the intensity
of social interaction. Earlier we derived results relating communicability to the rate at
which investors convert from P to A, conditional on strategy return outcomes, in Parts 2
and 3 of Proposition 1. Our next results show how communicability and intensity of social
interaction increase the steady-state frequency of the active strategy. This provides our
fifth main contribution.
Proposition 4 In an economy with σA > σP > 0, γA ≥ γP = 0, there exists a D̄ > 0 of
the return penalty D such that if D < D̄, the steady state fraction, f¯, of investors following
the active strategy, increases with:
1. SET, β;
15

We formalize this conclusion in Section 3.4, Proposition 6, where we show that the expected number of active investors—in this context, investors in lottery stocks—increases with the intensity of social
interactions, κ.

16

2. The conversability, γ;
3. Attention of receivers to extremes, a;
4. The extrapolativeness of receivers, b.
5. The intensity of social interaction, κ.
Proposition 4 describes how several characteristics of the social transmission process
affect the evolutionary predominance of A. Part 1 states that greater SET as reflected in
β promotes evolution toward A, because SET causes greater reporting of the high returns
that make A enticing for receivers. Active investment A more often generates extreme
returns for SET to operate upon through higher factor loading, idiosyncratic volatility,
or more positive idiosyncratic skewness. Empirically, β as a reflection of the need for
self-enhancement could be estimated using psychometric testing.
Part 2 states that greater conversability, as reflected in γ, can help A spread because
sending events tend to be more influential for an A than a P sender. The reason for this
is that receivers pay greater attention to extreme returns (a > 0), which are more often
generated by the A strategy. Part 2 is consistent with active trading becoming more popular
when people become more talkative about their investment performance. Examples include
the rise of communication technologies, media, and such social phenomena as ubiquitous
computing, stock market chat rooms, investment clubs, and blogging. This raises the
possibility that the rise of these phenomena—to the extent that this occurred for reasons
other than a rising stock market, such as technological change—contributed to the internet
bubble.16 If greater general sociability is associated with greater comfort in discussing
performance information, then in any given conversation it increases the unconditional
probability that the sender will discuss returns; i.e., it increases γ. So if the expected return
of A is not too low, we have the empirical implication that greater sociability increases the
equilibrium frequency of the active strategy.
16

Another possible interpretation of the distinction between active versus passive strategies is that active
strategies are more conversable (less conventional, more affect-triggering, or more arousing). This can
be captured by replacing γ in the sending function with γA and γP , where γA > γP . However, our
model generates a survival advantage for A even without it having a conversability advantage. We have
verified that γA > γP favors the spread of A. Although fairly obvious, this point provides the additional
empirical implication that there will be relative overvaluation of stocks whose ‘glamour’ characteristics
make them attractive for conversation. Such glamour characteristics include growth, recent IPO, sports,
entertainment, media, and innovative consumer products, so this implication is consistent with some known
return anomalies.

17

In Part 3, greater attention by receivers to extreme outcomes, as reflected in a promotes
the spread of A over P. This is because A generates more of the extreme returns which,
when a is high, are especially noticed and more likely to persuade receivers. This effect
is reinforced by SET, which causes greater reporting of extreme high returns. This a
parameter can be estimated empirically; Barber and Odean (2008) estimate the effects of
investor attention to extreme returns.
In Part 4, greater extrapolativeness of receivers, as reflected in b, helps A spread by
magnifying the effect of SET. This suggests that active investing will be more popular
when extrapolative beliefs are stronger (past returns are perceived to be more informative
about the future). Past empirical literature has estimated investor extrapolativeness of
expectations using both survey approaches (Case and Shiller 1988; DeBondt 1993; VissingJorgensen 2003) and field evidence (Haruvy, Lahav, and Noussair 2007; Greenwood and
Shleifer 2014; Hoffmann, Post, and Pennings 2015); such estimates provide a possible means
of testing this prediction.
Part 5 highlights a distinctive feature of our theory, that the effects we identify derive
from social interaction, and are therefore predicted to be stronger in times and places with
greater intensity of social interactions, as reflected in κ. For example, population density is
often used as an empirical proxy for social connectedness Empirically, participation in online
communities (which are associated with social interaction) has been found to be associated
with riskier financial decisions, with a stronger effect for more active participants (Zhu et
al. (2012)). A similar intuition suggests that greater social connectedness (a larger number
of links between individuals) will also strengthen the effects we derive. This point provides
additional empirical predictions in relation to proxies for social connectedness at both the
population level and, in the next Subsection 3.4, at the individual level.
Consistent with a role for social contagion in the attraction to lottery distributions,
people who live in urban areas buy lottery tickets more frequently than individuals who
live in rural areas (Kallick et al. (1979)). Furthermore, there is evidence suggesting that
the preference for high skewness stocks is greater among urban investors, after controlling
for demographic, geographic, and personal investing characteristics (Kumar 2009).17 In
addition, as mentioned in the introduction, an empirical test of our model finds that lotterylike features (skewness and volatility) negatively predict returns more strongly when the
17

Kumar (2009) empirically defines lottery stocks as stocks with high skewness, high volatility, and low
price, so his findings do not distinguish the effects of skewness versus volatility.

18

intensity of social interaction is higher, as proxied by either population density or the Social
Connectedness Index from Facebook (Bali et al. (2019)).

3.4

Investor Behavior in a Social Network

Our model also provides strong novel empirical predictions about how social connections
between investors influence investing behavior, providing the sixth and final main contribution of the paper. In reality, potential senders and receivers are not randomly matched
in the whole population. Investors tend to communicate with the subset of others with
whom they have social ties, such as friends, members of the same club or online community,
and so forth. So the transmission of strategies between investors depends on their network
positions.
We have extended the model to include a social network; the formal model is available
in the online appendix. Since formal analysis of the social network framework requires a
substantial amount of notation, and the results are very intuitive, we provide an informal
presentation in the body of the paper.
In our extension, each investor, n, is connected to a set of other investors Dn , which is
a subset of the full set of N agents. These represent the only investors an investor may
receive messages from or send messages to. Specifically, in each period the fraction 2κ of
all the pairs of investors who are connected are matched, half as potential senders and
the matched half as potential receivers. It follows that investors with many connections
are more likely to be selected to become senders and receivers than are investors with
few connections. Moreover, the probability that an investor changes type depends on the
type and performance of the investor’s connections, rather than of the general population.
This intuition leads to Propositions 5 and 6, which extend our previous results to provide
predictions about the behavior of specific investors based on their individual positions in
the social network.
Proposition 5 In the model with a social network
1. For an investor n with a given number of connections, the probability that investor
n switches strategy is increasing in the number of n’s connections to investors of the
opposite type, and in the performance of n’s connections that are of the opposite type.
2. The probability that investor n switches strategy is strictly convex in each of the returns
of the opposite-type investors that n is connected to.
19

3. The probability that investor n of a given type switches to the type of a neighbor is
increasing in the skewnesses of the portfolio returns of each of n’s network neighbors.
If the return penalty to A is sufficiently small, then the probability that investor n of
type P converts is also increasing in the return volatilities of each of n’s neighbors.
Proposition 5 provide several new predictions that are testable using data on investor
social networks. Some of these predictions are untested, but there is supporting evidence
for Part 1. Survey evidence indicates that greater household involvement in social activities
is associated with greater stock market participation both in the U.S. (Hong, Kubik, and
Stein 2004) and in ten European countries (Georgarakos and Pasini 2011). Furthermore,
Heimer (2014) documents that social interaction is more prevalent amongst active investors
who buy and/or sell stocks than passive investors who hold U.S. savings bonds, thereby
supporting our explanation for the active investing puzzle in which informal communication
tends to promote active rather than passive strategies.
Finally, we turn to implications about how individual social connectedness, and personal communicability characteristics of an investor and the investor’s neighbor, affect an
investor’s attraction to the active strategy. We also extend the model to allow for individual
differences in communicability, in addition to differences in network connectedness.
Proposition 6 In the model with a social network, there exists a D̄ > 0 such that
1. If D < D̄, the probability that a passive investor n switches to A in the next period
increases with that investor’s attention to extremes, an , and extrapolativeness, bn .
2. If D < D̄, the probability that a passive investor n switches to A in the next period
increases with each of that investor’s neighbors’ SET, βm , and conversability, γm ,
m ∈ Dn .
As compared with investment professionals, individual investors are almost surely influenced more heavily by casual social communication of performance anecdotes relative to
independent analysis and investigation. This suggests that the predictions of Propositions
5-6 that social interaction favors active investing will apply more strongly to individual
investors than to professionals.
The implications of Proposition 6 are empirically testable. Part 1 states that investors
with higher individual attention to extremes and/or extrapolativeness have higher probability of becoming A’s. Part 2 indicates that the conversion probability of a P switching
20

to A increases with the SET (βm ) and conversability (γm ) of each of that investor’s neighbors. (Here cross-investor differences in conversability reflect the fact that some people find
investments to be a more attractive topic for conversation than do other people.)
The finding of Proposition 5 Part 1 that people tend to switch more when they are
connected more to those of the opposite type suggests that in the economy as whole, if
people have a propensity to socialize more with users of the same strategy, the rate of
conversion will be lower. Such a tendency to preferentially socialize with those of similar
type is called homophily. Homophily in our context reflects the fact that people like talking
to each other about shared interests, which is likely to be just as true for investments
as other activities. We analyze these issues in the online appendix, and find that the
transformation rate and steady state fraction of A’s is decreasing with homophily (the
tendency for connections to be with others of the same type). Intuitively, greater homophily
reduces the effective number of social interactions, since investors of opposite type are less
likely to have communication and conversion. So the dominance of A is reduced.

4

Concluding Remarks

We offer a new social approach to investment decision-making and asset prices, accounting
for the imperfectly rational process by which ideas are transmitted between investors in
their social network. We argue that success in the struggle for survival between investment
strategies is determined by the sending function, which describes the probability that a
sender communicates a strategy and its performance, and the receiving function, which
describes the probability that this information converts the receiver to that strategy.
In the model, owing to self-enhancing transmission, senders’ propensity to communicate their returns is increasing in sender return. The propensity of naive receivers to be
converted is also increasing in sender return. Owing to the salience of extremes, the propensity of receivers to attend to and be converted by the sender is convex in sender return.
These shapes of the sending and receiving functions, together with the intensity of social
interactions describe the social transmission process. The psychological traits of investors
determine the parameters of the sending and receiving functions.
We find that active strategies—those with high volatility, skewness, and personal engagement, spread after they experience high returns, and that this relationship is convex.
As returns are realized, and as investors communicate with and persuade each other over
21

time, the system evolves to a dynamically stable outcome with a high frequency of active
investing. So in contrast with traditional behavioral finance models, active strategies tend
to spread through the population even if investors have no inherent preference over their
characteristics. The model therefore provides a new, social approach to understanding investor behavior. Also, since this attraction to variance and skewness derives from investor
responses to past realizations, our model does not require that investors understand the
statistical concepts of variance or skewness.
In particular, the evolutionary predominance of investors who adopt active strategies
provides a social explanation for anomalies such as the lottery, volatility, beta, and IPO
effects in capital market equilibrium. These effects depend on empirically observable parameters of the sending and receiving functions and the social network, leading to a rich
set of additional empirical implications about investor trading and return anomalies.
More generally, we suggest that a fruitful direction for understanding how social interactions affect financial decisions is to study the factors that shape the sending and receiving
functions, i.e., that cause an investor to talk about an investment idea, or to be receptive to
such an idea upon hearing about it. Conversations are influenced by chance circumstances,
subtle cues, and even trifling costs and benefits to the transactors. This suggests that
variations in social environment that may seem trifling at the individual level can have important effects on economic outcomes. For example, the model suggests that a shift in the
social acceptability of talking about one’s successes, or of discussing personal investments
more generally, can have large effects on risk taking and active investing. This suggests a
possible explanation for both secular and higher-frequency shifts in investor behavior.
Much of the empirical literature on social interactions focuses on whether information
or behaviors are transmitted, and on what affects the strength of social contagion. Our
approach suggests that it is valuable to understand how biases in the transmission process
affect decision making and economic outcomes.
It has often been argued that social interactions contribute to shifts in investor sentiment and bubbles (e.g., Shiller (2000)). Our model explains the dynamics of shifts in
the popularity of different strategies as a function of past returns. As such, it offers a
microfoundation for swings in investor sentiment.
To further explore sentiment and bubbles, our model could be extended to allow for
overshooting and correction, by having the sending and the receiving functions depend on

22

the sender’s return over multiple periods (rather than just the most recent period return).
Alternatively, if an increase in the fraction of investors who adopt an active strategy makes
it more socially acceptable to discuss one’s investment successes, the popularity of the
active strategy will be self-reinforcing. So our model, and more generally the social finance
approach, offers a possible framework for modeling how the spread of investment ideas
causes overshooting, bubbles and crashes.

23

References
Ammann, M. and N. Schaub (2016, June). Social interaction and investing: Evidence
from an online social trading network. Working paper, University of St. Gallen.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang (2006, February). The cross-section of
volatility and expected returns. Journal of Finance 61 (1), 259–299.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang (2009, January). High idiosyncratic
volatility and low returns: International and further U.S. evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 91 (1), 1–23.
Baker, M., B. Bradley, and J. Wurgler (2011, January/February). Benchmarks as limits
to arbitrage: Understanding the low-volatility anomaly. Financial Analysts Journal 67 (1), 40–54.
Bali, T. G., N. Cakici, and R. Whitelaw (2011, February). Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries
and the cross-section of expected returns. Journal of Financial Economics 99 (2),
427–446.
Bali, T. G., D. A. Hirshleifer, L. Peng, and Y. Tang (2019, July). Attention, social
interaction, and investor attraction to lottery stocks. Working paper, Georgetown
University.
Barber, B., C. Heath, and T. Odean (2003, December). Good reasons sell: Reason-based
choice among individual investors in the stock market. Management Science 49 (12),
1636–1652.
Barber, B., Y.-T. Lee, Y.-J. Liu, and T. Odean (2009). Just how much do individual
investors lose by trading? Review of Financial Studies 22 (2), 609–632.
Barber, B. and T. Odean (2000a, April). Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock investment performance of individual investors. Journal of Finance 55 (2),
773–806.
Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2000b, January/February). Too many cooks spoil the
profits: The performance of investment clubs. Financial Analyst Journal 56 (1), 17–
25.
Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2002, March). Online investors: Do the slow die first?
Review of Financial Studies 15 (2), 455–488.
Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2008, April). All that glitters: The effect of attention
and news on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Review of
Financial Studies 21 (2), 785–818.
Barberis, N., R. Greenwood, L. Jin, and A. Shleifer (2015, January). X-CAPM: An
extrapolative capital asset pricing model. Journal of Financial Economics 115 (1),
1–24.
Barberis, N., R. Greenwood, L. Jin, and A. Shleifer (2018, August). Extrapolation and
bubbles. Journal of Financial Economics 129 (2), 203–227.
Barberis, N. and M. Huang (2008, December). Stocks as lotteries: The implications of
probability weighting for security prices. American Economic Review 95 (5), 2066–
2100.

24

Barberis, N. and A. Shleifer (2003, May). Style investing. Journal of Financial Economics 68 (2), 161–199.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 6,
1–62.
Ben-David, I. and D. Hirshleifer (2012, August). Are investors really reluctant to realize
their losses? Trading responses to past returns and the disposition effect. Review of
Financial Studies 25 (8), 2485–2532.
Bénabou, R. and J. Tirole (2002, August). Self-confidence and personal motivation.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3), 871–915.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2000). Beyond the melting pot: Cultural transmission, marriage, and the evolution of ethnic and religious traits. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3), 955–988.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001, April). The economics of cultural transmission and the
evolution of preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2), 298–319.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2012, August). Salience theory of choice under
risk. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1243–1285.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2013, May). Salience and asset prices. American Economic Review 103 (3), 623–628.
Boyer, B., T. Mitton, and K. Vorkink (2010, January). Expected idiosyncratic skewness.
Review of Financial Studies 23 (1), 169–202.
Boyer, B. H. and K. Vorkink (2014, August). Stock options as lotteries. Journal of
Finance 59 (4), 1485–1527.
Brenner, L. A., D. J. Koehler, and A. Tversky (1996, March). On the evaluation of
one-sided evidence. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 9 (1), 59–70.
Brown, J. R., Z. Ivković, P. A. Smith, and S. Weisbenner (2008, June). Neighbors matter:
Causal community effects and stock market participation. Journal of Finance 63 (3),
1509–1531.
Brunnermeier, M. K. and J. Parker (2005, September). Optimal expectations. American
Economic Review 95 (4), 1092–1118.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. T. Rebelo (2016, August). Understanding booms
and busts in housing markets. Journal of Political Economy 124 (4), 10881147.
Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2007, October). Down or out: Assessing the
welfare costs of household investment mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115 (5),
707–747.
Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2009, February). Fight or flight? portfolio
rebalancing by individual investors. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1), 301–348.
Campbell, J. Y., J. D. Hilscher, and J. Szilagyi (2008, December). In search of distress
risk. Journal of Finance 63 (6), 2899–2939.
Carhart, M. M. (1997, March). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of
Finance 52 (1), 57–82.
Case, K. E. and R. J. Shiller (1988, November/December). The behavior of home buyers
in boom and post-boom markets. New England Economic Review 80 (3), 29–46.
25

Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison (1997, December). Risk taking by mutual funds as a response
to incentives. Journal of Political Economy 105 (6), 1167–1200.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2010, April). Why does the law of one
price fail? An experiment on index mutual funds. Review of Financial Studies 23 (4),
1405–1432.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and A. Metrick (2002, June). How does the internet affect
trading? Evidence from investor behavior in 401(k) plans. Journal of Financial Economics 64 (3), 397–421.
Choi, Y. (2019). When losers talk: Conversations, social norms, and information diffusion. Working paper.
Cipriani, M. and A. Guarino (2002). Social learning and financial crises. In Risk measurement and systemic risk: Proceedings of the third joint Central Bank research
conference, pp. 77–83. Basel, Switzerland: The Committee on the Global Financial
System, Bank for International Settlements Press.
Cipriani, M. and A. Guarino (2008, April). Herd behavior and contagion in financial
markets. B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics 8 (1), Article 24.
Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. J. Malloy (2008, October). The small world of investing:
Board connections and mutual fund returns. Journal of Political Economy 116 (5),
951–979.
Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. J. Malloy (2010, August). Sell-side school ties. Journal of
Finance 65 (4), 1409–1437.
Conrad, J., R. F. Dittmar, and E. Ghysels (2013, February). Ex ante skewness and
expected stock returns. Journal of Finance 68 (1), 85–124.
Daniel, K. D., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers (1997, July). Measuring mutual
fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. Journal of Finance 52 (3),
1035–1058.
DeBondt, W. F. M. (1993, November). Betting on trends: Intuitive forecasts of financial
risk and return. International Journal of Forecasting 9 (3), 355–371.
DeBondt, W. F. M. and R. H. Thaler (1995). Financial decision-making in markets
and firms: A behavioral perspective. In R. A. Jarrow, V. Maksimovic, and W. T.
Ziemba (Eds.), Finance, Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science,
Volume 9, Chapter 13, pp. 385–410. Amsterdam: North Holland.
DeLong, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1990). Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation. Journal of Finance 45 (2),
375–395.
DeMarzo, P., D. Vayanos, and J. Zwiebel (2001). Social networks and financial markets.
Working paper, MIT and Stanford University.
DeMarzo, P., D. Vayanos, and J. Zwiebel (2003). Persuasion bias, social influence, and
uni-dimensional opinions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 909–968.
Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2002, July). Participation and investment decisions in a retirement
plan: The influence of colleagues’ choices. Journal of Public Economics 85 (1), 121–
148.
26

Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2003, August). The role of information and social interactions
in retirement plan decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118 (3), 815–842.
East, R., K. Hammond, and M. Wright (2007, June). The relative incidence of positive and negative word of mouth: A multi-category study. International Journal of
Research in Marketing 24 (2), 175–184.
Eraker, B. and M. J. Ready (2015, March). Do investors overpay for stocks with lotterylike payoffs? An examination of the returns on OTC stocks. Journal of Financial
Economics 115 (3), 486–504.
Escobar, L. and A. Pedraza (2019). Active trading and (poor) performance. Working
paper, World Bank.
Fiske, S. T. (1980, June). Attention and weight in person perception: The impact of
negative and extreme behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 38 (6),
889–906.
Frazzini, A. and L. H. Pedersen (2014, January). Betting against beta. Journal of Financial Economics 111 (1), 1–25.
French, K. R. (2008, August). Presidential address: The cost of active investing. Journal
of Finance 63 (4), 1537–1573.
Georgarakos, D. and G. Pasini (2011, October). Trust, sociability, and stock market
participation. Review of Finance 15 (4), 693–725.
Goetzmann, W. N. and A. Kumar (2008). Equity portfolio diversification. Review of
Finance 12 (3), 433–463.
Goffman, E. (1961). Encounters. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Gray, W. R., S. Crawford, and A. E. Kern (2012, May). Do hedge fund managers identify
and share profitable ideas? Working paper, Drexel University.
Green, T. C. and B.-H. Hwang (2012, February). Initial public offerings as lotteries:
Skewness preference and first-day returns. Management Science 58 (2), 432–444.
Greenwood, R. and A. Shleifer (2014, March). Expectations of returns and expected
returns. Review of Financial Studies 27 (3), 714–746.
Griffin, J. M., F. Nardari, and R. M. Stulz (2007, May). Do investors trade more when
stocks have performed well? Evidence from 46 countries. Review of Financial Studies 20 (3), 905–951.
Han, B. and A. Kumar (2013, April). Speculative retail trading and asset prices. Journal
of Quantative and Financial Analysis 48 (2), 377–404.
Han, B. and L. Yang (2013, June). Social networks, information acquisition, and asset
prices. Management Science 59 (6), 1444–1457.
Haruvy, E., Y. Lahav, and C. N. Noussair (2007, December). Traders’ expectations
in asset markets: Experimental evidence. American Economic Review 97 (5), 1901–
1920.
Heimer, R. and D. Simon (2015, October). Facebook finance: How social interaction
propagates active investing. Working paper, Brandeis University.
27

Heimer, R. Z. (2014, November). Friends do let friends buy stocks actively. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization 107 (B), 527–540.
Hirshleifer, D., J. Li, and J. Yu (2015). Asset pricing with extrapolative expectations
and production. Journal of Monetary Economics 76, 87–106.
Hoffmann, A. O., T. Post, and J. M. Pennings (2015, March). How investor perceptions
drive actual trading and risk-taking behavior. Journal of Behavioral Finance 16 (1),
94–103.
Hong, H., J. Kubik, and J. C. Stein (2005, December). Thy neighbor’s portfolio: Wordof-mouth effects in the holdings and trades of money managers. Journal of Finance 60 (6), 2801–2824.
Hong, H. and J. C. Stein (1999, December). A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading and overreaction in asset markets. Journal of Finance 54 (6), 2143–2184.
Hong, H. G., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein (2004, February). Social interaction and stock
market participation. Journal of Finance 59 (1), 137–163.
Huang, J., K. D. Wei, and H. Yan (2007, May). Participation costs and the sensitivity
of fund flows to past performance. Journal of Finance 62 (3), 1273–1311.
Huang, S., B.-H. Hwang, and D. Lou (2018, July). The speed of communication. Working
paper, University of Hong Kong.
Ivković, Z. and S. Weisbenner (2007, July). Information diffusion effects in individual
investors’ common stock purchases: Covet thy neighbors’ investment choices. Review
of Financial Studies 20 (4), 1327–1357.
Jiang, G. J., D. Xu, and T. Yao (2009). The information content of idiosyncratic volatility. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44 (1), 1 – 28.
Kallick, M., D. Smits, T. Dielman, and J. Hybels (1979). A survey of American gambling
attitudes and behavior. Research Report Series, Survey Research Center, Institute
for Social Research, University of Michigan.
Karlsson, N., G. F. Loewenstein, and D. J. Seppi (2009, February). The ‘Ostrich Effect’:
Selective attention to information. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 38 (2), 95–115.
Kaustia, M. and S. Knüpfer (2012, May). Peer performance and stock market entry.
Journal of Financial Economics 104 (2), 321–338.
Kelly, M. and C. O. O’Grada (2000). Market contagion: Evidence from the panics of
1854 and 1857. American Economic Review 90 (5), 1110–1124.
Koehler, J. J. and M. Mercer (2009, July). Selection neglect in mutual fund advertisements. Management Science 55 (7), 1107–1121.
Kumar, A. (2009, April). Who gambles in the stock market? Journal of Finance 64 (4),
1889–1933.
Langer, E. J. and J. Roth (1975, December). Heads I win, tails it’s chance: The illusion
of control as a function of the sequence of outcomes in a purely chance task. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 32 (6), 951–955.
Leary, M. R. and R. M. Kowalski (1990, January). Impression management: A literature
review and two-component model. Psychological Bulletin 107 (1), 34–47.
28

Lim, S. S., J. Ng, and B. Uzzi (2020, January). Biased information transmission in
investor social network: Evidence from professional traders. Working paper, DePaul
University.
Lu, T. and N. Tang (2015, May). Social interaction effects and individual portfolio
choice: Evidence from 401(k) pension plan investors. Working paper, Peking University HSBC Business School.
Massa, M. and A. Simonov (2005, February). History versus geography: The role of
college interaction in portfolio choice. Working paper, INSEAD.
Massa, M. and A. Simonov (2006, Summer). Hedging, familiarity and portfolio choice.
Review of Financial Studies 19 (2), 633–685.
Mitton, T. and K. Vorkink (2007). Equilibrium underdiversification and the preference
for skewness. Review of Financial Studies 20 (4), 1255–1288.
Mitton, T., K. Vorkink, and I. Wright (2018, July). Neighborhood effects on speculative
behavior. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 151, 42–61.
Morewedge, C. K., D. T. Gilbert, and T. D. Wilson (2005, August). The least likely
of times: How remembering the past biases forecasts of the future. Psychological
Science 16 (8), 626–630.
Moskowitz, G. B. (2004). Social Cognition: Understanding Self and Others. New York,
NY: The Guilford Press.
Nisbett, R. and L. Ross (1980). Human Inference: Strategies and Shortcomings of Social
Judgment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Özsöylev, H. N. and J. Walden (2011, November). Asset pricing in large information
networks. Journal of Economic Theory 146 (6), 2252–2280.
Peng, L. and W. Xiong (2006). Investor attention, overconfidence and category learning.
Journal of Financial Economics 80 (3), 563–602.
Schlenker, B. R. (1980). Impression Management: The Self–Concept, Social Identity,
and Interpersonal Relations. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
Shiller, R. J. (1989). Market Volatility. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Shiller, R. J. (1990, Spring). Speculative prices and popular models. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4 (2), 55–65.
Shiller, R. J. (2000). Irrational exuberance. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Shiller, R. J. (2017, April). Narrative economics. American Economic Review 107 (4),
967–1004.
Shiller, R. J. and J. Pound (1989, August). Survey evidence on the diffusion of interest and information among investors. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 12 (1), 47–66.
Shive, S. (2010, February). An epidemic model of investor behavior. Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 45 (1), 169–198.
Sicherman, N., G. Loewenstein, D. J. Seppi, and S. P. Utkus (2012, July). To look or
not to look: Financial attention and online account logins. Working paper, Columbia
University.
29

Sims, C. (2003, March). Implications of rational inattention. Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 665–690.
Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1998, October). Costly search and mutual fund flows. Journal
of Finance 53 (5), 1589–1622.
Smith, V. L., G. L. Suchanek, and A. W. Williams (1988, September). Bubbles,
crashes and endogenous expectations in experimental spot asset markets. Econometrica 56 (5), 1119–1151.
Statman, M., S. Thorley, and K. Vorkink (2006). Investor overconfidence and trading
volume. Review of Financial Studies 19 (4), 1531–1565.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1974, September). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science 185 (4157), 1124–1131.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2003). Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does “irrationality”
disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003 18, 139–194.
Welch, I. (1992, June). Sequential sales, leaning, and cascades. Journal of Finance 47 (2),
695–732.
Wojnicki, A. C. and D. Godes (2008, April). Word-of-mouth as self-enhancement. Working paper, University of Toronto.
Zhu, R. J., U. M. Dholakia, X. J. Chen, and R. Algesheimer (2012, June). Does online community participation foster risky financial behavior? Journal of Marketing
Research 49 (3), 394–407.

30

For Online Publication
A
A.1

Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1:

Define ∆f = ft+1 − ft . Note that
∆f = ft (1 − ft )κ(TA (RA ) − TP (RP )) + λ̂(q − ft ),

(A.1)

where TA (RA ) = r(RA )s(RA ), and TP (RP ) = r(RP )s(RP ). At date t, ft is given.
Differentiating with respect to RA twice, and using the earlier conditions that r0 (RA ), s0 (RA ) >
0, that s00 (RA ) = 0 by (1), and that r00 (RA ) > 0 by (2), gives
∂TA (RA )
∂RA
2
∂ TA (RA )
∂(RA )2

= r0 (RA )s(RA ) + r(RA )s0 (RA ) > 0

(A.2)

= r00 (RA )s(RA ) + 2r0 (RA )s0 (RA ) > 0.

(A.3)

Since RA affects TA but not TP , these formulas describe how active return affects both the
expected net shift in the fraction of A’s, and the expected unidirectional rate of conversion from
P to A.
Furthermore, substituting for the sending function s(RA ) from (1) and the receiving function
r(RA ) from (2) into (A.2) and (A.3) gives
∂TA (RA )
∂RA
∂ 2 TA (RA )
∂(RA )2

2
= (2aRA + b)(βRA + γ) + β(aRA
+ bRA + c)

(A.4)

= 2a(βRA + γ) + 2β(2aRA + b).

(A.5)

The fact that sending and receiving functions and their first and second derivatives are all positive
signs some of the terms in parentheses. So it follows immediately from (A.4) that the sensitivity
of the transformation rate of investors to A as a function of past active return is increasing with
the parameters of the sending and receiving functions, β, γ, a, b, and c. By (A.5), a similar
point follows immediately for convexity as well, with the exception that c does not enter into
convexity. Furthermore, since κ is multiplied by TA (RA ) − TP (RP ) in equation (A.1), it also
follows immediately that these effects are increasing with the intensity of social interactions, κ.

A.2

Proof of Proposition 2

From the discussion in the main text, it follows that we need to show that T̄ = T̄A − T̄P > 0
under the assumption of the proposition.
Using the definitions of the sending and receiving functions, direct calculation yields
T̄

= T̄ A − T̄ P
3
2
2
= aβ[γA σA
− γP σP3 + 3µA (σA
− σP2 )] + B(σA
− σP2 ) − aβD3

−3aβµA D2 − [3aβµ2A + 3(aβ + B)σP2 + C]D

31

(A.6)

where
B = aγ + bβ,
and
C = bγ + cβ.
∂ T̄
It is easy to verify that T̄ > 0 when D = 0 and ∂D
< 0 when D > 0 (see the proof of Proposition 3,
Part 1), so that T̄ is decreasing with D when D > 0. On the other hand, when D is very large
(relative to a fixed set of other model parameters), T̄ would be negative. Therefore, there exists
a positive D̄ corresponding to which T̄ is zero. Then for all D < D̄, T̄ > 0, so the active strategy
dominates.

A.3

Proof of Proposition 3

To show Part 1, we differentiate (A.6) with respect to D to obtain that
∂ T̄
= −3aβD2 − 6aβµA D − [3aβµ2A + 3(aβ + B)σP2 + C] < 0.
∂D
For Part 2, differentiating with respect to active volatility σA gives
∂ T̄
∂σA

2
= 3aβγA σA
+ 6aβµA σA + 2BσA > 0

(A.7)

Thus, the growth of A increases with active volatility σA . Greater return variance increases the
effect of SET on the part of the sender. Although high salience to receivers of extreme returns
(a > 0) is not required for the result, it reinforces this effect. Indeed, even if there were no SET
(β = 0), since a > 0 implies that B > 0, the result would still hold. Intuitively, high volatility
generates the extreme outcomes which receive high attention.
For Part 3, differentiating with respect to skewness γA of A gives
∂ T̄
∂γA

3
= aβσA
> 0,

(A.8)

Thus, the advantage of A over P is increasing with return skewness of A.

A.4

Proof of Proposition 4

For Part 1, we differentiate with respect to β, the strength of SET. This reflects how tight the
link is between the sender’s self-esteem and performance.
∂ T̄
∂β

3
2
2
= a[γA σA
− γP σP3 + 3µA (σA
− σP2 )] + b(σA
− σP2 ) − aD3

−3aµA D2 − [3aµ2A + 3(a + b)σP2 + c]D
> 0

(A.9)

32

if D ≈ 0 is sufficiently small. So greater SET increases the evolution toward A, because SET
causes greater reporting of the high returns that make A enticing for receivers. A generates
extreme returns for SET to operate upon through higher volatility, or more positive skewness.
For Part 2, differentiating with respect to conversability γ gives
∂ T̄
∂γ

2
= a(σA
− σP2 ) − (b + 3aσP2 )D

> 0

(A.10)

if D is sufficiently small. Greater conversability γ can help the active strategy spread because of
the greater attention paid by receivers to extreme returns (a > 0), which are more often generated
by the A strategy. (If D < 0, this effect is reinforced by the higher mean return of A. In this
case an unconditional increase in the propensity to report returns tends to promote the spread of
the sender’s type more when the sender is A.) If A earns lower return than P on average, greater
conversability incrementally produces more reporting of lower returns when the sender is A than
P, which opposes the spread of A.
For Part 3, recall that the quadratic term of the receiving function a reflects greater attention
on the part of the receiver to extreme profit outcomes communicated by the sender. Differentiating
with respect to a gives
∂ T̄
∂a

3
2
2
− γP σP3 + 3µA (σA
− σP2 )] + γ(σA
− σP2 ) − βD3
= β[γA σA

−3βµA D2 − [3βµ2A + 3(β + γ)σP2 ]D
> 0

(A.11)

if D is sufficiently small. So greater attention by receivers to extreme outcomes, a, promotes the
spread of A over P because A generates more of the extreme returns which, when a is high, are
especially noticed and more likely to persuade receivers. This effect is reinforced by SET, which
causes greater reporting of extreme high returns.
For Part 4, differentiating with respect to how prone receivers are to extrapolating returns, b,
gives
∂ T̄
∂b

2
= β(σA
− σP2 ) − (3βσP2 + γ)D

> 0

(A.12)

if D is sufficiently small. Greater extrapolativeness of receivers helps A spread by magnifying the
effect of SET (reflected in β), which spreads A because of the higher volatility of A returns.
Finally, for κ, the result follows from the symmetric functional dependence of f¯ on T̄ and κ,
¯
f = f¯(κT̄ ), which implies that f¯ is increasing in κ, just like it is increasing in T̄ .

A.5

Proof of Proposition 5

In this and the next Proof, we assume the presence of a social network, as follows: Investors are
connected in an undirected social network represented by the graph G = (N , E), where N is the
set of investors and E is the set of edges connecting them. The set of investors N = {1, . . . , N },

33

and (m, n) ∈ E ⊂ N × N if investors m and n are connected through a social tie. By convention,
the network is undirected, i.e., (m, n) ∈ E ⇔ (n, m) ∈ E, and investors are not connected to
themselves ((n, n) ∈
/ N ).
In the model, social ties could represent friendship, professional collaboration, membership in
the same country club, or involvement with the same online community. If (m, n) ∈ E, there is a
chance that investor m tells n his investment strategy and performance. The set of investors that
n is socially linked to is Dn = {m : (n, m) ∈ E} ⊂ N \{n}, and n’s degree (number of connections)
is dn = |Dn |. An investor with a higher degree is said to be more connected. The total number
P
of connections is Q = 12 n dn .
Consider investor n, who has adopted a passive investment strategy. Given return realizations,
RA and RP , the transition probability for a sender from A to P is TA (RA ). Denote the subset of
neighbors of investor n that are type A (resp. P) by DnA (resp. DnP ).
We prove the result for a more general case than our base model in which, even within the
same class of investment strategies (A or P), investors may have different returns. Specifically,
the return of an A investor m ∈ DnA is assumed to be RAm . The main body considers the special
case in which RAm ≡ RA (is the same) for all active investors. In a period, the number 2κN links
are chosen randomly in E, with equal probability, and such that (m, n) and (n, m) are not both
chosen, and we assume that 2κN << Q. Here, n is the potential sender and m the potential
receiver in the chosen link (n, m).
For a type P investor n to convert to A, he/she must (i) be selected for communication, which
occurs with probability 2κdn /Q, (ii) be selected to be receiver, which occurs with probability 1/2,
(iii) communicate with an A, m ∈ DnA , and finally (iv) be converted, which occurs with probability
TA (RAm ). So the probability C that investor n switches from P to A is therefore
C =κ×

|Dn | |DnA | X
×
TA (RAm ).
Q
|Dn |
A

(A.13)

m∈Dn

Clearly, this probability is increasing in the number of A connections, |DnA |. It is also increasing
and strictly convex in the performance of each of these connections, since TA is and increasing
strictly convex function of RAm . Finally, an identical argument as in the proof of Proposition 3
applied to (A.13) implies that the probability is increasing in σAm .

A.6

Proof of Proposition 6

An identical argument as in the proof of Proposition 1 applied to (A.13) implies that the probability is increasing in an , bn , βm , and γm , m ∈ Dn .

B

Endogenizing the Receiving and Sending Functions

We model here the determinants of the sending and receiving functions, and derive their functional
forms.

34

B.1

The Sending Function

To derive a sending function that reflects the desire to self-enhance, we assume that the utility
derived from sending is increasing with own-return. Conversation is an occasion for an investor
to try to raise the topic of return performance if it is good, or to avoid the topic if it is bad.
Suppressing i subscripts, let π(R, x) be the utility to the sender of discussing his return R,
π(R, x) = R +

x
,
β0

(B.1)

where β 0 is a positive constant that measures the relative weight in the individual’s utility on
conversational context versus the desire to communicate higher returns. The more tightly the
investor’s self-esteem is tied to return performance, the higher is β 0 . The random variable x
measures whether, in the particular social and conversational context, raising the topic of ownperformance is appropriate or even obligatory.
The sender sends if and only if π > 0, so
s(R) = P r x > −β 0 R|R



= 1 − F (−β 0 R),

(B.2)

where F is the distribution function of x. If x ∼ U [τ1 , τ2 ], where τ1 < 0, τ2 > 0, then
s(R) =
=

τ2 + β 0 R
τ2 − τ1
τ2
+ βR,
τ2 − τ1

(B.3)

where β ≡ β 0 /(τ2 − τ1 ), and where we restrict the domain of R to satisfy −τ2 /β 0 < R < −τ1 /β 0 to
ensure that the sending probability lies between 0 and 1. This will hold almost surely if |τ1 |, |τ2 |
are sufficiently large. Equation (B.3) is identical to the sending function (1) in Subsection 2.2
with
τ2
γ≡
.
τ2 − τ1
In the sender’s utility π(R, x) of discussing return R, the parameter β 0 captures the value
placed on mentioning one’s high return experience, versus the appropriateness of doing so. The
more tightly bound is the sender’s self-esteem or reputation to return performance, the larger is
the parameter β 0 , and hence the stronger is SET, as measured by β in the sending function (1)
which is proportional to β 0 .
The constant γ in the sending function (1) reflects the conversability of the investment choice.
When investment is a more attractive topic for conversation or when conversations are more
extensive, as occurs when investors are more sociable, higher γ shifts the distribution of x to the
right (i.e., an increase in τ2 , for given τ2 − τ1 , implies higher γ).

B.2

The Receiving Function

We derive an increasing convex increasing shape for the receiving function as in equation (2)
in Section 2.3 from the combination of two effects: greater receiver attention to extreme return

35

outcomes, and, conditional upon paying attention, and, owing to the representativeness heuristic,
greater persuasiveness of higher return.
The return on a sender or receiver strategy has unknown mean µi , i = s, r, where Ri = µi + i ,
2 ),
where for tractability the receiver perceives the distribution of the means as µi ∼ N (µi0 , σµi
2 ). Assume all RHS random variables are independent.
i ∼ N (0, σi
The receiver is exposed to a realization of (Rs , Rr ) and to the sender’s type. A receiver can,
at cost ∼ U (0, c1 ), pay attention, in which case, the receiver learns the direct cost of switching
strategies, c2 ∼ U (c2 , c2 ), and optimizes over whether to switch. A non-attending receiver incurs
no cost, and never switches. The costs of paying attention and of switching depends on situationspecific circumstances not observed by the econometrician.
We assume that c2 < 0 < c2 . The possibility that the ‘cost’ of switching is negative reflects a
possible favorable inference by the receiver about the sender’s adoption of the sender’s strategy.
(It could alternatively reflect conformist preferences.)
The quasi-Bayesian update of µi , i = s, r given observed returns
E[µi |Ri ] = µi0 + β i (Ri − µi0 ),
where
βi =

2
σµi
2 + σ2
σµi
i

(B.4)

.

Here we capture representativeness/overextrapolation taking the form of βi being an overestimate
of the true relationship, i.e., the receiver regards past returns as being more indicative of future
performance than they really are.18
We assume for simplicity that an attending receiver switches to the sender’s strategy based
on whether the difference in updated means µs − µr exceeds the switch cost c2 .19
So conditional upon attending and the observed returns, the probability of switching strategies
is
Z β s Rs −β r Rr
dc2
β s Rs − β r Rr − c2
=
(B.5)
P (E[µs |Rs ] − E[µr |Rr ] − c2 ≥ 0) =
c̄2 − c2
c̄2 − c2
c2 =c2
when this quantity lies between 0 and 1, and is at the relevant probability boundary otherwise.
We endogenize the investor’s attention heuristic by solving for the optimal decision of whether
to pay attention, taking into account (Rs , Rr ) and what this implies about (µs , µr ). Owing to
cognitive processing constraints, in general we expect this decision to be heuristic. However, a
wide set of heuristics are possible, and the result we derive are not driven by bias in this decision.
So as a benchmark case that is neutral with respect to bias in the attention decision, we model the
attention decision as fully rational, i.e., making full use of Rs , Rr , and c1 , but not c2 which is only
18

2
Algebraically this could arise from overestimation of σµi
and/or underestimation of σ2i . The form of
the receiving function that we derive here does not actually require this overextrapolation, but for realistic
2
parameter values σµi
/σ2i would be low, since most of the variance in strategy performance comes from
chance rather than differences in means. This would lead to very weak updating, implying a very small
slope of the receiving function.
19
It would not be hard to allow for the effect of risk aversion via an adjustment for the difference in
variances of the two strategies. Since prior variances are known, observation reduces posterior variances
deterministically, i.e., by the same amount regardless of the signal.

36

observed after paying attention.20 The approach of assuming rationality in attention allocation
is also applied in the large literature on rational inattention (Sims 2003), and in other work on
limited attention such as Peng and Xiong (2006).
The receiver’s attention heuristic is tuned to pay attention if the expected improvement in
portfolio expected returns, net of switch costs, and given the observed past returns, exceeds the
cost of attention. Let 1E[µs |Rs ]−E[µr |Rr ]−c2 ≥0 be an indicator function for the receiver switching to
the sender’s strategy after attending and observing returns. The receiver attends iff the expected
gain exceeds c1 ,
E[(µs − µr − c2 )1E[µs |Rs ]−E[µr |Rr ]−c2 ≥0 |Rs , Rr ] − c1 ≥ 0,

(B.6)

so substituting out expectations of µ’s by (B.4), the condition becomes
(β s Rs − β r Rr )(β s Rs − β r Rr − c2 )
− E[c2 1µs −µr −c2 ≥0 |Rs , Rr ] − c1 ≥ 0.
c̄2 − c2

(B.7)

Now the expectation above is
E[c2 1E[µs |Rs ]−E[µr |Rr ]−c2 ≥0 |Rs , Rr ] =

(β s Rs − β r Rr )2 − c22
2(c̄2 − c2 )

So the receiver attends iff
(β s Rs − β r Rr − c2 )2
− c1 ≥ 0.
2(c̄2 − c2 )
Since c1 is uniformly distributed,


(β s Rs − β r Rr − c2 )2
(β s Rs − β r Rr − c2 )2
s
r
,
P (Attend|R , R ) = P c1 ≤
=
2(c̄2 − c2 )
2c̄1 (c̄2 − c2 )

(B.8)

(B.9)

which is quadratically increasing in the weighted return difference β s Rs − β r Rr .
The probability that the receiver switches conditional upon the returns is the product
P (Attend|Rs , Rr )P (Switch|Attend, Rs , Rr ).
The first probability is given in (B.9), and the second in (B.5).
So the probability of switching, i.e., the receiving function, is
r(Rs , Rr ) =

(β s Rs − β r Rr − c2 )3
2(c̄2 − c2 )2 c̄1

20

Modelling the attention choice as fully rational may seem paradoxical, since it can take more calculations to allocate attention optimally than to simply solve the decision problem at hand. However,
again, we view full rationality of the attention decision as merely the most convenient benchmark case.
Furthermore, it is not necessary to view our benchmark case as involving full conscious rationality in the
attention allocation decision. The calculations needed to allocate attention correctly do not necessarily
use cognitive resources at the time of each attentional decision. Attention heuristics can be viewed as
having been designed in human evolutionary prehistory to balance the cost of paying attention against
the benefits achieving better decision outcomes. Alternatively, the attention mechanism can be viewed
as a rule-of-thumb heuristic that the investor has learned through previous experience over the investor’s
lifetime.

37

when this quantity lies between 0 and 1. This is a cubic function of β s Rs − β r Rr with all
nonnegative coefficients since c2 ≤ 0.
A special case of this development is when β r << β s , in which case the expression approximately simplifies to
r(Rs ) =

1
[(β s Rs )3 − 3c2 (β s Rs )2 + 3(c2 )2 β s Rs − (c2 )3 ]
2(c̄2 − c2 )2 c̄1

when this quantity lies between 0 and 1.
A quadratic Taylor approximation leads to a quadratic expression for r(Rs , Rr ) or, when β r
small, for r(Rs ), as in equation (2) in Section 2.3, where we assume that most of the probability
mass of R is in the range where the coefficients of this quadratic approximation are positive,
consistent with a convex increasing shape for the receiving function. Specifically, performing
this Taylor expansion around Rs = 0 yields the quadratic receiving function coefficients a =
−3c2 (β s )2 /[2(c̄2 − c2 )2 c̄1 ], b = 3(c2 )2 β s /[2(c̄2 − c2 )2 c̄1 ], and c = −(c2 )3 /[2(c̄2 − c2 )2 c̄1 ]. By varying
the free parameters, any positive vector of values of (a, b, c) is feasible.

C

Homophily

Consider a variation of the network model in which there is homophily. Specifically, senders and
receivers (or, equivalently links) are no longer randomly selected, but rather the probabilities are
tweaked such that the probability that communication (a link) is selected between two agents with
the same strategy is relatively higher than the probability that agents with different strategies
are selected, by a factor χ.
Specifically, when there is no homophily, the fraction of selected sender-receivers with an
active potential sender and a passive potential receiver in a period is κft (1 − ft ). When there is
homophily, it is instead χκ ft (1 − ft ), where χ > 1 denotes the degree of homophily. This is also
the fraction of passive potential senders and active potential receivers selected.
The transformation rate will then be
1
E[∆f ] = f (1 − f )κT̄ + λ̂(q − f ).
χ
It is easy to show that compared with the transformation rate in the base model (3), the transformation rate with homophily is lower, and this also carries over to a lower steady state fraction
of active investors.

D

Equilibrium Model

So far, we have modeled the economy in a partial equilibrium setting with exogenous return
distributions for A and P, along with informal arguments that when there are more A’s in the investor population, demand for this strategy increases, decreasing future returns. In practice, after
extensive inflow of investors into active strategies, we expect the equilibrium price of acquiring
strategy positions to rise, reducing expected future returns. So evolution toward A is self-limiting.
We now extend the model in a stylized way to capture such equilibrium effects. Without loss of
generality, we assume that one agent is chosen in each time period, i.e., that κ = 1/2N .

38

The Investment Technology
We model the supply-side of the economy as a set of short-term investment opportunities with
diminishing returns to scale, which implies imperfectly elastic supply. We assume that the output
elasticity is lower for investments associated with active than for passive strategies, reflecting
the idea that active strategies may be less scalable. For simplicity, we assume that investments
associated with P’s are perfectly elastic, whereas investments associated with A’s are not. For
example, if A is buying IPO stocks, and if the supply of excellent new business opportunities is
limited, then there will be diminishing returns to aggregate investment in A. As a special case,
the passive investment could, for example, represent a low-risk storage technology.
The one-period returns in this case depend on total active investments, X, as
RA (NA ) = (βA r + A + υ) × (ρX)−1/2 − υ,
RP

= βP r + P ,

(D.1)
(D.2)

where the NA is the total number of active investors, υ > 0, ρ > 0 are parameters, and X in
equilibrium will depend on NA .21 Also, r denotes a common component of returns shared by A
and P (e.g., the market portfolio), E[r] = 0, βi is the sensitivity of strategy return to the common
return component, i is a strategy-specific component, E[i ] = 0, i = A, P . We assume that r, A
and P are independent, with skewness γA and γP , respectively, and that the skewness of r is
zero.

The Investor Objective
The objective of investors is to maximize the mean-variance expected utility function
 
ζ
U = E[R] −
V ar(R),
2

(D.3)

where for simplicity we set the risk aversion coefficient ζ = 1. The riskfree asset has return rf .
Here, since we have normalized such that E[r] = E[A ] = E[P ] = 0, we assume that rf < 0. The
negative riskfree rate could, for example, represent a storage technology with some depreciation.
This assumption could easily be modified, at the cost of greater algebraic complexity, by allowing
for additional intercept components of returns in (D.1) and (D.2).
By assumption, the P’s maximize expected utility of investing in a portfolio consisting of a
risky investment alternative that is available to P investors, and the riskfree asset. Similarly, A’s
optimize a portfolio of a risky investment alternative that is available to A investors, and the
riskfree asset. Investors optimize rationally, but do not consider including both passive and active
assets in their portfolios at the same time.22 In equilibrium, active investors’ total demand is X,
where they optimize expected utility given the return distribution in (D.1).
21

The return specification in (D.1) corresponds to a concave production function where input X leads to
 1/2
stochastic production (βA r + A + υ) × X
− υX. The parameters are such that a higher ρ is associated
ρ
with a lower expected output, and a higher υ corresponds to a more concave production function.
22
Our assumption of an increasing receiving function was based on the idea that investors overextrapolate
reports about past return performance. This suggests that investors will have overoptimistic expectations
about the strategies they have been persuaded to adopt. It would be easy to incorporate such overestimation

39

Joint Determination of Strategy Popularity and Asset Returns
In this specification, the return penalty, DNA , depends on NA , the number of A’s. We choose a
specific value for the ρ parameter,
2 σ2 + σ2 )
2(βA
r
A
ρ=
,
N |rf |
which in equilibrium implies an initial return penalty of zero, DN/2 = 0. Here, we have assumed
that f0 = 12 , i.e., that half of the population initially invests in each strategy. Moreover, we
assume that q = 12 , so that new investors also invests equally in the two strategies.
The case of a zero return penalty to active investing is a simple benchmark case that is
useful for identifying what influences the spread of competing investment strategies when the
obvious effect of expected return differences is neutralized. It follows from the dependence here
of equilibrium return on the number of A’s that the transformation probability also depends on
NA ,
A

T NA = E[TA (RA (NA ))].

(D.4)

The following proposition provides conditions under which the results from Sections 3.2-3.3 generalize to the equilibrium setting.
Proposition 7 Under the parameter restrictions that |rf | is small, κ ≥ |rf |, γP = 0, γA ≥ 0,
and
βA > 2βP

(D.5)

σA > 2σP ,

(D.6)

Proposition 2, Proposition 3:2-3:3 , and Proposition 4 continue to hold in equilibrium. Moreover,
the returns an investor is expected to receive from active investments is nonpositive and strictly
decreasing over time.
In equilibrium, active investments thus dominate, and the return penalty is positive, in line
with the core results of the partial equilibrium model. Intuitively, transmission bias causes A to
spread, putting a downward pressure on the returns to the A strategy, and thereby inducing a
return penalty to active investing. In other words, owing to transmission bias, A investing persists
despite needing to climb uphill against a return penalty.
The sufficient condition on σA is stricter in the equilibrium setting, as seen by the extra
A
factor 2 in (D.6). This factor arises because the restriction T NA depends on the number of active
A

P

investors, NA , and T NA > T NA needs to be satisfied for all 1 ≤ NA ≤ N . Of course, this is just a
sufficient condition.
The only result from Section 3.2 that does not extend to the equilibrium setting is Proposition 3:1, the comparative static with respect to the return penalty. Such comparative statics are
not well defined in the equilibrium model since the return penalty is endogenous.
into the investor’s mean-variance portfolio optimization here, but doing so would not affect the general
nature of our conclusions. These are driven by the fact that in our specification, an increase in the fraction
of A’s drives down the equilibrium expected return of this strategy. So for simplicity we assume rational
mean-variance optimization.

40

E

Trading Volume

If we interpret A as active trading in the market for individual stocks, with a preponderance
of long positions, then a high market return implies high average returns to A’s. Proposition 1
therefore suggests that when the stock market rises, volume of trade in individual stocks increases.
This implication is consistent with episodes such as the rise of day trading, investment clubs, and
stock market chat rooms during the millennial internet boom, and with evidence from 46 countries
including the U.S. that investors trade more when the stock market has performed well (Statman,
Thorley, and Vorkink 2006; Griffin, Nardari, and Stulz 2007). We next study trading volume in
the equilibrium model, to verify that evolution toward A is associated with high trading volume.
The total demand of NA active investors, given a risky investment opportunity with expected
A ]−rf
return E[RA ] and return variance V ar(RA ) is X = NA E[R
V ar(RA ) , and market clearance, by (D.1),
leads to
ρκ2 NA2
X=
(E.1)
2 σ 2 + σ 2 ))2 .
(ρυNA − ρNA |rf | + (βA
r
A
When an investor switches from P to A, he liquidates his passive portfolio position of
|rf |
,
σP2
the number of active investors increases from NA to NA + 1, and he invests
1
XNA +1
NA + 1
in the active investment. Here, in equilibrium,
XNA =

2υ 2 N NA2 |rf |
2 σ2 + σ2 ) .
(2NA (υ − |rf |) + N |rf |)2 (βA
r
A

(E.2)

Moreover, the NA investors that are already active rebalance from a total position of XNA to
The total trading volume is thus: |rσf2 | + ZNA , where

NA
NA +1 XNA +1 .

P

def

ZNA =

XNA
XNA +1
1
XNA +1 + NA
−
.
NA + 1
NA
NA + 1

It is easy to verify that when υ + rf ≈ 0, i.e., when |rf | is of similar size as υ, then
in n, and therefore
ZNA = XNA +1 − XNA .

Xn
n

is increasing

Moreover, when υ = −rf ,
ZNA =

2υ
2 σ2
N (βA
r

2)
+ σA

(1 + 2NA ),

(E.3)

which is strictly increasing in NA . Therefore, by continuity, for υ + rf ≈ 0, total trading volume,
is also strictly increasing in NA .
An identical argument applies to the situation when an investor switches from A to P. Specifically, if there are initially NA + 1 investors, and an investor switches from A to P, that investor
1
invests |rσf2 | in the passive strategy, sells NA+1
XNA+1 in the active investment, whereas the other NA
P

investors in total rebalance from NA
by

|rf |
2
σP

XNA+1
NA+1

to XNA . Again, the total trading volume is described

+ ZNA .

41

