NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KALDOR AND PIKETTY’S FACTS:
THE RISE OF MONOPOLY POWER IN THE UNITED STATES
Gauti B. Eggertsson
Jacob A. Robbins
Ella Getz Wold
Working Paper 24287
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24287

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018

We thank the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, the Institute for New Economic
Thinking, and the Brown University Wealth and Inequality Project for financial support. We also
thank Lawrence Summers, David Weil, Neil Mehrotra, and Keshav Dogra for helpful discussions
and conference and seminar participants at the New York Federal Reserve, the European Central
Bank, and the Federal Reserve Board. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Gauti B. Eggertsson, Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Kaldor and Piketty’s Facts: The Rise of Monopoly Power in the United States
Gauti B. Eggertsson, Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold
NBER Working Paper No. 24287
February 2018
JEL No. E3,E5,E6,O4
ABSTRACT
The macroeconomic data of the last thirty years has overturned at least two of Kaldor’s famous
stylized growth facts: constant interest rates, and a constant labor share. At the same time, the
research of Piketty and others has introduced several new and surprising facts: an increase in the
financial wealth-to-output ratio in the US, an increase in measured Tobin’s Q, and a divergence
between the marginal and the average return on capital. In this paper, we argue that these trends
can be explained by an increase in market power and pure profits in the US economy, i.e., the
emergence of a non-zero-rent economy, along with forces that have led to a persistent long term
decline in real interest rates. We make three parsimonious modifications to the standard
neoclassical model to explain these trends. Using recent estimates of the increase in markups and
the decrease in real interest rates, we show that our model can quantitatively match these new
stylized macroeconomic facts.
Gauti B. Eggertsson
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu
Jacob A. Robbins
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02906
Jacob_Robbins@brown.edu

Ella Getz Wold
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
ella.getz.wold@gmail.com

1

1

INTRODUCTION

Introduction

The goal of this paper is to give a unified explanation of five puzzling trends
in the US macroeconomic data. We pursue the hypothesis that an increase in
monopoly profits, along with forces that have reduced the natural rate of interest,
have been key drivers of these trends. Towards that goal, we build a quantitative
model of the US economy that includes imperfect competition, barriers to entry,
the trading of pure profits, and realistic asset pricing. We then explore how the
economy responds to changes in market power and interest rates, and find that
our model is able to quantitatively match all of the trends.
First, we describe the macroeconomic puzzles that motivate our research.
To paraphrase Thomas Piketty, wealth is back in the United States. Household financial wealth, measured by the market value of housing and business
assets, has increased from 250% of income in 1970 to 400% in 2015.1 The new
wealth was not accumulated by traditional savings. In fact, savings rates have
generally decreased since the 1970s. The financial wealth is not embodied in
new productive capital goods. The replacement value of capital goods to output
has remained relatively constant over the period.
Instead, wealth was largely accumulated through capital gains in the stock
and housing markets. The value of the S&P 500 index increased by 8% per year
from 1970 to 2015, while the replacement value of its productive capital stock
did not increase nearly as fast. This has lead to an increase in Tobin’s Q, the ratio
of the market value of corporations to the replacement cost of their capital stock,
of public corporations from approximately 1 in 1970 to 1.75 in 2015. There
has also been a boom in housing prices. The market value of all housing (plus
land), relative to the replacement cost of housing, increased from 103% in 1970
to 128% in 2015.
At the same time of these capital gains, there is a growing body of evidence
that suggests a marked decrease in competition, an increase in concentration,2 a
decline in business dynamism,3 and an increase in profits.4 In addition, the labor
share has decreased over the time period.
Finally, there has been a substantial decrease in real interest rates. However,
this lower return is not mirrored in the average return on corporate capital, which
has stayed constant. The lower interest rates have not led to a boom in investment; in fact, investment-to-output has been sluggish for two decades, despite
the high levels of Tobin’s Q.
These are not your father’s growth facts. The changes over the past 40 years
have overturned at least two of Kaldor’s famous stylized facts: constant interest
rates, and constant labor share.5 With Kaldor’s constants in doubt, it is neces1
We discuss all data sources in detail in section 2. We will sometimes refer to financial wealth
as simply “wealth”.
2
See Dorn et al. (2017) or Grullon, Larkin and Michaely (2016), for example.
3
See Decker et al. (2016).
4
See, for example, The Economist (2016) and Summers (2016).
5
Some of Kaldor’s other facts also seem more tenuous: (i) a constant growth rate in output per

1

1

INTRODUCTION

sary to give a thorough reexamination of the usefulness of the perfect competition neoclassical model for explaining the macroeconomic data of the modern
economy; recall that the main triumph of the neoclassical model is its ability to
generate Kaldor’s growth facts. More broadly, existing models cannot address
many of the changes that have occurred over the past 40 years, such as the divergence between financial wealth and capital, Tobin’s Q permanently above 1,
and the deviation of the average from the marginal return on capital.
We hypothesize that an increase in monopoly profits, along with a decrease
in the natural rate of interest, are driving these broad macro-trends. We make
three parsimonious modifications to the standard neoclassical model in order to
explain them. First, we depart from perfect competition, and posit that market
power allows firms to make pure profits. Second, there are barriers to entry,
which prevent competition from driving these profits to zero. Third, claims to the
(nonzero) pure profits of firms are traded and priced, and the ratio of the market
value of firms (which includes the rights to pure profits) to the replacement value
of the productive capital stock is permanently above one; this ratio is commonly
known as “empirical Tobin’s Q”. Because of the barriers to entry, the assets
which hold the rights to the pure profits are non-reproducible: unlike productive
capital,6 individuals cannot recreate these assets through investment, they must
instead purchase them from others.
We use our model to explain a wide variety of trends in the US since the
1970s, which we now summarize. Our paper will present a unified explanation
of the following five puzzles; throughout the paper we will reference the facts by
their number in bold.7
1. (P1) An increase in the financial wealth-to-income ratio despite low savings rates, with a stagnating capital-to-income ratio.
2. (P2) An increase in Tobin’s Q to a level permanently above 1.
3. (P3) A decrease in the real rate of interest, while the measured average
return on capital is relatively constant.
capita (US output growth has slowed considerably) (ii) constant capital-to-output ratio (whether
this holds depends on whether you take into account the relative price of investment) (iii) a wage
rate that grows at a constant rate equal to the growth rate of output (median wages have been
sluggish relative to output growth) (iv) constant hours worked per capita (hours per capita have
declined).
6
In our model, we use “productive capital” (“productive investment”) to mean both tangible
and intangible capital (investment) that contributes to the production of goods and services,
which is broadly in line with the BEA. We do not include in this term capitalized spending by
businesses on economic competencies such as advertising, marketing research, and branding.
Because this spending does not serve to increase the production of goods and services, we term
this spending “non-productive intangible investment”. We discuss this distinction further in
section 3.1.3 and 8.2.
7
We term these trends ”puzzles”, following the macroeconomic literature which describes as
puzzles basic features of the data that are inconsistent with the canonical neoclassical model, see
e.g. the “equity premium puzzle”, “international portfolio puzzle”, etc.

2

1

INTRODUCTION

4. (P4) An increase in the pure profit share, with a decrease in the capital and
labor share. 8
5. (P5) A decrease in investment-to-output, even given historically low borrowing costs and a high value of empirical Tobin’s Q.
Our model has a straightforward way of generating these patterns: the conclusions of the model follow directly from our modifications to the standard
neoclassical model. An increase in firms’ market power leads to an increase in
pure profits, thus an increase in the market value of stocks (which hold the rights
to these pure profits). This leads to an increase in Tobin’s Q (the numerator is
proportional to the market value of stocks) as well as financial wealth. With an
increase in markups, the pure profit share increases, and the labor and capital
share both decrease.
An increase in pure profits will tend to drive up the average return on capital.
To generate a constant average return, as we see in the data, we need a decline
in interest rates, which pushes down the average return on capital. In our model,
the two forces cancel each other out and lead to a constant average return.
The value of Tobin’s Q depends upon the rate at which pure profits are discounted, and thus the equity premium. In order to match the equity premium
in the data, we follow the macro-finance literature and include long-run productivity risk in our model, as in Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Croce (2014). This
produces an interesting result: returns to assets that receive the rights to pure
profits are significantly riskier than the returns to productive capital. The reason
for this result is closely connected to the non-reproducibility of the assets which
hold the rights to pure profits. When the economy is shocked, the price of these
assets show large fluctuations, because their supply is fixed. In comparison,
there is less fluctuation in the price of productive capital, since the supply is not
fixed and it can be produced through new investment; the variance of the price of
productive capital is determined in our model by the level of capital adjustment
costs. As the economy transforms from one in which the majority of assets by
market value are productive capital into one dominated by pure economic rents,
this generates an endogenous increase in risk premium.
The assumption of pure profits in our model is in alignment with the field
of business strategy and managerial economics, in which the existence of market power is emphasized, and indeed one of the main purposes of the firm to
gain and secure this market power: the celebrated “sustainable competitive advantage”.9 In our model, there is non-perfect competition. There are barriers to
entry, which give market power to firms which is non reproducible in the short
run. This allows the market value of firms to permanently diverge from the replacement value of the capital stock. Our paper thus follows a long tradition in
the business and finance literature by using empirical Tobin’s Q as a measure
8
9

Section (3) makes clear the distinction between the capital and the profit share.
See for example, Porter (1996), Barney (1991), and Oberholzer-Gee and Yao (2013).

3

1

INTRODUCTION

of firm market power.10 Our model is also in alignment with the endogenous
growth and endogenous entry literature, in which the profit share of the economy is positive even in the long run.
By contrast, traditional macroeconomic theory has focused on either perfect competition, or monopolistic competition in which fixed costs generally
drive profits to zero. All assets in the economy are fully reproducible assets, either the productive capital which can be accumulated through investment, or the
monopoly profits, which can be gained by paying a fixed entry cost. The market
value of firms can diverge from the replacement cost of capital, but only due to
the presence of adjustment costs. In the long run, as stated by Tobin, Brainard
et al. (1976), “the increase in stock brings market value into line with replacement cost, lowering the former and/or raising the later”. The canonical view of
this position is found in Hall (2001).
Our model clarifies the measurement and theory of a number of important
concepts. With our model in hand, we can make subtle but important distinctions: between financial wealth and productive capital, measured labor share
(which includes bargaining rents) and economic labor share, productive and nonproductive intangible investment, empirical Tobin’s Q and theoretical q, the capital and the profit share, the equity premium on profits and the equity premium
on capital, and the marginal and average return.
An important aspect of the paper is our integration of wealth and balance
sheet data from the Integrated Financial Accounts into quantitative macroeconomics. In this paper, we are interested in matching historical movements of
financial moments such as wealth-to-income and Tobin’s Q, as well as the traditional quantity moments such as productive capital and investment. We further
integrate advances from the macro-finance literature into our model to match key
financial moments such as the equity-premium.
We quantitatively test the extent to which our model can match the changes
seen in US data. To do so, we estimate the change in markups in the US over
the past forty years from aggregate macroeconomic data, exploiting the fact that
under constant returns to scale production, markups are proportional to the profit
share of the economy. This method shows a large increase in markups over
the past forty years, comparable to alternative estimates taken from the New
Keynesian literature, which has historically estimated markups in order to test
their cyclicality. We also compare our markup series to a new estimate from
De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), who use firm level data and techniques from
industrial organization to generate a time series of markups.
Using our estimated change in markups from 1970 to the present, along with
changes in productivity growth and demographics that lead to a decline in the
equilibrium real rate of 2%, our model is able to quantitatively match the five
puzzles described above. The fact that we are able to match such a wide variety
of independent data moments, such as the wealth-to-output ratio, the average
10

See, for example, Lindenberg and Ross (1981). Smirlock, Gilligan and Marshall (1984).
and Salinger (1984).

4

1

INTRODUCTION

return on capital, and changes in income shares, is supportive of the hypothesis
that changes in market power and interest rates are driving these trends.
The primary goal of this paper is to pursue the hypothesis that changes in
monopoly profits, along with forces that have pushed down the natural rate of
interest, have been the main driver of a variety of macroeconomic changes over
the past forty years. There are a number of reasons why we argue for this hypothesis (i) there is a wide variety of confirmatory evidence that concentration,
profits, and markups have increased over the time period, while the natural rate
of interest has decreased (ii) it is parsimonious, in the sense that we use two data
series (markups and interest rates) to explain the movements of 5 separate trends
(iii) our model does not generate counterfactual implications.
We do not, however, claim that ours is the only explanation for the five stylized facts seen in the US over the past forty years and other forces are not at
work. There are several compelling competing hypotheses that have been put
forward: (i) an increase in the risk premium of capital (ii) unmeasured intangible
capital (iii) an increase in the capital-to-output ratio, along with an elasticity of
substitution greater than one (iv) a decrease in the bargaining power of labor. We
will find some credence to some of these other explanations: indeed, we argue
that several of them are complementary. Our model generates an endogenous increase in the equity premium. In addition, many forms of intangible capital, such
as investments in brand equity, advertising, and marketing, are closely related to
the rise in economic rents we document.
Our work has important welfare implications. Higher pure profits will tend
to increase income and wealth inequality, since equity holders (who receive the
pure profits) tend to be in the upper portion of the distribution of income and
wealth. Higher monopoly power may also be inefficient, and could decrease
GDP through a lower capital stock and labor supply. The increase in monopoly
power has likely contributed to these trends in the US over the past three decades.
In order to draw policy implications, it is necessary to study further the reasons behind this increase in monopoly power in the US. This paper is concerned
with the macroeconomic effects of an increase in monopoly power, and does not
take a stand on the underlying cause of this increase. That being said, there is
some suggestive evidence that lax anti-trust enforcement has lead to an increase
in industrial concentration (see Grullon, Larkin and Michaely (2016)). If this
were true, it suggests that anti-trust policy should do more to prevent monopolies and oligopolies from forming. In addition, with high levels of pure profits
it may be optimal to have relatively high taxes on corporate profits, especially if
interest is deductible and there is accelerated depreciation.

1.1

Previous literature

For each of the five puzzles listed above, there is a burgeoning literature documenting them, as well as proposed explanations for the patterns in the data.
Piketty (2014) and Piketty and Zucman (2014) document evidence that the
wealth-to-income ratio has risen in many developed economies over the past
5

1

INTRODUCTION

forty years, along with an increase in Tobin’s Q in the United States. Piketty et.
al. decompose the increase in wealth into two components, a savings component
and a valuation component. The savings component can be described by the
equation β = gs , where β is the ratio of wealth-to-income, s is the savings rate,
and g the growth rate of output. Piketty argues that this fundamental relationship
governs the evolution of the wealth-to-income ratio in the long run, i.e. over
the course of centuries. In the short run, i.e. several years to several decades,
there can be valuation effects, in which the price of capital goods (Tobin’s Q)
increases.11 Nevertheless, he does find substantial capital gains from 1970-2010.
He proposes that changes in capital policies over the time period lead to the asset
price gains. Our paper will propose a different explanation for the growth in
Tobin’s Q and wealth-to-income.
Gomme, Ravikumar and Rupert (2011) and Gomme, Ravikumar and Rupert
(2015) document that the average return on productive capital has stayed relatively constant over the past 30 years, even as interest rates have decreased. Our
model will provide an explanation for this divergence.
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) and Elsby, Hobijn and Şahin (2013) have
provided evidence that there has been a global decline in the labor share, and
Barkai (2016) has introduced intriguing evidence that the pure capital share has
decreased and the pure profit share has increased. As in Barkai, our model will
use markups to explain a decline in the labor and capital share, and an increase
in the pure profit share.
Philippon and Gutierrez (2016) show that investment is weak relative to measures of profitability and valuation, particular Tobin’s Q. They find support for
the hypothesis that weak investment is being driven by a decrease in competition
at the industry level. Our model will incorporate this explanation: a decrease in
competition will lead to a stagnation in investment, even in spite of historically
low interest rates.
A few recent studies have also made connections between several of the
above facts. Stiglitz (2016) and Stiglitz (2015b) are concerned with many of
the same macroeconomic data as this paper, such as the divergence between financial wealth and capital, and connect this to an increase in rents which are capitalized in financial assets. Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2017) note several
of the above facts, and try to explain them in an accounting framework through
a combination of rents, increases in risk-premia, and technical change. In a series of papers that are closest to ours, Gonzalez and Trivın (2016) and Brun and
González (2017) explore many of the same facts, and connect them to an increase in Tobin’s Q and monopoly rents. Auclert and Rognlie (2016) explore
how changes in markups affect the supply of assets and aggregate demand.
Our paper distinguishes itself from this literature conceptually, theoretically,
11

In the long run, however, Piketty believes there can be no significant divergence between
“the price of consumption and capital goods”. Because of this long run relationship, Piketty
is comfortable using the terms ‘wealth’ and ‘capital’ interchangeably. We disagree with this: a
major goal of this paper is to explore empirically and theoretically the difference between wealth
and capital.

6

2

FIVE MACROECONOMIC PUZZLES

quantitatively, and empirically. Conceptually, our paper is distinct in that it
presents a unified explanation of five macroeconomic trends, spanning several
literatures in macroeconomics, finance, and growth. Other papers generally focus on one or two of our five puzzles: Philippon and Gutierrez (2016) focuses
on puzzle (5) and (2), Barkai (2016) on (3) and (4), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2017) on (3) and (4), Piketty and Zucman (2014) on (1), Autor et al.
(2017) on the fall in the labor share, Gomme, Ravikumar and Rupert (2015) on
(3), De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) on the rise of markups.
Theoretically, our model includes a novel combination of (i) a general equilibrium model with long-run productivity risk (ii) the pricing of the rights to
pure profits, which leads to a value of Tobin’s Q permanently above 1. This
produces a results that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been discussed
before: a risk premium on pure profits that is greater than the risk premium on
productive capital. With the pricing of pure profits, it becomes easy to match the
equity premium in a full production model, even with relatively low values for
the coefficient of risk aversion and capital adjustment costs.
Our model quantitatively matches a wide range of moments in the data that
other models cannot match or do not attempt to match, such as the wealth-toincome ratio, the average return on capital, and a level of Tobin’s Q commensurate with the data. Simultaneously, we can also match the traditional macro and
finance moments, such as the investment-to-output ratio, real interest rate, labor
share, and the equity premium. Other papers in this literature do not have long
run risk or other elements that allow them to match the equity premium, which is
important for our quantitative results. Without the equity premium, it is difficult
to simultaneously match the real interest rate, average return, and Tobin’s Q.
Empirically, we estimate a new series of markups based on the profit share.
Independently, Barkai (2016) has also derived a similar series.

2

Five Macroeconomic Puzzles

Puzzle 1: Increasing wealth-to-output There has been a large increase
in the financial wealth-to-output ratio in the US (henceforce we will simply say
‘wealth’ instead of ‘financial wealth’), rising from around 250% of output in
1980 to almost 400% in 2015, as illustrated in the left panel of figure 1. Household wealth is taken from the distributional national accounts (Piketty, Saez and
Zucman 2016)12 .
The puzzle lies in the fact that while wealth-to-output has increased, the ratio
of capital-to-output has been stagnant, as seen in the dotted line in figure 113 .
Capital refers to the value of private capital as measured by the BEA in the
fixed asset tables14 . In addition, this increase in wealth has taken place despite
12

It consists of housing wealth, equities, fixed income assets, business assets and pensions,
less liabilities. For computational details, see Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2016).
13
Output is Gross Domestic Product, BEA Account Code: A191RC
14
Capital is the Current-Cost Net Stock of Fixed Assets: Private (K1PTOTL1ES000)

7

2

FIVE MACROECONOMIC PUZZLES

Wealth and Capital as a share of Gross Domestic Product

2

4

2.5

6

3

8

3.5

10

4

12

Personal Saving Rate

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015
2

1980

Wealth/GDP

1980

Capital/GDP

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure 1: Wealth and capital as a share of gross value added
a decline in the savings rate, as illustrated in the right panel of figure 115 . Since
the wealth was not accumulated by savings, it must have been accumulated by
capital gains, as we indeed see in the data. But this does not solve the puzzle, it
simply shifts it: what is the source of these capital gains?
The trends in wealth and capital are not being driven by housing. In appendix
figure A.6, we decompose the increase in wealth share into six components.
Although the value of housing-to-income has indeed increased, from 1.32 in
1980 to 1.48 in 2015, most of the increase in wealth has come from other assets.
Puzzle 2: Increasing Tobin’s Q There has been a large increase in empirical measures of Tobin’s Q over the time period, which measures the market
value of corporations relative to the replacement cost of their capital. We follow
Hall (2001) and Gutierrez and Philippon (2016) in calculating Tobin’s Q according to formula (1). V e denotes the value of equities, as measured in the financial
accounts16 . Corporate liabilities L and financial assets F A are also from the financial accounts17 . Inventories and the value of corporate capital PK K are taken
from the BEA18 . We follow Gutierrez and Philippon (2016) in also calculating
an alternative Tobin’s Q which excludes miscellaneous liabilities and financial
assets, as given by formula (2).
Q1 =

V e + (L − F A) − Inventories
PK K

(1)

Amisc − Lmisc
(2)
PK K
Figure 2 depicts our measures of Tobin’s Q, and shows a striking upwards
trend. The two alternative measures provide qualitatively similar results. Even
using our most conservative estimate, Tobin’s Q has increased almost threefold
Q2 = Q1 +

15

The saving rate is the Personal Saving Rate, BEA Account Code: A072RC
The value of equities source series id is LM103164103.Q.
17
The source id numbers are FL104190005.Q and FL104090005.Q respectively
18
Nonfinancial corporate capital: k1pnofi2es000
16

8

2

FIVE MACROECONOMIC PUZZLES
Tobin's Q

1

0

.5

1.5

1

2

1.5

2

2.5

Tobin's Q

1980

1985

1990

1995
Q1

2000

2005

2010

2015

1980

Q2

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Q Compustat

Figure 2: Tobin’s Q. Left: financial accounts and BEA data. Right: Compustat
since 1980, implying a large increase in the market value of capital relative to
the replacement cost of capital.19
Measures of Tobin’s Q using micro data find qualitatively similar results. The
right panel of figure 2 depicts the mean Tobin’s Q of publicly listed corporations
using Compustat data. There has been a large increase in this measure of Tobin’s
Q since 1980, and Q has been substantially above 1 for most of the period. This
large increase in Tobin’s Q is a puzzle from the standpoint of standard capital
adjustment costs models, which predicts that the value of Tobin’s Q should be 1
in the long run.
Puzzle 3: Declining corporate bond rates, constant return on business capital There has been a substantial decrease in the real interest rate of
corporate bonds over the past thirty years. Figure 3 shows the real return for two
corporate bond series, an index of AAA bonds and an index of BAA bonds20 .
Both series show a substantial decrease over the time period. Other measures
of corporate borrowing costs such as bank interest rates have also decreased.21
Corporate borrowing costs are a measure of the marginal return on capital, since
economic theory tells us that corporations should invest until the marginal product on capital is equal to the interest rate.
The puzzle is that while there has been a significant decline in the marginal
return of capital as measured by corporate bond markets, measures of the profitability of firms that correspond to the business return of capital have not declined.22 We follow Gomme, Ravikumar and Rupert (2011) and Gomme, Ravikumar and Rupert (2015) in calculating the business return on capital, which we
19

Tobin’s Q as calculated using macro data is often found to be below one for extensive periods of time, as is also the case in figure 2. This implies that firms are valued at less than the
replacement cost of their capital, which is at odds with economic theory, and may be driven by
mis-measurement in macro data. See, for example, the discussion on this point in Piketty and
Zucman (2014).
20
Moody’s Seasoned Aaa Corporate Bond Yield and Moody’s Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond
Yield are available from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The returns are deflated
using a 5 year moving average of the Gross National Product: Implicit Price Deflator (A001RI1)
21
See
Federal
Reserve
data
series
H.15,
selected
interest
rates.
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h15/.
22
According to standard neoclassical theory, these returns should coincide.

9

2

FIVE MACROECONOMIC PUZZLES

0

5

10

15

Average Return on Capital

1980

1985

1990

1995

Average Return
Corporate BAA

2000

2005

2010

2015

Corporate AAA

Figure 3: Average return on capital
will term the ‘average return’. The exact definition is given in equation (3). We
use data from the corporate sector of the national accounts. The numerator is a
measure of corporate profits: we start with gross corporate value added, and subtract payments to labor, depreciation, and taxes.23 The denominator is a measure
of the value of the corporate capital stock, using data from the BEA.
GV A − wL − δP K K − T ax
(3)
P KK
The average return on capital is depicted by the blue connected line in figure
3. The trend of the average return has not followed decrease seen in corporate
bond rates: if anything, there is an upward trend in the average return.
AR =

Puzzle 4: Decreasing labor share and capital share It is a well known
fact that the labor share has decreased over the past 30 years in the US, and
our analysis of the data confirms this. Table 1, using data from the national
accounts, shows that the labor share was around 63 percent in the early 1980s,
and has fallen to around 57 percent by the end of our sample24 . The decline in the
labor share in the US is not due solely to housing,25 if we restrict our attention
to simply the corporate sector the decline is seen as well. Nor is the decline
entirely explained by an increase in intellectual property capital. As we will
discuss in section 8, even with the revisions to the national accounts to include
intangible capital, the income share of invested capital has not increased over the
time period.
23

The numerator is measured as net value added (BEA Account Code: A457RC) less labor
expenditures (BEA Account Code: A460RC)
24
The labor share is measured as compensation to labor (BEA Account Code: A460RC) relative to gross value added (BEA Account Code: A455RC).
25
The story in Europe is slightly different. See Rognlie (2016) and Gutierrez (2017).

10

2

FIVE MACROECONOMIC PUZZLES

Most analyses of factor shares only separate income into two factors, labor
income and capital income. Since the labor share is observed in the data (as
payments to labor) while the capital share is not, the capital share is usually
calculated as the residual of the labor share. Calculating the capital share this
way of course shows an increase over the time period.
Rather than calculating the capital share indirectly as a residual, we can try
to calculate it directly. To do so we first need to estimate total capital income, the
value of the capital stock times the rental rate of capital. In this, we follow the
work of Barkai (2016). Since most firms own rather than rent their capital, we
cannot observe a rental rate of capital. Instead, we must estimate it. Economic
theory gives an arbitrage condition for the rental rate rK , given by equation (4).
The rental rate must equal the risk free rate rrf plus the risk premium rrp , less
expected inflation E(π) and plus the capital depreciation rate. In addition, if the
price of capital is not equal to the price of output, the rental rate on capital must
account for expected price gains of holding capital E(gP K ).
rPKG = P K rrf + rrp − E(π) + δ + (1 − δ)E(gP K )



(4)

We use the return on the three month treasury bill to proxy for the risk free
rate. As our measure of the risk premium we use the spread between the rate of
return on corporate BAA bonds and long term treasury bonds. Expected inflation
is approximated by a five-year moving average of realized inflation. Finally, the
relative price of capital P K is calculated using the price deflator for investment
and the price deflator for consumption. To proxy for expected capital price gains
we calculate the five-year moving average of realized price gains.
Using the rental rate on capital, we calculate the capital share as capital income over total income. We calculate the labor share as labor income over total
income, and the tax share as taxes on production over income. Finally, there is
a residual share of income which is not accounted for by labor, capital, or taxes.
Table 1 and figure 4 show that, along with the labor share, the capital share is
also declining over time, from 26 percent in the 1980s to 17 percent. The main
driver of this decline has been a decrease in the risk free interest rate, which
has driven down the rental rate of capital. Capital-to-output has been relatively
stable, as fact 1 shows. The share of gross value added being paid in taxes has
remained fairly stable over the past decades.
In 1980 there was very little residual factor share — labor, capital, and taxes
accounted for almost all of national income. However, along with the decline in
the labor and capital share, the residual share has increased to 17% by 2015. In
other words, there is now a “missing” factor of income that does not go to labor
or capital — we will argue that this missing factor is pure profits, thus we term
this residual share the profit share.
Puzzle 5: Low investment despite low r, high Q As the work of Philippon and Gutierrez (2016) has shown, several measures of investment have been
trending down since the 1980s. In figure 5 we plot net investment as a share of
11

2

FIVE MACROECONOMIC PUZZLES

Factor share
1985
Labor Share (%)
63
Capital Share (%)
26
Tax Share (%)
8
Pure Profit Share (%)
3

2015
57
17
9
17

Change (%)
-6
-9
+1
+14

Table 1: Factor shares. 5-year moving averages

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Gross Value Added

1980

1985

1990

1995

year

Profit Share
Capital Share

2000

2005
Tax Share
Labor Share

Figure 4: Factor shares

12

2010

2015

3

MODEL

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Net Investment as a share of Net Operating Surplus

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure 5: Net investment as a share of net operating surplus
net operating surplus, a measure of business operating income26 . While 50% of
net operating revenue was used for investment in the early 1980s, it has fallen to
about 25% in the present. Net investment as a share of gross value added shows
a similar decline. This decrease in investment is somewhat puzzling, given historically low interest rates. Of course, forces that push down the demand for
loanable funds would lead to both low investment and interest rates. This decrease in investment has also come despite high values of empirical measures of
Q. In standard investment theory, high levels of Q should lead to higher investment.27

3

Model

The core of our model is a DSGE economy with long-run productivity risk. To
this base, we add three elements which allow us to explain the five puzzles. We
focus our exposition on these modifications of the standard neoclassical model,
leaving the full description of the model’s equations and first order conditions to
the appendix.

3.1

Market structure

We hypothesize that an increase in pure profits is a key force behind the five
puzzles. We introduce profits into our model economy in the simplest possible
manner: Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition. This is the first key departure
of our model from neoclassical theory.28 The pure profits are distributed to the
26

We use Net Fixed Investment: Nonresidential (BEA Account Code: A593RC1)
See, for example, Hayashi (1982).
28
Although our exposition uses monopolistic competition to generate pure profits, the results
of our model are more general. The reason is simple: under a wide variety of micro-founded
models, market structure primarily serves to determine the level of markups µt in the economy.
27

13

3

MODEL

holders of securities which hold the rights to the pure profits: the value of these
securities form the wedge between financial wealth and productive capital, and
will help explain P1 and P2.
There is a unit mass of monopolistically competitive final goods firms that
differentiate an intermediate good and resell it to consumers. The final good
composite is the CES aggregate of these differentiated final goods, which are
indexed by i:
Z
Yt =

1

ytf (i)

Λt −1
Λt

t
 ΛΛ−1
t

di

.

0

Final goods firms set prices in each period, and face a demand curve of the

−Λt
pt (i)
f
form yt (i) = Yt Pt
, where Pt is the nominal price index of the final
good aggregate and Λt is a time-varying measure of a firm’s market power.29 An
increase in Λt decreases a firm’s market power and lowers equilibrium markups.
Each final goods producer uses ytm of intermediate goods to produce output,
according to a linear technology function ytf = ytm . A final goods firm chooses
and ytf (i) to maximize real profits, subject to the production
real prices pPt (i)
t
constraint. The marginal cost of producing a unit of final good is the price of the
pint
intermediate good Pt t .
The optimality condition for the real price of the firm’s good is a time-varying
markup µt over marginal cost (which is the price of the intermediate good):
int
pint
pt (i)
t pt
= ΛΛt −1
= µt Pt t . Since the price of the intermediate good is the same,
Pt
Pt
all final goods firms make the same pricing decisions, and thus pt (i) = Pt ,
pint
yielding Pt t = µ1t .
Market power in our model is determined by the CES elasticity Λt , which det
, i.e. markups
termines the level of markups in our economy. We posit that ΛΛt −1
µt , follow an AR(1) process, given by
ln(µt ) = (1 − ρµ )ln(µ̄) + ρµ ln(µt−1 ) + µt .

(5)

The long run level of markups (determined by the long-run level of Λ) in
the economy is given by µ̄. An increase in the long-run level of markups will
allow us to explain an increase in the profit share, and a decrease in the labor and
capital share (P4).
The second key element of our model is that there are barriers to entry for
final goods firms. There are two types of barriers to entry in our model. First,
Thus different market structures with the same markups µt will give at least qualitatively similar
results. To see this directly, consider equation (6). The value of securities depends only on the
exit rate of firms and the level of markup in the economy. Next, examining equations (A.29) and
(A.30), we see that there is a wedge between the marginal product of labor and the wage, as well
as the marginal product of capital and the implicit rental rate of capital, however independent of
this market structure, the wedge is equal to the markup.
1
R
 1−Λ
1
t
1−Λt
29
The price index for the final aggregate is given by Pt = 0 pt (i)
di
.

14

3

MODEL

final goods firms hold the unique rights to the specific variety they produce. This
ensures that entry of new firms does not drive price equal to marginal cost, and
thus profits to zero. Second, we assume that the supply of final goods firms is
fixed in the short run. Individuals cannot create new final goods firms, and thus
these firms are non-reproducible. The next section will show that, in the long
run, the barriers to entry are not permanent, and firms will eventually go out of
business.
Due to these barriers to entry, there can be nonzero pure profits in the econYt . The
omy; final goods firms make aggregate profits Πt equal to Πt = µtµ−1
t
µt −1
profit share of income in the economy is thus given by P St = µt .
Pure profits are distributed to shareholders of final goods firms, who own the
rights to the economic rents, as dividends. Aggregate dividends distributed to
shareholders at time t are thus given by dft = Πt . Since all firms make identical
profits, each firm receives an equal fraction of aggregate dividends. As will be
seen, the securities that hold the rights to the pure profits of final goods firms
will be priced and traded, which will allow the value of wealth to diverge from
that of productive capital (P1 & P2).

3.1.1

Firm entry and exit dynamics

Although there are strong barriers to entry for final goods firms, these barriers
are not permanent: all final goods firms in our economy will eventually go out
of business and be replaced by new firms. We include exogenous firm exit as in
Melitz (2003). Firm exit in our model affects the value of the securities which
hold the rights to the pure profits of firms. Having firm exit will allow us to
better match the level of financial wealth in the economy, and thus quantitatively
explain P1 and P2.
We assume that between period t − 1 and t a final good firm has a probability
∆t of exiting the market. Thus, of all the firms that are extant in time t − 1,
only (1 − ∆t ) will survive to period t, a smaller fraction (1 Q
− ∆t ) · (1 − ∆t+1 )
will survive to period t + 1, and an ever diminishing percent sn=t (1 − ∆n ) will
survive to period s. When a firm exits, shareholders who hold the rights to its
profits are wiped out.30 The information on whether a firm goes out of business
is revealed at the end of period t − 1, before asset decisions are made for the next
period.
Entry in our model is also exogenous. Each period a mass ∆t of new firms
enters, replacing the firms that have exited. New “IPO” securities are issued at
the end of time t−1 that give the rights to these firms’ profits; this corresponds to,
for example, when Google was floated for the first time on the stock exchange.
30

From the point of view of an investor in these securities, the churning of firms is somewhat
analogous to the depreciation of capital. An individual buys securities, receives a return, and
some of the security “depreciates” through the bankruptcy of the underlying firms.

15

3

3.1.2

MODEL

Asset pricing

The third key element of our model is that the rights to the pure profits of final
goods firms are traded. There are security markets in which the rights to the
future profits of final goods firms are bought and sold. The trading of these
securities leads to a divergence between financial wealth and productive capital
(P1), and allows Tobin’s Q to diverge permanently away from 1 (P2).
At the end of period t − 1, securities Stf are traded for each firm, which
give the rights to all future dividends dft of these firms for as long as they survive. Individuals do not buy shares of individual final goods firms, which are
infinitesimally small. They instead buy positive fractions of the continuum of
firms. Since the continuum spans from 0 to 1, every period there is a single
share of securities Stf outstanding. Due to the law of large numbers, for every
mass of shares an individual purchases, exactly ∆t+1 percent of the underlying
firms will go out of business between period t and t + 1.
The value of these securities Stf is given by the present discounted value of
the dividends the shares receive:
"∞
#
s
X
Y
f
Xt−1 = Et−1
ms dfs
(1 − ∆n ) .
(6)
s=t

n=t+1

In this equation, mt is the stochastic discount factor that is determined in equilibrium by the optimal asset choice of households. Note that future dividends
are discounted by two factors: by ‘(1 − ∆)’, taking into account that some firms
will go out of business, and the stochastic discount factor, taking into account
that future dividends must be discounted by the riskiness of these profits and the
time value of money.31

3.1.3

Intermediate goods firms

Production is fairly standard; the only twist from a purely neoclassical model is
the presence of the markup wedge µt between the marginal product of capital
and the rental rate; an increase in this wedge will be our main explanation for
why investment has decreased (P5).
A representative intermediate goods firm uses labor Lt and productive capital
Kt to produce output Ytm according to the production function
σ
 σ−1

σ−1
σ−1
,
Ytm = αKt σ + (1 − α)(At Lt ) σ

(7)

where σ is the production elasticity of substitution and At the level of labor
augmenting productivity. “Productive capital” Kt includes both tangible and
31

Note that although we have motivated the discounting of the value of shares (1−∆) through
the notion of firm entry and exit, there are several other interpretations that can be given to this
discount rate. First, it can be though of as an additional, not modeled, risk premium on pure
profits. Second, it can be though of as a reduced form way to model the fact that not all firms are
publicly traded in the US, and thus their pure profits are not capitalized.

16

3

MODEL

intangible capital that contributes to the production of goods and services, which
is broadly in line with the BEA.32 Here forward, we will simply use the term
“capital” when referring to “productive capital”.
Intermediate goods firms distribute the excess of its profits over retained investment as a dividend dit Sti = µ1t Ytm −wt Lt −It . Investment increases the firm’s
future stock of capital according to
Kt+1 = Φ(It /Kt )Kt + (1 − δ)Kt ,

(8)

where δ is the rate of depreciation and adjustment costs Φ(·) are a positive concave function. Following Jermann (1998), we use an adjustment cost function
 1−ξ
a1
+ a2 .33
given by Φ(It /Kt ) = 1−ξ KItt
The first order conditions from the firm’s problem are derived in section A.4.
Note that markups µt create a wedge between the marginal product of capital and
the rental rate. As markups increase, the increased wedge will cause investment
to decrease (P5).

3.2

Long Run Risk

The value of securities Stf (and thus financial wealth, P1 & P2) depends upon
the rate at which pure profits are discounted, and thus the equity premium. In
order to match the equity premium in the data, we follow the macro-finance literature and include long-run productivity risk in our model, as in Bansal and
Yaron (2004) and Croce (2014).34 There are two sources of uncertainty in productivity growth: an i.i.d short-run shock that is standard in RBC models (a ),
and a long-run component (x ) that leads to small but persistent movement in
long-run growth. Let At denote the level of labor augmenting productivity, and
lowercase letters denote log-units. The growth rate of productivity is given by:
∆at+1 = ζ + xt + σa a,t+1
xt = ρxt−1 + σx x,t


  

a,t+1
0
1 ρxa
˜ iid N
,
x,t+1
0
ρxa 1

(9)
(10)
(11)

Here xt is the “long run risk” of productivity growth, and a,t+1 is the short
run risk.
32
We do not include in this term capitalized spending by businesses on economic competencies such as advertising, marketing research, and branding. Because this spending does not
serve to increase the production of goods and services, we term this spending “non-productive
intangible investment”. We discuss this distinction further in section 8.2.
33
For a full discussion of the adjustment cost function, see appendix A.4.
34
The exact way we match the equity premium is not important for our theoretical or quantitative results: our analysis would be similar if we had generated the equity premium through
consumption habit formation or rare disaster risks.

17

3

3.3

MODEL

Household preferences

Preferences are fairly standard: representative households have preferences of
the Epstein and Zin (1989) variety, which will allow us to more easily match the
equity premium. The one nonstandard element is a time-varying wedge in the
utility between time periods. Changes in the wedge will allow us to match the
path of the real interest rate in a representative agent setting, and thus match P3.
The economy consists of a unit mass of identical infinitely lived agents. Utility is given by
h
1 i θ
 1−γ
1−γ θ 1−γ
1−ν
ν
θ
+ βDt Et Vt+1
,
Vt = (1 − β) ct (At−1 (1 − Lt ))

(12)

where the time discount factor is β, ν is a weight determining the average share
of total hours worked, γ is the risk aversion parameter, and θ is a parameter
1−γ
defined as θ = 1−
1 . In this expression, ψ is the elasticity of intertemporal subψ

stitution. The main advantage of using Epstein-Zin utility is that there is no
longer a link between the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and the coefficient of risk aversion, which makes it easier to match the equity-risk premium
(and quantitatively explain P1 & P2). If γ = 1/ψ, the utility collapses to the
CRRA variety. As in Croce (2014), leisure utility is scaled by productivity.
The term Dt is an additional wedge between utility in period t + 1 and period
t, beyond the time discount rate of β. It represents additional unmodeled factors,
such as population growth and mortality, that might effect the supply of loanable
funds (and thus the real interest rate) in an OLG model, but have no effect in a
representative agent model. Dt is a lever we will use in our quantitative exercises
to decrease the long-run real interest rate, and thus match P3.
Individuals maximize this utility subject to a series of budget constraints,
f
i
ct + Xti St+1
+ Xtf St+1
= wt Lt + dit Sti + dft Stf

+∆t+1 Xtf

+ (1 −

∆t )Xtf Stf

+

(13)

Xti Sti .

On the left hand side of the budget constraint, individuals use their income to puri
chase either consumption, shares of intermediate good firms (Xti St+1
), or shares
f f
of final goods firms (Xt St+1 ). On the right hand side of the budget equation,
agents receive income from a variety of sources: labor income wt Lt , dividends
from intermediate goods firms dit Sti , dividends from final goods firms dft Stf , IPO
issued securities of final goods firms ∆t+1 Xtf , remaining share value of final
goods firms (1 − ∆t )Xtf Stf , and remaining share value of intermediate goods
firms, Xti Sti .

3.4

Equilibrium and solution

An equilibrium is a set of quantities and prices such that individuals maximize
utility subject to budget constraints, intermediate and final goods firms maximize
18

4

CHARACTERIZING THE PUZZLES

profits subject to production constraints, and markets clear. While this model is
not stationary, we can make it so by applying a standard transformation: divide
all quantities (except labor) by At−1 , as well as wages and the price of securities
Xti and Xtf . Appendix A contains the full definition of equilibrium and lists
all of the equations of the model. A steady state equilibrium is the same as
the above equilibrium definition, except that all variables are constant rather
than subscripted by time. Appendix A contains the steady state equations of the
model.
We solve the model using a 2nd order perturbation methods, using the software Dynare (Adjemian et al. (2011)); a period in our model is a month. We
solve the model around the nonstochastic steady state. The work of Caldara
et al. (2012) has shown that perturbation methods are well suited to solving
DSGE models with recursive preferences and long run risk, with accuracy that
is competitive with Chebyshv polynomias and value function iteration. Once we
have solved the model, we will compare the theoretical moments generated by
the model to data moments.

4

Characterizing the puzzles

In this section, we derive model statistics that correspond to the data moments of
our five puzzles: financial wealth, average return, Tobin’s Q, etc. These statistics will be the main objects of analysis for our theoretical as well as quantitative results, and will also illustrate how our theory differs in key ways from the
neoclassical model. For each macro-statistic, we will also derive steady-state
equations, which will be useful in the comparative statics analysis.
P1: Increasing financial wealth, constant capital We measure financial wealth in our model in a way that corresponds to the measurement in the US
Financial Accounts. In the Financial Accounts, wealth is defined as the market
value of stocks and bonds, thus we define financial wealth Wt as equal to the
combined value of securities and capital, Wt = Xtf + qt Kt . We immediately
see from this equation a key difference between our model and the neoclassical: when there are non-zero pure profits in the economy, the value of financial
wealth may diverge from the value of the capital stock.
We now derive the steady state security price X f as a percent of output.
In a balanced growth equilibrium, the ratio of dividends to output is given by
d
= P S. In addition, dividends grow at the same rate as output, thus future
Y
dividends must be adjusted for productivity growth. Thus we have
∞

X P S(exp(ζ))s (1 − ∆)s
Xf
PS
=
=
,
exp(ζ)(1−∆)
s
Y
(1 + r)
1−
s=0
1+r

(14)

using the formula for the sum of a geometric series. The ‘r’ in this expression is
the steady state real interest rate.
19

4

CHARACTERIZING THE PUZZLES

Given the steady state real interest rate, it is easy to characterize the capitalto-output ratio. The f.o.c. of intermediate goods firms yields r = FµK − δ, which
allows us to calculate steady-state capital-to-labor; combining this with steady
state labor-to-output (equation A.76) yields steady state capital-to-output.
P2: increasing Tobin’s Q Empirical Tobin’s Q is defined both in the financial accounts and in our model as the ratio of the market value of wealth to the
value of capital goods:
Q=

X f + qt K t
Wt
= t
.
qt K t
qt K t

(15)

We immediately see from this equation a second way in which our model differs
from the neoclassical: with nonzero pure profits, Tobin’s Q can be permanently
above 1.
P3: declining interest rate, constant average return The average return on capital is measured in the data as GDP minus depreciation minus payt −δqt Kt
ments to labor, divided by the replacement value of capital: ARt = Yt −wtqLt K
.
t
In a steady state, the average return is equal to
AR = r +

Π
PS
=r+ K
K
Y

(16)

We see from this equation that with pure profits, there can be a divergence between the average and the marginal return on capital. In a neoclassical model,
they are one and the same.
It is simple to characterize the steady state real interest. From equation
(A.17), the stationary discount rate is
m = βD · exp(
The risk free interest rate is r =

1
m

−1
ζ).
ψ

(17)

− 1.

P4: increasing profit share, declining labor share We measure labor
share as payments to labor, LSt = wYt Lt t , capital share as the return on productive
rK q K

capital, KSt = t Ytt t , and profit share as the residual, P St = 1 − LSt − KSt .
In the neoclassical model, the profit share is zero.
P5: declining investment In a stationary equilibrium the capital to output
ratio is constant, and thus investment must be exactly enough so that capital
grows with output, i.e. at the rate of productivity growth plus depreciation. Thus
in a steady state investment to output equals
I
K
= [exp(ζ) − 1 + δ] .
Y
Y
20

(18)

5

A QUALITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

Finally, we characterize the equity premium in our model, because our quantitative results will produce interesting endogenous movements in this moment.
Since there are two assets in our model (intermediate and final goods firms),
we will calculate two equity premiums, as well as the equity premium on the
return from holding both types of assets together, in proportion to their values. The returns of our model are calculated as follows. The risk free return
is given by Rt = Et [m1t+1 ] , the expected return on the final goods firm is given by
 f

f
dt+1 +(1−∆t+1 )Xt+1
f
Et [Rt+1 ] = Et
, and the return on intermediate good firm is
Xtf
i
h i
dt+1 +qt+1 Kt+2
i
. The combined return is the total return
given by Et [Rt+1 ] = Et
qt Kt+1
from holding the total value of intermediate and final good firms,
"
c
]
Et [Rt+1

= Et

f
+ dit+1 + qt+1 Kt+2
dft+1 + (1 − ∆t+1 )Xt+1

Xtf + qt Kt+1

#
.

(19)

The equity premium for all three of these assets is then calculated as the expected
return minus the risk free rate, adjusted for leverage. In line with Croce (2014),
we use a leverage ratio of 2.
We are not aware of any previous work that distinguishes between the equity
premium on profits and the equity premium on productive capital, although the
distinction is important for our results. Our empirical results will show that the
equity premium on securities is substantially higher than the equity premium on
productive capital. As discussed in detail in section 7.6, because there are barriers to entry, final goods firms are nonreproducible assets, and thus their price
can have large fluctuations in response to changes in pure profits. In contrast,
productive capital is reproducible, and thus the price of capital q has only moderate fluctuations (due to the presence of adjustment costs). As a direct result, in
moving from an economy in which the value of securities is high relative to the
value of the capital stock the equity premium will increase.35

5

A qualitative solution to the puzzles

We hypothesize that a permanent increase in markups, along with a decrease
in the real interest rate, can explain the five puzzles. We now examine the impact of both changes on our five stylized facts of interest. We will compare
analytic comparative statics in the steady state of our model, which allows us
to unambiguously sign the derivatives. Our results will show that the proposed
mechanisms can qualitatively solve the five puzzles that are the subject of this
paper: in the succeeding sections, we will then test whether our mechanisms can
quantitatively solve them.
35

This result should be tempered somewhat by the fact that we may be missing a key element.
As Larry Summers has pointed out (see Summers (2017)), as equity prices rise, firms become
less levered.

21

5

5.1

A QUALITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

An increase in markups

We examine the change in steady state model moments to small changes in the
steady state level of markups, µ̄.
Proposition 1. The following comparative static results hold:
∂ K̄
L̄
∂ µ̄

∂ K̄

1.

< 0, ∂Ȳµ̄ < 0. (P1) An increase in steady state markups will lead to a
decrease in the capital-to-labor ratio and the capital-to-output ratio.

2.

∂Q
∂ µ̄

> 0. (P2) An increase in steady state markups will lead to an increase
in empirical Tobin’s Q.

3.

∂AR
∂ µ̄

> 0. (P3) An increase in steady state markups will lead to an increase
in the average return on capital.

4.

∂P S
∂ µ̄

> 0. (P4) An increase in steady state markups will lead to an increase
in the pure profit share.

5.

∂LS
∂ µ̄

< 0, if σ ≤ 1. (P4) An increase in steady state markups will lead
to a decrease in the labor share if production is Cobb-Douglas, or the
production elasticity of substitution is less than one.
¯

6.

∂ ȲI
∂ µ̄

< 0. (P5) An increase in steady state markups will lead to a decrease
in the investment-to-output ratio.

Proof. See appendix B.
Proposition 1 shows that an increase in markups can potentially explain many
of the five puzzles. We give proofs of the above results in appendix B, and
discuss here the intuition.
An increase in markups will increase profits of final goods firms, and thus
dividends to the owners of final-goods firms securities. This will increase the
value of these securities, leading to an increase in wealth-to-output (P1) and
Tobin’s Q (P2).
Because of the increased profit share, there is also an increase in the measured average return on capital – note that this goes against P3, the constant
average return seen in the data. However, the increase in markups leads to an
increase in the wedge between the average return on capital and the risk free
interest rate (see equation (16)), which is supportive of P3.
An increase in markups will directly lead to an increase in the profit share
(P4). With an increase in the profit share, there will be a decrease in the combined labor and capital share. Whether there will be an umambiguous decrease
in the labor share depends on the value of σ, which determines the elasticity
of the ratio of the labor to capital share to a change in markups. Under CobbDouglas, there is no response in the relative labor-capital share to a change in
markups. If σ < 1, the relative labor share will decline with an increase in
22

5

A QUALITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

Table 2: Effect of an increase in markups
Model statistic
Symbol
Effect
Capital-to-output (P1)
Kt /Yt
↓
Tobin’s Q (P2)
Qt
↑
Average return (P3)
ARt
↑
Profit share (P4)
P St
↑
Labor share (P4)
LSt
↓ if σ ≤ 1
Investment-to-output (P5) It /Yt
↓
markups (P4). Although the relative capital share increases, in our simulations
this is never enough to lead to an overall increase in the capital share: although
with an increase in markups capital gets a bigger slice over the overall labor +
capital share pie, the shrinkage of the pie due to an increased profit share outweighs this effect.
The higher markups will increase the wedge between the marginal product
of capital and the rental rate of capital (see equation (A.29)). However, since the
interest rate does not change, neither does the rental rate of capital. Thus there
must be an increase in the marginal product of capital, and hence a decrease
in the capital-to-output ratio. This will also lead to lower investment (P5, see
equation (18)).
All of the effects of an increase in markups are summarized in Table 2, which
shows that an increase in markups can go a long way towards explaining the five
puzzles. One remaining challenge is that an increase in markups would tend to
increase the average return on capital, while in the data it is relatively stable; the
next section will suggest a possible solution to this challenge.

5.2

A decrease in interest rates

We now study the comparative static effects of a lower real interest rate. We
model the decrease in interest rates in a reduced form way, through an increase
in the utility wedge D. We view this as a reduced form way of modeling factors
that affect the supply of loanable funds (and thus the real interest rate) in an OLG
model, but have no effect in a representative agent model. Two key examples we
have in mind are a decrease in population growth and a decrease in the mortality
rate.36
Proposition 2. The following comparative static results hold:
1.

∂W
Y
∂D

> 0. (P1) An increase in D will lead to an increase in the wealth-tooutput ratio.

36

Although in a representative agent model slower population growth will not push down the
real interest rate, in most OLG models it will have this effect.Eggertsson, Mehrotra and Robbins
(2017), in an OLG context, discuss a variety of forces that have driven down interest rates since
1970.

23

5
∂K
Y
∂D

A QUALITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

∂K

2.

> 0, ∂DL > 0. (P1) An increase in D will lead to an increase in the
capital-to-output ratio and the capital-to-labor ratio.

3.

∂AR
∂D

< 0. (P3) An increase in D will lead to a decrease in the average
return on capital.

4.

∂LS
∂D

> 0 if σ < 1. (P4) An increase in D will lead to an increase in the
labor share if σ < 1. If σ > 1, ∂LS
< 0.
∂D

5.

∂KS
∂D

6.

< 0 if σ < 1. (P4) An increase in D will lead to a decrease in the
> 0.
capital share if σ < 1. If σ > 1, ∂KS
∂D
∂ YI
∂D

> 0. (P5) An increase in D will lead to an increase in the investmentto-output ratio.

Proof. See Appendix B.
Once again, we leave the proofs to appendix B, and discuss the intuition for
these results.
A decrease in r would tend to decrease the marginal product of capital (see
equation (A.29)), and thus increase the capital-to-output ratio. In addition, a
lower r means that the rights to future dividends are discounted at a lower
rate, which would tend to raise the value of securities, Xtf , relative to output.
Since both capital-to-output and security value-to-output increase, the wealthto-output ratio will increase as well (P1). The total effect on Tobin’s Q is ambiguous, however, since both the numerator and denominator of this ratio will
increase.
As seen in equation (16), a decrease in the real interest rate would tend to
decrease the measured average return on capital (P3). Note that a decrease in
interest rates thus has the opposite effect of an increase in markups. If we consider both changes simultaneously, there are two opposing forces on the average
return on capital: the increase in profits would tend to raise the AR, while the
decrease in r would tend to decrease it.
Since a lower r means a higher capital-to-output ratio, this will tend to increase the labor share and decrease the capital share (P4), assuming, as most
evidence suggests, that the production elasticity of substitution σ < 1.
Because a decrease in r leads to an increase in the capital-to-output ratio,
there will be also be an increase in the investment-to-output ratio (P5, see equation (18)). Thus once again, the force of a lower r tends to counteract the force
of higher profits. The effects of changes in r on the capital-to-output ratio and
investment-to-output ratio are strongly dependent on whether capital and labor
are complements or substitutions, i.e. the elasticity of substitution σ is less than
or greater than one. The lower is σ, the smaller the effects of changes in the
interest rate on capital and investment.

24

6

ESTIMATING CHANGES IN MARKUPS AND INTEREST RATES

Table 3: Effect of an increase in D
Model statistic
Symbol
Effect
Wealth-to-income (P1)
Wt /Yt
↑
Capital-to-output (P1)
Kt /Yt
↑
Tobin’s Q (P2)
Qt
?
Average return (P3)
ARt
↓
Profit share (P4)
P St
0
Labor share (P4)
LSt
↑ if σ < 1
Capital share (P4)
KSt
↓ if σ < 1
Investment-to-output (P5) It /Yt
↑

5.3

A decrease in productivity

We also examine the effect of a decrease in the permanent growth rate of productivity, ζ. From equation 17, we see a decrease in ζ will lead to an increase
in the discount factor, and thus a decrease in the steady state real interest rate
r. Depending on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, ψ, the change in
interest rates will either be greater than the change in ζ (ψ < 1), less than the
change in ζ (ψ > 1), or of the same magnitude (ψ = 1). In our baseline calibration we have ψ > 1, and thus the change in interest rates will be smaller in
magnitude than the change in productivity growth. Then, from equation 14, we
see that when productivity growth decreases, the security value-to-output ratio
will decrease. The explanation for this is fairly straightforward. A slowdown in
productivity means a slowdown in the growth rate of the economy, and thus of
dividends, leading to a decline in the value of securities, and with ψ > 1 this
outweighs the effect of a lower discount rate of the dividends (r) on the value of
securities.
Proposition 1 and 2 have analytically opened the possibility to explaining the
five puzzles. Whether they can do so quantitatively is the subject of the rest of
the paper.

6

Estimating changes in markups and interest rates

The comparative statics results above show that an increase in markups, combined with a decrease in the equilibrium interest rate, can potentially explain the
five trends. To test whether these qualitative predictions hold up in a quantitative
sense, we need a measure of how these variables have changed in the US data.
We estimate markups using aggregate macro data, and find that there has been
a substantial increase from 1970 to the present. We use existing findings from
the literature of the decline in the natural rate of interest, and use a conservative
decline of 2% over our sample period.

25

6

6.1

ESTIMATING CHANGES IN MARKUPS AND INTEREST RATES

Markups

We estimate markups using aggregate macroeconomic data, exploiting the fact
that under constant returns to scale production, markups are proportional to the
profit share of the economy. In particular, under CRS markups equal the inverse
of the share of production not accounted for by pure profits:
PS =

1
µ−1
=⇒ µ =
.
µ
1 − PS

(20)

As discussed in section 2, we estimate profit share from the data by taking the
residual share of output after subtracting labor and capital income. The estimates
of capital income are dependent on factors which are difficult to measure or
uncertain, in particular the risk premium on capital investments and the expected
change in the relative price of capital. For this reason, we calculate four different
versions of our markup series, each under different assumptions about the risk
premium and the relative price of capital; these series all show a similar trend
and are reported in appendix figure A.5.37

.95

.95

1

1

Baseline
1.05
1.1

1.05
N&R(2013)

1.15

1.2

1.1

Markups

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Baseline

2005

2010

2015

N&R(2013)

Figure 6: Comparing Markup Estimates
Our baseline markup series uses the risk premium implied by the return on
BAA corporate bonds, and assumes no expected change in the relative price
of capital; the results are displayed in figure 6. Under these assumptions, the
markup increases substantially over the time period, from 1.1 in 1970 to around
1.2 in 2015. The other estimated series show a similar increase.
37

The four series differ along two dimensions: whether (i) risk premium and/or (ii) the change
in the relative price of capital are included in the calculation of the rental rate of capital. See
appendix figure A.5.

26

7

A QUANTITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

We compare our markup series to two others in the literature, both of which
use alternative (and independent) estimation techniques. The first alternative
measure is taken from the New Keynesian literature, which has historically estimated markups in order to test their cyclicality. Figure 6 compares our results
to a typical New Keynsian estimate, provided by Nekarda and Ramey (2013).
The overall increase is of a similar magnitude, but the dynamics are different.
Our estimates show a roughly steady increase in markups over the time period,
while N&R show a sharp increase starting in 2000. The reason why there is a
divergence is that N&R’s estimate is closely tied to the decline in the labor share,
which accelerates starting in 2000. In contrast, our estimate is also tied to the
decline in the capital share, which begins with the decline in interest rates (which
drives down the rental rate of capital) from the beginning of the time period.
In a recent paper, De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) use firm level data and
techniques from industrial organization to estimate a new time series of markups.
These results show a massive increase in markups, from 18% in 1980 to 67% in
the present, a much larger increase than our results. We will extensively discuss
these results in section 7.5

6.2

Interest rates

We use a conservative estimate of the decline in the natural rate of interest; results in the literature vary somewhat widely. Holston, Laubach and Williams
(2017), using the Laubnach-Williams model, estimate a decline of ≈ 3.5%, from
3.91 in 1970 to .43% in 2015. Del Negro et al. (2017), using DSGE and time
series analysis, estimate a decline of 1-1.5%, from 2-2.5% to 1-1.5%. A simple
five year moving average of the real federal funds rate yields a decline of 3.8%,
from 2.25 to -1.55. For our baseline analysis, we use a decline in the natural rate
of interest of 2%, from 3% in 1970 to 1% in 1970.

7

A quantitative solution to the puzzles

We now test the hypothesis that changes in markups and interest rates can quantitatively explain the five puzzles outlined in the introduction. While the analytic
comparative statics of section 5 suggested our model can qualitatively match the
puzzles, we now investigate the magnitudes. To do so, we cannot rely purely on
steady state results, since in a steady state there is no equity premium. Instead,
we will compare moments of the stochastic economy. Our results will show that
changes in markups and interest rates can indeed quantitatively account for the
five puzzles.
The five puzzles all involve changes in macroeconomic quantities. For this
reason, we will judge our quantitative success by whether changes in our model
moments can match changes in the data moments. We first calibrate our model to
US data in 1970 (matching levels only). We then solve the model, and compute
moments of interest by calculating theoretical moments from the second-order
27

7

A QUANTITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

Table 4: Parameters taken from the data and related literature
Panel A: Data
Symbol Value
Source
Productivity growth (/yr)
ζ
2.02% Fernald (2012)
Panel B: Related literature
Long run risk persistence
Long run risk std. dev.
Short run risk std. dev.
Depreciation rate (/yr)

ρ
σx
σa
δ

.98
.0010
.01
6%

Croce (2014)
Croce (2014)
Croce (2014)
Jorgensen (1996)

approximation of the model’s solution (see section 4). We then change the long
run level of markups from their 1970 to their 2015 level, then interest rates, and
then both together, calculating the model’s moments for each change. We will
then compare changes in our model moments between the two time periods to
changes in the data moments.

7.1

Quantitative calibration

We calibrate the model to the US economy in 1970. The goal of the calibration
is to match the level of the model’s moments to the 1970 data moments: once
again, we do no target changes in moments over the time period, as this will be
the main outcome and test of our analyses. We focus on matching in particular
the moments which correspond to the five macroeconomic puzzles of interest.
The calibration results will show our model moments closely matching the data
moments in levels for 1970, with parameter estimates within the range of values
reported in the existing literature.
There are three categories of parameters: (i) the long run level of markups
and interest rates estimated in section 638 (ii) parameters taken from the data and
literature, and (iii) parameters chosen to match 1970 data moments, through the
minimization of an objective function.
Parameters from category (ii) are displayed in table 4. The rate of productivity growth ζ we take from Fernald (2012). We use the estimates of Croce (2014)
to calibrate our long-run and short-run productivity risks. The depreciation rate
comes from Jorgenson (1996).
We choose the remaining parameters to match six key moments of the US
economy as of 1970. All data moments are calculated through a 5-year moving
average around 1970, using yearly data. The first four moments are standard
in the DSGE literature: a real interest rate of 3.0%, an investment-to-output
ratio of 16.1%, a labor share of 72.4%, and a share of hours worked of 18%.
In light of our above theoretical and empirical analysis, we add a new moment
to the calibration: a wealth-to-output ratio of 2.66. Finally, in consideration of
38

In the appendix D we report results using the markup estimates of Nekarda and Ramey
(2013), as well as those of De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017).

28

7

A QUANTITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

Table 5: Calibrated parameter results
Parameters chosen to match targets Symbol Value
Capital production elasticity
α
0.26
Production elasticity
σ
0.93
Firm exit rate
∆
0.0043
Rate of time preference
β
0.9958
Risk Aversion
γ
7.68
Hours supplied
ν
0.21
our goal of matching financial moments, we calibrate our model to match an
equity premium of 4.71%. The parameters chosen this way are the rate of time
preference β, the capital production coefficient α, the production elasticity of
substitution σ, the firm exit rate ∆, the labor supply coefficient ν, and the risk
aversion parameter γ.
There is no one-to-one mapping between these remaining parameters and the
targets, hence we jointly choose all parameters to match the model output to the
targets. Nevertheless, each of the parameters above correspond relatively closely
with one of the key moments we are trying to match. The rate of time preference β is closely related to the real interest rate; as β increases, the real interest
rate falls. The capital share parameter α along with the production elasticity σ
determine the labor share as well as the investment-to-output ratio. The rate of
firm exit ∆ has a large effect on the wealth-to-output ratio. The parameter ν
determines the number of hours worked. Finally, the risk aversion parameter γ
is the most important determinant of the equity premium.
We minimize a weighted sum of the squared difference of our model moments and the 1970 data moments. Table 5 displays the parameter values, while
6 shows the resulting model moments and compares them with the data. With the
parameters selected by our minimization, the model moments come very close
to matching those in the data.
The parameters in table 5 fall directly within the range of parameter values
in the macro-finance literature. We now compare our parameters with previous calibrations/estimations of DSGE models with recursive preferences and/or
long-run productivity risk. Our β of .9958 is quite close to the value of .9957 in
Croce (2014), .997 in Van Binsbergen et al. (2012), and 0.9606 in Rudebusch and
Swanson (2012). While previous literature has generally used Cobb-Douglas
production, we use CES, and find σ = .93.39 Our capital elasticity parameter α,
.26, is smaller than the capital share parameter in the existing literature (.34 in
Croce (2014), .3 in Van Binsbergen et al. (2012), .33 in Rudebusch and Swanson (2012)): in order to match the labor share with a higher level of markups, α
must be smaller. Our estimated coefficient of risk aversion, γ = 7.68, is in line
with Croce (2014), as well as the estimates of Vissing-Jørgensen and Attanasio
(2003). We are able to match the equity premium with such a small coefficient
39

This is line with the range of estimates in Antras (2004).

29

7

A QUANTITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

of risk aversion because of the presence of long-run risk in our model: in models
without this feature, the estimated coefficients are much higher.
The monthly firm exit rate of .43% yields a yearly rate of 5%. This is half the
exit rate used in Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2012), but comparable in magnitude to the annual production destruction rate (in terms of share of products and
market share) of 8.8% from Bragdon, Redding and Schott (2010). We note, however, that the ∆ parameter in our model corresponds to the notion of bankruptcy
(in which the shareholders are wiped out) and/or the replacement of a firm’s
products with that of a competitor’s (in which some portion of shareholder value
is wiped out), not to the replacement of a product within a firm by the firm’s own
product. Data from Decker et al. (2016) shows the average annual firm exit rate
is around 9%. However, since young firms, which tend to be the smallest, go out
of business at a much higher rate than old firms, the average exit rate weighted
by employment is only around 2.75%. We note that, unlike the firm entry rate,
there has not been a secular decline in firm exit rates since 1980.
Table 6: 1970 calibration results
Targets
Model
Data
Source
Real interest rate
2.99% 3.00%
Federal Reserve
Wealth-to-output ratio
2.66
2.66
Financial Accounts
Investment-to-output ratio 15.27% 16.15%
NIPA
Labor share
71.82% 72.40%
Elsby (2013)
Equity premium
4.60% 4.71%
Croce (2014)
Labor supply
0.18% 0.18%
Croce (2014)
We once again emphasize that we are choosing parameters only to match
1970 moments. In particular, we do not choose any parameters to try and match
the change in moments from 1970 to the present. The success or failure of our
exercise will be comparing changes in our model moments with changes in the
data moments.
The final set of parameters we estimate are the AR(1) parameters for markups,
ρµ and σµ (the standard deviation of the error µt ). To do so, we detrend our baseline markup series and estimate ρµ = .97 and σµ = .005 via OLS.

7.2

Quantitative results: overall hypothesis

We begin with a test of our overall hypothesis: whether changes in markups and
interest rates can explain the five macroeconomic puzzles. Table 7 shows the
combined effects of changing markups, productivity growth, and D from their
steady steady values in 1970 to their 2015 values.40 Overall, our model does a
surprisingly good job of explaining the five macroeconomic puzzles: the changes
in the model moments which correspond to the puzzles are similar in magnitude
40

Section 7.4 describes our calibration procedure for the change in D.

30

7

A QUANTITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

Table 7: Quantitative results: changes in markups, productivity growth rates,
interest rates
Moments
∆ Model ∆ Data
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
0.90
0.95
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
0.23
0.31
Tobin’s Q (P2)
0.16
0.40
Real interest rate (P3)
−2.00% −2.00%
Average return (P3)
0.64%
0.64%
Profit share (P4)
8.25%
8.25%
Labor share (P4)
−6.41% −6.41%
Capital share (P4)
−1.84% −2.30%
Investment-to-output ratio (P5) −1.13% −0.19%
Equity Premium
2.05%
0 − 2%
to the data moments. The first column lists the macroeconomic moment of interest (with the corresponding puzzle in parentheses). The second column displays
the calculated change in model moments between 1970 and 2015 that is the result of changing markups and interest rates. The third column lists the change in
the data moments.
We discuss each puzzle result in turn. (P1) Our model produces, in line with
the data, an increase in the wealth-to-output ratio, with a relatively stable capitalto-output ratio. Our model’s increase in the wealth-to-output ratio of .90 is quite
close to the increase seen in the data, .95, while the increase in the capital-tooutput ratio is also comparable. (P2) Our model produces an increase in Tobin’s
Q, however the increase is somewhat smaller in our model: .16 compared to .40
in the data.
(P3) In line with the puzzle, our results show a moderate increase in the average return, with a declining real interest rate. Interestingly, the change in the
average return has exactly matched the increase in the data.41 (P4) The model
does a good job of matching the increase in the profit share, as well as the decline
in the labor and the capital share; however, the ability of the model to exactly
match the magnitude of the profit share decline should not be surprising, since
the change in markups was estimated explicitly to match the movement in this
moment. (P5) Our model produces a decline in investment, despite a high Tobin’s Q and low real interest rate. The decline in investment is larger than seen
in the data.
In summary, we have shown that the estimated decline in markups, along
with a decrease in the real interest rate commensurate with the data, can quantitatively account for the five facts described in the introduction. In the following
two sections, we examine the impact of changes in markups and interest rates
separately on our five puzzles of interest. We will see that both changes are
41

By chance, the change in the average return of the model matches the change in the data to
two decimal points. It is not surprising, however, that the change in interest rates exactly matches
the decline: we choose the increase in D to exactly target a decrease in r of 2% (see section 7.4).

31

7

A QUANTITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

needed in order to match the macroeconomic data.

7.3

Quantitative results: markups

Table 8 shows the results of increasing the long-run level of markups from our
baseline estimated level in 1970, 1.1, to its estimated level in 2015, 1.22. The
results are overall quite supportive of our hypothesis, however it is clear that an
increase in markups alone cannot fully explain all five puzzles.
(P1) In line with puzzle 1, there is an increase in the wealth-to-output ratio,
.50, however it is smaller than the .95 increase in the data. In addition, there
is a moderate decrease in the capital-to-output ratio, compared with a moderate
increase in the data. (P2) There is an increase in Tobin’s Q of .34, quite comparable to the .40 in the data. (P3) Due to the increase in profits there is a large
increase of 4.8% in the average return – this is much larger than the increase of
.64% seen in the data. There is no change in interest rates from the increase in
markups: although there is an increase in the supply of assets due to the increase
in security values, in a representative agent economy this is exactly counteracted
by an increase in demand, and there is no change in interest rates. This result
shows that although an increase in markups can explain the divergence between
the average return and the interest rate, it cannot by itself generate a constant
average return.
(P4) The increase in markups leads to an increase in the profit share of 8.25%
(data 8.25%), and a corresponding decrease in both the labor and the capital
share. (P5) Due to the increase in the wedge between the marginal product of
capital and the rental rate, there is a moderate decline in investment of 1.26%.
Table 8: Quantitative results: changes in markups only
Moments
∆ Model ∆ Data
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
0.50
0.95
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
−0.16
0.31
Tobin’s Q (P2)
0.34
0.40
Real interest rate (P3)
0.00%
−2.00%
Average return (P3)
4.80%
0.64%
Profit share (P4)
8.25%
8.25%
Labor share (P4)
−6.69% −6.41%
Capital share (P4)
−1.56% −2.30%
Investment-to-output ratio (P5) −1.26% −0.19%
Equity Premium
2.18%
0 − 2%
Table 8 is strongly supportive of our hypothesis. Quantitatively, it shows that
changes in markups alone can go a long way towards explaining several of the
five puzzles that are the subject of this paper. The large increase in the average
return predicted by the model is one exception to this; however, as we will see
in the next section, a decline in interest rates can serve as a check to this force,
driving down the average return.
32

7

A QUANTITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

Table 9: Quantitative results:
Moments
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
Tobin’s Q (P2)
Real interest rate (P3)
Average return (P3)
Profit share (P4)
Labor share (P4)
Capital share (P4)
Investment-to-output ratio (P5)
Equity Premium

7.4

changes in D only
∆ Model ∆ Data
0.25
0.95
0.22
0.31
−0.06
0.40
−1.18% −2.00%
−1.94%
0.64%
−0.00%
8.25%
0.17%
−6.41%
−0.17% −2.30%
1.72%
−0.19%
0.28%
0 − 2%

Quantitative results: interest rates

We consider two channels which lead to a decline in interest rates: (i) a decline
in productivity growth (ii) a reduced form increase in the utility wedge D. We
decrease the productivity growth rate (the parameter ζ), from 2.02% per year in
1970 to its value of .65% in the present. We increase D such that the combined
effect of the changes in µ, ζ, and D lead to a decrease in interest rates over the
time period is 2%, which is in line with the data.
The results of increasing D are shown in table 9. With lower interest rates,
there is a decrease in the average return (P3), and an increase in investment
(P5). There are also moderate changes in the labor and capital share, wealth-tooutput, and capital-to-output. The results of changing productivity growth only
are shown in table A.2. A decline in productivity growth leads to a decline in the
real interest rate of .84% – not enough to match the full decrease seen in the data.
With slower productivity growth, there is also a decline in the average return on
capital.

7.5

Other markup estimates

Appendix tables A.3-A.10 show our quantitative results for our two other estimates of markup series – those of Nekarda and Ramey (2013) and De Loecker
and Eeckhout (2017). The results for the Ramey estimates are quite similar to
our baseline results, since the increase in markups is similar in size.
The results of the De Loecker are much larger in magnitude then our baseline results. This is unsurprising, given that they estimate a massive increase
in markups, from 18% in 1980 to 67% in the present. Table A.10 shows the
combined results of changing markups and interest rates from their 1970 to their
2015 values. The results show a massive decline of 22.47% in the labor share, an
increase in the pure profit share of 30.18%, an increase in the average return of
17.27%, and an increase in Tobin’s Q of 1.35. These numbers are well out of line
with the data. A natural question is then, is there anything in our model which
33

7

A QUANTITATIVE SOLUTION TO THE PUZZLES

could square these numbers with the data? The answer is, tentatively, yes. If
the increase in markups was also accompanied by other forces that caused gross
profits to decrease, this would tend to decrease the magnitudes shown in Table
A.10. We discuss two potential mitigating factors in sections 8.2 and 8.3.

7.6

Excess returns of final goods firms

Table 8 displays a surprising result: an increase in markups causes an increase in
the equity premium of 2.18%. As discussed in section 4, this is due to a composition effect. The risk premium on pure profits is greater than the risk premium
on productive capital. Then as the value of the pure profits increases relative to
that of capital, i.e., an increase in Tobin’s Q, the combined equity premium on
holding profits and capital will increase. There are only negligible changes in
the returns on the different assets: risk free bonds, intermediate goods, and final
goods firms.
We now further explore the reason why the risk premium on final goods
firms, ERf , is higher than the risk premium on intermediate goods firms, ERi .
Excess returns for an asset, following Cochrane (2009), can be written as Et [rt+1 −
rtf ] ≈ −covt (mt+1 , rt+1 ). Because ERf > ERi , ERf must (negatively) covary
more with m than ERi . Assets must offer a higher equity premium when its
return move in a direction opposite to that of the discount factor. To understand
the different covariances of the two different assets, we will explore the differing
responses of asset returns to productivity-shocks. Figure 7, left column, gives
the IRF of key asset prices to a one-standard deviation short-run productivity
shock a . Figure 7, right column, gives the IRF of asset prices to a one-standard
deviation long-run productivity shock x .
Following a shock to short-run productivity, there is an increase in the price
of productive capital q. With higher productivity, the intermediate-good firm
finds it optimal to increase investment to take advantage of this productivity.
Due to the presence of adjustment costs, this increases the price of capital significantly.
It is well known since Jermann (1998) that capital adjustment costs are necessary in order to generate a realistic equity premium in production economies.
In the absence of adjustment costs, agents optimally choose to smooth their consumption (especially with high risk aversion), which decreases the volatility of
the stochastic discount factor. Relatedly, without capital adjustment costs, the
price of capital q does not fluctuate, and thus the only source of fluctuations of
returns are in the productivity of capital. The higher the adjustment costs, the
higher the capital risk premium.
A key assumption of our analysis is that there are significant barriers to entry
for final-goods firms. Thus, in contrast to productive capital, the securities which
hold the rights to pure profits are non-reproducible assets. When pure profits
increase, there is thus a large increase in the price of these securities. When the
productivity of capital increases, firms can simply produce new capital to take
advantage of this increased productivity. We should thus expect the price of final
34

8
10 -3

6

OTHER EXPLANATIONS FOR THE PUZZLES

q SR

10 -3

5

4

q LR

0

2

-5
0

5

10

15

20

0

Ch Val FF SR

0.1

5

0.1

0

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

15

20

Ch Val FF LR

0

-0.1

-0.1
0

5

10

15

20

0

Fin ER SR

0.02

5
10 -3

20

10

Fin ER LR

10

0

0

-0.02
0

5

10

15

20

0

M SDF SR

0.1

5

0

0

10

M SDF LR

-0.2

-0.1

-0.4
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

Figure 7: IRF to one standard deviation short-run productivity shock a (left column), and one standard deviation long-run productivity shock x (right column)

goods firms to be more volatile than intermediate goods firms, and thus yield a
greater risk premium.
Following a shock to both short and long-run productivity, we see there is
a large increase in the value of final goods firms (“Ch Val FF”), due to the fact
that these final-goods firms are non-reproducible assets. This, in turn, leads to a
large increase in the excess returns (“Fin ER”).

8

Other explanations for the puzzles

While this paper pursues the hypothesis that changes in markups and interest
rates are largely responsible for the macroeconomic changes seen over the past
forty years, we do not argue that other forces are not at work. We see our hypothesis as complementary to three other explanations: a decrease in the bargaining
power of workers, an increase in risk premia, and an increase in intangible investment.

8.1

Neoclassical and zero-rent economy

In the neoclassical Ramsey/Koopmans/Cass model, there are no monopoly profits, and securities markets measure only the value of a firm’s capital stock. In the
basic version of this model, the value of wealth is always equal to the value of
35

8

OTHER EXPLANATIONS FOR THE PUZZLES

capital, Tobin’s Q always equals one, and the average return moves in line with
interest rates. This model is thus at odds with the divergence between wealth and
capital in the data, the divergence between the average return and interest rates,
and the increase in Tobin’s Q to a level permanently above 1.
Robert Hall (2001) pursues the hypothesis that a firm’s stock market price
measures the value of its capital. As Hall notes, if there are no barriers to entry, in the longer run capital earns no rent because it is in perfectly elastic supply to the firm; he calls this the “zero-rent” economy. In a zero-rent economy,
movements in Tobin’s Q and wealth to output can only be due to two factors (i)
adjustment costs (ii) unmeasured intangible capital. However, adjustment costs
cannot explain a permanently elevated Tobin’s Q, as we have seen in the data,
unless the speed of adjustment of capital is unrealistically slow. Whether there
is unmeasured intangible capital will be considered extensively below.

8.2

Unobserved intangible capital

Another possible explanation for the five facts we have observed is a large amount
of capital that is unmeasured in the national accounts. If this capital was valued
by investors, it would be reflected in the market price of firms, and thus explain
a high level of wealth-to-capital and Tobin’s Q. In addition, it would increase the
measured average return on capital, since the unmeasured capital would generate income but would not be counted in the denominator of the average return
equation.
For many years business spent heavily on certain “intangible” products, which,
although from an economic point of view appear to be capital, were counted in
the national income accounts as expenses: computer software, computer databases,
scientific and non-scientific R&D, mineral exploration, spending to create artistic originals, and many more (see Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2009) and Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2005) for details). However, over the past 20 years
the BEA has twice revised the national income series to include many types of
intangible capital, such as software investment, R&D investment, and spending
on artistic originals. All of our figures and statistics in this paper already include
these forms of intangible capital.
Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2005) classify intangible capital into three categories: (i) computerized information, which includes software and databases
(ii) innovative property, which includes investment in R&D and artistic originals, and (iii) economic competencies, which include brand equity, advertising,
marketing, firm specific human capital, and worker training. While much of categories (i) and (ii) are already capitalized in the GDP accounts, category (iii) is
largely uncapitalized, and is by far the largest category of intangible capital according to Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2005). The BEA is considering adding
a number of categories to intangible investment, including computer design services, architectural and engineering services, management consulting services,
advertising, and marketing research.
A key question, however, is whether all of these activities should be con36

8

OTHER EXPLANATIONS FOR THE PUZZLES

sidered as capital investment. In Corrado and Hulten’s framework, “any outlay
that is intended to increase future rather than current consumption is treated as
a capital investment.” From a firm’s point of view, spending money in period
t to increase market share in period t + 1, is indeed investment, and would
be classified as such by Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2009). However, from a
macroeconomic point of view, this “intangible capital” does not lead to future
production or output, it is simply a shift in output from one firm to another. In
fact, there is a very close correspondence between Corrado and Hulten’s third
category of intangible capital and market power, branding, and product differentiation: in other words, the ”unmeasured” intangible investment may have been
an investment in creating the very ”non-zero-rent” economy which is the subject
of this paper.
We favor a different interpretation of Corrado and Hulten’s third category
(spending on economic competencies), rather than interpreting it as intangible
investment. Because spending on these categories does not, and will not, contribute to the production of goods, we argue they should not be counted as investment spending and accumulated into the capital stock. For this reason, we term
this spending “non-productive intangible investment”. While from a firm’s point
of view there may be little difference between investing in a marketing campaign
and investing in a new factory, from an economic accounting point of view there
is a difference: marketing spending will not ever lead to an increase in the productive capacity of a firm. This suggests that there must be a distinction between
a firm’s financial accounting, where it makes a lot of sense to accumulate this
intangible investment in capital, and in national economic accounting, in which
we argue it makes less sense.
We can include this non-productive intangible spending in our model. If we
assume this NPI spending is done by final goods firms, aggregate profits would
then be given by by Πt = µtµ−1
Yt − N P It . This non-productive spending is one
t
way to make quantitative sense of the the large increases in markups estimated
by De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017). If the increase in markups estimated by De
Loecker was also accompanied by an increase in the share of corporate income
spent on non-productive intangibles, there would be a much smaller measured
effect of these markups on Tobin’s Q, the average return, and the measured labor
share.

8.3

Labor bargaining power

An alternative, and complimentary, hypothesis of what is driving the changes in
the five macro trends is that there has been a decrease in labor bargaining power
over the time period. In this story, the ability of firms to outsource production
abroad or to contracting firms, the decline of labor unions, and the rise of dominant firms has lead to a reduction in the bargaining power of workers (see, for
example, Weil (2014), Elsby, Hobijn and Şahin (2013), Dube and Kaplan (2010),
Stiglitz (2015a) and Abdih and Danninger (2017)). To explore this hypothesis,
we add a reduced form version of labor bargaining power. The pure profits of the
37

8

OTHER EXPLANATIONS FOR THE PUZZLES

Figure 8: Profit distribution of final goods firms
firm, instead of being all being distributed to the shareholders, are now shared
with the workers.
Figure (8) displays how the pure profits of final goods firms are distributed.
Profits flow to two distinct groups, workers and shareholders of the final good
firm. We assume workers have some level of bargaining power, ξt , which is
taken as exogenous. This bargaining power may come about through a variety
of channels: labor unions, powerful managers and executives who are able to
bargain for their pay (Bebchuk and Fried (2004)), or matching frictions in the
labor market (Rogerson, Shimer and Wright (2005)). Due to this bargaining
power, workers receive a share ξt of aggregate profits.
The rest of the profits go to shareholders of final goods firms, who own
the rights to the remaining pure profits, as dividends. Aggregate dividends distributed to shareholders at time t are thus given by
dt = (1 − ξt )Πt .

(21)

If labor’s bargaining lower ξt decreases, dividends to shareholders will increase. There will thus be an increase in the value of shares, wealth-to-output,
and empirical Tobin’s Q. However, unlike in the case of an increase in pure
profits, there will not be any changes in capital or investment, since there is no
change in the wedge between the marginal product capital and its rental rate.42 In
addition, the share of income which is measured to go to labor would decrease,
42

This is a simplification. In many search and matching model, labor bargaining power has
a negative effect on investment, depending on the contract structure (see, for example, Grout
(1984), Arnsperger and Croix (1990), and Acemoglu and Shimer (1999)). In these models, a
decrease in the labor bargaining power would lead to an increase in investment – exactly the
opposite of the effect of an increase in markups.

38

9

CONCLUSION

since this measured amount includes the rents from bargaining power, and the
share of income measured to go to profits would increase.

8.4

Capital risk premium

Another factor that may be driving some of the five macro-trends is an increase
in the capital risk premium. In an analysis that also includes changes in markups,
the relative price of capital, and the capital share, Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2017) find that an increase in the capital risk premium may be driving
some of the trends, such as a stable average return on capital despite a decreasing risk free rate and a decrease in the labor share. This finding is not mutually
exclusive with our hypothesis of increasing markups: in many specifications of
their accounting exercise, Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2017) find moderate
increases in markups along with an increase in the capital risk premium.
We note that one of the results of our quantitative exercises is that there may
be a distinction between the risk premium on productive capital and that on pure
profits. In our baseline exercise, there is a large increase in the equity premium
(analogous to the equity premium measured in the data), while there is not an
increase in the capital risk premium.
In our reading, the data on the capital risk premium and the equity premium is somewhat mixed. Measures of the return on capital based on corporate bond rates (such as AAA, BAA, and BBB bonds) have decreased over the
time along with the risk-free rate. However, there has been an increase in bondspreads since the financial crisis. Furthermore, some measures of the equity risk
premium have increased. Duarte and Rosa (2015) compile 20 different measures of the equity risk premium using a variety of different models. The firstprinciple component of these measures has increased substantially since 2000.
The longer-term trend of the first principal component, however, is less apparent:
since 1980 it does not appear there has been a change in this measure of the ERP,
or in other combined measures such as the cross-sectional mean of the different
models.
One counterfactual implication of an increase in the capital-risk premium is
the effect on the wealth-to-output ratios. With an increase in capital risk premium stock prices should decrease (the profits are discounted at a higher rate),
and thus we would predict a decrease in the wealth-to-output ratio instead of
the large increase we have seen. Of course, if there are also contemporaneous
increases in dividends (perhaps through higher markups), this could offset this
tendency.

9

Conclusion

The analysis of this paper relies heavily on our estimates of the level of pure
profits and markups in the US economy. Unfortunately, there is a great deal of
uncertainty around these estimates. To estimate pure profits, we need a good
39

9

CONCLUSION

measure of both the capital and the risk premium in the economy. To estimate
markups directly, we need an estimate of marginal cost, which has always been a
difficult proposition. With these caveats in mind, we discuss some implications
of our results.
There are important welfare implications to an increase in market power.
Most directly, an increase in markups has a negative impact on GDP. Markups
are a wedge between the marginal product of labor and the wage, and the marginal
product of capital and its rental rate. With higher labor wedges, the wage is lower
and thus labor supply is lower, decreasing output. With higher capital wedges
there is lower investment and a lower capital to output ratio, which also lowers
output. There are also important indirect costs of monopoly power. As emphasized by Tullock (1967) and Krueger (1974), if there is competition for these
monopoly profits through rent seeking behavior, in general the welfare loss is
larger than in the absence of competition. If the value of pure profits is indeed in
the order of 20-30% of output, there is an enormous incentive for firms to compete to take, maintain, or extend these profits. In this paper we have emphasized
one particular aspect of “rent seeking” behavior, namely firms’ expenditures on
product differentiation, branding, and advertising in order to maintain market
share, which the literature has often called intangible investment. Of course
there is also the more traditional political rent seeking.
The increase in market power also has implications for income inequality.
With higher pure profits, workers receive a lower share of output and capitalists
a higher share. Since individuals with higher incomes receive a larger percentage of their income as capital income, and the poorest individuals generally do
not hold financial assets, this mechanism will tend to increase income inequality.
There is also a potential interaction of inequality with changes in labor bargaining power. Although it is unclear that the overall level of labor bargaining power
has decreased, there is some evidence that with the fall of unionization and the
rise of outsourcing the bargaining power of the poorest workers has decreased.
Meanwhile, the bargaining power of the highest educated superstars and CEOs
may have increased. If CEOs are taking a larger portion of the profits and workers a smaller portion, this would also tend to increase income inequality. An
increase in monopoly rents also has implications for wealth inequality. We have
seen how an increase in pure profits leads to a boom in stock prices, since equities hold the residual rights to corporate profits. Since those with the highest
level of wealth tend to hold a greater fraction in equities, and those with lower
wealth tend to hold a greater portion in housing, an increase in monopoly rents
would tend to increase wealth inequality.
The increase in market power has important implications for corporate tax
policy. Standard economic theory tells us that taxing pure profits is generally a
good idea (Guo and Lansing (1999)), while taxing capital income may not be a
good idea (Judd (1985)). As shown by Guo and Lansing (1999), the optimal tax
on corporate profits depends on the relative size of capital income to pure profits.
Even in an economy with a moderate profit share (on the order of 8%), relatively
high levels of corporate income taxes are optimal, especially with interest de40

REFERENCES
ductibility and accelerated depreciation. Traditionally, it has been thought that
the level of pure profits in the economy was small – a common citation is Basu
and Fernald (1997)’s estimate of 3%. With a profit share of 15-20%, as our
analysis suggests, high level of corporate taxes may be optimal.
Our model is also a theory of wealth accumulation in the US, and thus can
directly address some of the questions raised in Piketty’s “Capital in the 21st
Century”. A major criticism of Piketty’s theory of wealth-accumulation is that
the return on capital, the ‘r’ in r − g, is assumed to be constant even as capital
increases. With a standard, neoclassical production function, however, as capital
increases, the marginal product of capital and the return on capital must decrease.
Thus there would seem to be a natural force which would tend to counteract the
increase in wealth. The analysis in this paper suggests a possible reconciliation
between the view of Piketty and the views of the neoclassicals. With an increase
in monopoly profits, there can be an increase in wealth, without a corresponding
decrease in the average return on capital.
Finally, our work has implications for national macroeconomic income and
wealth accounting. Measuring the level of pure profits in the US economy is of
first order importance, and should be considered by national statistical agencies.
Non-productive intangible investment should not be capitalized.
The analysis in this paper has a number of testable implications beyond the
macro data on which have have formulated our theory. A direct implication of
our work is that firms in industries with higher markups should have a lower
labor share, higher Tobin’s Q, a higher average return on capital, and lower investment.

References
Abdih, Yasser, and Stephan Danninger. 2017. “What Explains the Decline of
the US Labor Share of Income? An Analysis of State and Industry Level
Data.”
Acemoglu, Daron, and Robert Shimer. 1999. “Holdups and efficiency with
search frictions.” International Economic Review, 40(4): 827–849.
Adjemian, Stéphane, Houtan Bastani, Michel Juillard, Ferhat Mihoubi,
George Perendia, Marco Ratto, and Sébastien Villemot. 2011. “Dynare:
Reference manual, version 4.”
Antras, Pol. 2004. “Is the US Aggregate Production Function Cobb-Douglas?
New Estimates of the Elasticity of Substitution.” Contributions in Macroeconomics, 4(1): 1–34.
Arnsperger, Christian, and David Croix. 1990. “WAGE BARGAINING WITH A PRICE-SETTING FIRM.” Bulletin of Economic Research,
42(4): 285–298.
41

REFERENCES
Auclert, Adrien, and Matthew Rognlie. 2016. “Inequality and aggregate demand.” Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F Katz, Christina Patterson, John
Van Reenen, et al. 2017. “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.” Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the long run: A potential
resolution of asset pricing puzzles.” The Journal of Finance, 59(4): 1481–
1509.
Barkai, Simcha. 2016. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.” Mimeo. University of Chicago.
Barney, Jay. 1991. “Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage.” Journal of management, 17(1): 99–120.
Basu, Susanto, and John G Fernald. 1997. “Returns to scale in US production:
Estimates and implications.” Journal of political economy, 105(2): 249–283.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, and Jesse M Fried. 2004. “Stealth compensation via
retirement benefits.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bilbiie, Florin O, Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J Melitz. 2012. “Endogenous
entry, product variety, and business cycles.” Journal of Political Economy,
120(2): 304–345.
Bragdon, Joseph H, Stephen J Redding, and Peter K Schott. 2010.
“Multiple-product firms and product switching.” The American Economic Review, 100(1): 70–97.
Brun, Lı́dia, and Ignacio González. 2017. “Tobin’s Q and Inequality.”
Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.
2017. “Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Premia: Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning Yields, and Factor
Shares.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Caldara, Dario, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Juan F Rubio-Ramirez, and
Wen Yao. 2012. “Computing DSGE models with recursive preferences and
stochastic volatility.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 15(2): 188–206.
Cochrane, John H. 2009. Asset Pricing:(Revised Edition). Princeton university
press.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 2005. “Measuring capital
and technology: an expanded framework.” In Measuring capital in the new
economy. 11–46. University of Chicago Press.

42

REFERENCES
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 2009. “Intangible capital
and US economic growth.” Review of income and wealth, 55(3): 661–685.
Croce, Mariano Massimiliano. 2014. “Long-run productivity risk: A new hope
for production-based asset pricing?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 66: 13–
31.
Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda.
2016. “Where Has All the Skewness Gone? The Decline in High-Growth
(Young) Firms in the US.” European Economic Review, 86: 4–23.
Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P Giannoni, and Andrea
Tambalotti. 2017. “Safety, liquidity, and the natural rate of interest.”
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market Power and the
Macroeconomic Implications.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dorn, David, Lawrence F Katz, Christina Patterson, John Van Reenen, et al.
2017. “Concentrating on the Fall of the Labor Share.” National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Duarte, Fernando, and Carlo Rosa. 2015. “The Equity Risk Premium: A Review of Models.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review,
21(2): 39.
Dube, Arindrajit, and Ethan Kaplan. 2010. “Does outsourcing reduce wages
in the low-wage service occupations? Evidence from janitors and guards.”
ILR Review, 63(2): 287–306.
Eggertsson, Gauti B, Neil R Mehrotra, and Jacob A Robbins. 2017. “A
Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation.” National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2013. “The Decline of the
US Labor Share.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 44(2): 1–63.
Epstein, Larry G, and Stanley E Zin. 1989. “Substitution, risk aversion, and
the temporal behavior of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 937–969.
Gomme, Paul, B Ravikumar, and Peter Rupert. 2011. “The return to capital
and the business cycle.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(2): 262–278.
Gomme, Paul, B. Ravikumar, and Peter Rupert. 2015. “Secular Stagnation
and Returns on Capital.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Synopses, , (19).
Gonzalez, Ignacio, and Pedro Trivın. 2016. “Finance and the Global Decline
of the Labour Share.”
43

REFERENCES
Grout, Paul A. 1984. “Investment and wages in the absence of binding contracts: A Nash bargaining approach.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 449–460.
Grullon, Gustavo, Yelena Larkin, and Roni Michaely. 2016. “Are US Industries Becoming More Concentrated?” Unpublished Working Paper.
Guo, Jang-Ting, and Kevin J Lansing. 1999. “Optimal taxation of capital income with imperfectly competitive product markets.” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 23(7): 967–995.
Gutierrez, German. 2017. “Investigating Global Labor and Profit Shares.”
Hall, Robert E. 2001. “The stock market and capital accumulation.” The American Economic Review, 91(5): 1185–1185.
Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. “Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 213–224.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C Williams. 2017. “Measuring the natural rate of interest: International trends and determinants.” Journal
of International Economics.
Jermann, Urban J. 1998. “Asset pricing in production economies.” Journal of
monetary Economics, 41(2): 257–275.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1985. “Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight
model.” Journal of public Economics, 28(1): 59–83.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. “The Global Decline of
the Labor Share.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 61–103.
Krueger, Anne O. 1974. “The political economy of the rent-seeking society.”
The American economic review, 64(3): 291–303.
Lindenberg, Eric B, and Stephen A Ross. 1981. “Tobin’s q ratio and industrial
organization.” Journal of business, 1–32.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and
aggregate industry productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6): 1695–1725.
Nekarda, Christopher J, and Valerie A Ramey. 2013. “The cyclical behavior
of the price-cost markup.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Oberholzer-Gee, Felix, and Dennis Yao. 2013. “Market imperfections and sustainable competitive advantage.”
Philippon, Thomas, and German Gutierrez. 2016. “Investment-less Growth:
An Empirical Investigation.” National Bureau of Economic Research 22897.
44

REFERENCES
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the 21st Century. Harvard University Press.
Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “Capital is back: Wealthincome ratios in rich countries 1700–2010.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1255–1310.
Porter, Michael E. 1996. “What is strategy.” HBR.
Rogerson, Richard, Robert Shimer, and Randall Wright. 2005. “Searchtheoretic models of the labor market: A survey.” Journal of economic literature, 43(4): 959–988.
Rognlie, Matthew. 2016. “Deciphering the fall and rise in the net capital
share: accumulation or scarcity?” Brookings papers on economic activity,
2015(1): 1–69.
Rudebusch, Glenn D, and Eric T Swanson. 2012. “The bond premium in a
dsge model with long-run real and nominal.” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 4(1): 105–143.
Salinger, Michael A. 1984. “Tobin’s q, unionization, and the concentrationprofits relationship.” the Rand journal of Economics, 15(2): 159–170.
Smirlock, Michael, Thomas Gilligan, and William Marshall. 1984. “Tobin’s
q and the Structure-Performance Relationship.” The American Economic Review, 74(5): 1051–1060.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2015a. “8. Inequality and Economic Growth.” The Political
Quarterly, 86(S1): 134–155.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2015b. “New Theoretical Perspectives on the Distribution of
Income and Wealth among Individuals: Part I. The Wealth Residual.” National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2016. “The Measurement of Wealth: Recessions, Sustainability and Inequality.” In Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics. 63–76.
Springer.
Summers, Larry. 2016. “Corporate profits are near record highs. Heres why
thatsa problem.” Washington Post, March (30), Link.
Summers, Larry. 2017. “Interview of Larry Summers.” Conversations with
Tyler.
The Economist. 2016. “The problem with profits.”
Tobin, James, William C Brainard, et al. 1976. “Asset markets and the cost of
capital.” Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University.

45

REFERENCES
Tullock, Gordon. 1967. “The welfare costs of tariffs, monopolies, and theft.”
Economic Inquiry, 5(3): 224–232.
Van Binsbergen, Jules H, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Ralph SJ Koijen,
and Juan Rubio-Ramı́rez. 2012. “The term structure of interest rates in a
DSGE model with recursive preferences.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
59(7): 634–648.
Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, and Orazio P Attanasio. 2003. “Stock-market
participation, intertemporal substitution, and risk-aversion.” The American
Economic Review, 93(2): 383–391.
Weil, David. 2014. The fissured workplace. Harvard University Press.

46

A

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

Online Appendix for
Kaldor and Piketty’s Facts: the Rise of Monopoly
Power in the United States
Gauti B. Eggertsson, Jacob A. Robbins, Ella Getz Wold

A
A.1

Full equations of model
Final goods firms

There is a unit mass of monopolistically competitive final goods firms that differentiate an intermediate good and resell it to consumers. The final good composite
is the CES aggregate of these differentiated final goods, which are indexed by i:
Z

1

ytf (i)

Yt =

Λt −1
Λt

t
 ΛΛ−1
t

di

.

0

Final goods firms set prices in each period, and face a demand curve that
−Λt

pt (i)
f
, where Λt is a time-varying
takes the following form: yt (i) = Yt Pt
measure of a firm’s market power. An increase in Λt decreases a firm’s market
power and lowers equilibrium markups. The nominal price index is defined as
Z

pt (i)

Pt =

1
 1−Λ

1
1−Λt

t

di

.

0

Each final goods producer uses ytm of intermediate goods to produce output,
according to a linear technology function ytf = ytm . A final goods firm chooses
real prices pPt (i)
and ytf (i) to maximize real profits, subject to the production and
t
demand constraints:
pint
pt (i) f
yt (i) − t ytf (i)
Pt
Pt

−Λt
pt (i)
subject to ytf (i) = Yt
,
Pt
max

pint

where Pt t is the price of the intermediate good taken as given by the firm.
The optimality condition for the real price of the firm’s good is a time-varying
markup over the price of the intermediate good:
pt (i)
Λt pint
pint
t
=
= µt t ,
Pt
Λ t − 1 Pt
Pt
where µt is the optimal markup of the firm.
A.1

(A.1)

A

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

Since the price of the intermediate good is the same, all final goods firms
pint
make the same pricing decisions, and thus pt (i) = Pt , yielding Pt t = µ1t .
Final goods firms have market power which allows them to set prices above
marginal costs. Market power is determined by the CES elasticity Λt , which
t
, i.e. markups µt , follow an AR(1)
determines markups. We posit that ΛΛt −1
process, given by
ln(µt ) = (1 − ρµ )ln(µ̄) + ρµ ln(µt−1 ) + µt .

(A.2)

The long run level of markups (determined by the long-run level of Λ) in the
economy is given by µ̄. Final goods firms make aggregate profits equal to
µt − 1
Yt .
(A.3)
µt
Pure profits go to shareholders of final goods firms, who own the rights to the
economic rents, as dividends. Aggregate dividends distributed to shareholders
at time t are thus given by
Πt =

dft = Πt .

(A.4)

Since all firms make identical profits, each firm receives an equal fraction of
aggregate dividends.

A.2

Long Run Risk

Let At denote the level of productivity, and lowercase letter denote log-units.
The growth rate or productivity is given by:
∆at+1 = ζ + xt + σa a,t+1
xt = ρxt−1 + σx x,t


  

a,t+1
0
1 ρxa
˜ iid N
,
x,t+1
0
ρxa 1

(A.5)
(A.6)
(A.7)

Here xt is the “long run risk” of productivity growth, and a,t+1 is the short
run risk.

A.3

Consumer’s problem

The model mainly follows Caldara et al. (2012) and Croce (2014). An infinitely
lived individual has Epstein-Zin utility given by
h
1 i θ
 1−γ
1−γ θ 1−γ
ν
1−ν
θ
+ βD Et Vt+1
,
Vt = (1 − β) ct (At−1 (1 − Lt ))

(A.8)

where the time discount factor is β, the labor supply coefficient is ν, γ is the risk
aversion parameter, and θ is defined as
A.2

A

θ=

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

1−γ
.
1 − ψ1

(A.9)

In this last expression, ψ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. The term
Dt is an additional wedge between utility in period t+1 and period t, beyond the
time discount rate of β. Individuals maximize utility subject a series of budget
constraints,
f
i
ct + Xti St+1
+ Xtf St+1
= wt Lt + dit Sti + dft Stf

+∆t+1 Xtf

+ (1 −

∆t )Xtf Stf

+

(A.10)

Xti Sti .

On the left hand side of the budget constraint, individuals use their income to puri
chase either consumption, shares of intermediate good firms (Xti St+1
), or shares
f f
of final goods firms (Xt St+1 ). On the right hand side of the budget equation,
agents receive income from a variety of sources:
1. Labor income wt Lt
2. Dividends from intermediate goods firms dit Sti
3. Dividends from final goods firms dft Stf
4. IPO issued securities of final goods firms ∆t+1 Xtf
5. Remaining share value of final goods firms. Agents come into the period
holding Stf shares of the security. Because of firm exit, a fraction ∆t of
shares lose their value, and thus the value remaining is (1 − ∆t )Xtf Stf .
6. Remaining share value of intermediate goods firms, Xti Sti
Due to the nature of the recursive utility, we can write the optimal solution
as a recursive function
Vt (Sti , Stf ) = maxct ,Lt ,S i

f
t+1 ,St+1

h
 1−γ
(1 − β) cνt (At−1 (1 − Lt ))1−ν θ +
θ

 θ1  1−γ
f
i
βD Et Vt+1 (St+1
, St+1 )1−γ
(A.11)

f
i
s.t. ct + Xti St+1
+ Xtf St+1
= wt Lt + dit Sti + dft Stf

+∆t+1 Xtf + (1 − ∆t )Xtf Stf + Xti Sti .
From this equation, we can derive the first order conditions for optimization.
Setting up the Lagrangean and differentiating with respect to ct , we have
 1−γ 1
∂L
1− 1−γ
: (1 − β)Vt θ cνt (At−1 (1 − Lt ))1−ν θ ν = λt .
∂ct
ct
A.3

(A.12)

A

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

Taking first order conditions with respect to Lt , we have
 1−γ
1
∂L
1− 1−γ
: (1 − β)Vt θ cνt (At−1 (1 − Lt ))1−ν θ (1 − ν)
= wt λt .
∂ct
(1 − Lt )
(A.13)
Combining the first order conditions with respect to labor and with respect
to consumption, we have
ct
(1 − ν)
= wt ,
ν (1 − Lt )

(A.14)

f
, we have
and taking the first order condition with respect to St+1

∂L
f
∂St+1

f
: Xtf λt = βEt [λt+1 ((1 − ∆t+1 )Xt+1
+ dft+1 )].

(A.15)

Now, taking the first order condition with respect to ct+1 , we have


Et

−γ
Vt+1
(1

−

1− 1−γ
β)Vt+1 θ

1
∂L
1− 1−γ
1−γ θ −1
: Vt θ βD Et Vt+1
×
∂ct+1

 1−γ
1
ν
1−ν
θ
ν
ct+1 (At (1 − Lt+1 ))
,
ct+1

where in the last step we make a substitution by forwarding
Canceling redundant terms, we get

mt+1

A.4

∂Vt /∂ct+1
=
= βD
∂Vt /∂ct



ct+1
ct

 ν(1−γ)
−1 
θ

At (1 − Lt+1 )
At−1 (1 − Lt )

∂
∂ct

(A.16)

one period.

 (1−ν)(1−γ)
θ

1−γ
Vt+1
1−γ
Et Vt+1
(A.17)

Intermediate Goods Firm’s Problem

Representative intermediate goods firms use labor Lt and capital Kt to produce
intermediate goods Ytm according to the production function
σ
 σ−1

σ−1
σ−1
,
Ytm = αKt σ + (1 − α)(At Lt ) σ

(A.18)

where σ is the production elasticity of substitution. σ = 1 corresponds to CobbDouglas. The firm finances part of its investment It through retained earnings
REt and issues shares to cover the remaining part,
i
It = Xti (St+1
− Sti ) + REt .

(A.19)

It distributes the excess of its profits over retained earnings to its shareholders as
a dividend,
A.4

!1− θ1

A

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

dit Sti =

1 m
Y − wt Lt − REt .
µt t

(A.20)

dit Sti =

1
Yt − wt Lt − REt .
µt

(A.21)

Since Yt = Ytm , we have

Investment increases the firm’s future stock of capital according to
Kt+1 = Φ(It /Kt )Kt + (1 − δ)Kt ,

(A.22)

where δ is the rate of depreciation and adjustment costs Φ(·) are a positive concave function. The adjustment costs function is given by
a1
Φ(It /Kt ) =
1−ξ



It
Kt

1−ξ
+ a2 .

(A.23)

Following Jermann (1998), we will choose the adjustment costs parameters so
that the steady state ratio of investment to capital is not affected. In a model with
productivity growth, the investment to capital ratio is given by KI = (δ + eζ − 1).
From equation (A.22), in the steady state with productivity growth we have that
K(δ + eζ − 1) = Φ(I/K)K, thus we must have in the steady state Φ(I/K) =
(δ + eζ − 1). Note that this also ensures that if a firm replaces depreciation and
accounts for growth, adjustment costs are zero.
In addition, we also need q to be 1 in the steady state, and thus Φ0 (I/K) = 1.
These conditions imply the following two conditions:
1−ξ
a1
δ + eζ − 1
+ a2 = (δ + eζ − 1)
1−ξ
a1 (δ + eζ − 1)−ξ = 1.
Thus we have that a1 = (δ + eζ − 1)ξ , and a2 = (1 −

A.4.1

1
)(δ
(1−ξ)

(A.24)
(A.25)
+ eζ − 1).

Computation of the intermediate good firm’s value

Intermediate goods maximize the expected value of cash flow to the shareholders, discounted by the stochastic discount factor of individuals. Defining cash
flow, CFti = µ1t Yt − wt Lt − It , the value of the intermediate good firm is given
by
"∞
#
X
i
s−t s−t λs
i
V t = Et
β D
CFs .
(A.26)
λt
s=t
Firms maximize (A.26) subject to (A.22). The first order conditions are given
by:

A.5

A

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

∂
1
: 0
= qt ,
∂It Φ (It /Kt )

(A.27)

where qt is the the Lagrange multiplier of the maximization problem. Continuing, we have


∂
λt+1
1 0
: −qt + Et βD
f (Kt+1 )+
∂Kt+1
λt µt+1







It+1
It+1
It+1
0
+Φ
+ (1 − δ)
.
qt+1 −Φ
Kt+1
Kt+1
Kt+1
Then, using the fact that Φ0 (It+1 /Kt+1 ) =

1
qt+1

and

1

 σ−1
−1
σ−1
σ−1
σ
F 0 (Kt+1 ) = α(Kt+1 ) σ + (1 − α)(At+1 Lt+1 ) σ
,
αKt+1

(A.28)

we have that


1
 σ−1
−1
σ−1
σ−1
λt+1
1 
σ
qt = Et βD
α(Kt+1 ) σ + (1 − α)(At+1 Lt+1 ) σ
αKt+1
λt µt+1
(A.29)




 
It+1
It+1
−
+ qt+1 Φ
+ (1 − δ)
.
Kt+1
Kt+1
Finally, we have
1
 σ−1
−1
σ−1
σ−1
∂
1 
σ
σ
α(Kt )
+ (1 − α)(At Lt )
:
(1 − α)Lt σ = wt .
∂Lt µt

A.5

(A.30)

Asset pricing implications

As usual, the return on the risk free rate is given by
Rt =

1
Et [mt+1 ]

(A.31)

The return for investing in intermediate goods firms is given by
i
Rt+1
=

i
i
i
i
dit+1 St+1
dit+1 + Xt+1
+ Xt+1
St+1
=
.
i
Xti St+1
Xti

i
Now, using the fact that qt Kt+1 = Xt St+1
, we have

A.6

(A.32)

A

i
Rt+1

=

1
Y
µt t+1

=

1
Ym
µt t+1

i
i
− wt+1 Lt+1 − REt+1 + Xt+1
St+1

− wt+1 Lt+1 − It+1 +

=

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

qt Kt+1
i
i
i
)
− St+1
Xt+1 (St+2

i
i
St+1
+ Xt+1

qt Kt+1
1
Y − wt+1 Lt+1 − It+1 + qt+1 Kt+2
µt t+1
qt Kt+1

(A.33)

.

As usual, we have the asset pricing equation
i
1 = Et [mt+1 Rt+1
].

(A.34)

The return for investing in final goods firms is given by

f
Rt+1

=

f
f
f
dft+1 St+1
+ (1 − ∆t+1 )St+1
Xt+1
f
St+1
Xtf

=

µt+1 −1
Yt+1
µt+1

f
+ (1 − ∆t+1 )Xt+1

Xtf
(A.35)

A.6

Equilibrium

An equilibrium is a set of quantities: {ct , Kt , Lt , It , Yt , Ytm , dit , dft }∞
t=0 , a set of
f
i
∞
prices {wt , Xt , Xt , qt , mt }t=0 , and a set of exogenous processes {µt , At , xt , ∆t }∞
t=0
that jointly satisfy:
1. Consumption maximizes (A.8) subject to (A.10)
2. The stochastic discount factor is given by (A.17)
3. Intermediate firms maximize (A.26) subject to (A.22)
4. Intermediate good production is given by (A.18), and final good production is given by Yt = Ytm
5. Aggregate profits of final goods firms are given by (A.3), and aggregate
dividends are given by (A.4)
6. The price of securities satisfies (A.15)
7. The wage is given by (A.30)
8. The stochastic processes for µt , At , and xt are given by (A.2), (A.5), and
(A.6)
9. The paths for ∆t is exogenously specified
While this model is not stationary, we can make it so by applying a standard
transformation: divide all quantities (except labor) by At−1 , as well as wages
and the price of securities Xti and Xtf .
A.7

A

A.7

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

Full Equations of Model

Now, collecting the equations of the model, we have
h

Vt = (1 − β)

cνt (At−1 (1


mt+1 = βD

ct+1
ct

1−ν

− Lt ))

 ν(1−γ)
−1 
θ

 1−γ
θ

1−γ

+ βD Et (Vt+1 )

At (1 − Lt+1 )
At−1 (1 − Lt )

 (1−ν)(1−γ)
θ

θ
 θ1 i 1−γ

1−γ
Vt+1
1−γ
Et Vt+1

(A.36)

!1− θ1
(A.37)

(1 − ν)
ct
= wt
ν (1 − Lt )
1
Φ0 (It /Kt )

qt = Et mt+1



1 
µt+1

α(Kt+1 )

−

σ−1
σ

(A.38)

= qt ,

(A.39)

+ (1 − α)(At+1 Lt+1 )

It+1
Kt+1



σ−1
σ

1
 σ−1

(A.40)


 
It+1
+ qt+1 Φ
+ (1 − δ)
Kt+1

1
 σ−1
−1
σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1 
σ
σ
α(Kt )
+ (1 − α)(At Lt )
(1 − α)At σ Lt σ = wt
µt

Ytm



σ−1
σ

= αKt

−1
σ
αKt+1

+ (1 − α)(At Lt )

σ−1
σ

σ
 σ−1

(A.41)

(A.42)

Yt = Ytm

(A.43)

Yt = ct + It

(A.44)

Kt+1 = Φ(It /Kt )Kt + (1 − δ)Kt ,

(A.45)

∆at+1 = ζ + xt + σa a,t+1
xt = ρxt−1 + σx x,t

(A.46)
(A.47)

ln(µt ) = (1 − ρµ )ln(µ̄) + ρµ ln(µt−1 ) + µt .

(A.48)

A.8

A

Rt =
i
Rt+1

=

1
Y
µt t+1

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

1
Et [mt+1 ]

(A.49)

− wt+1 Lt+1 − It+1 + qt+1 Kt+2
qt Kt+1
dft =

.

µt − 1
Yt
µt

(A.51)

f
Xtf = Et [mt+1 ((1 − ∆t+1 )Xt+1
+ dft+1 )].

f
Rt+1

=

µt+1 −1
Yt+1
µt+1

(A.50)

(A.52)

f
+ (1 − ∆t+1 )Xt+1

(A.53)

Xtf

The variables are V, Y, Y m , c, L, m, w, q, K, I, a, x, µ, R, Ri , Rf , dft , X f . Thus
there are 18 equations and 18 variables.

A.8

Making the model stationary

We now make a standard transformation by dividing the following variables by
At−1 : V, Y, Y m , c, w, K, I, X f , X i , df , di . We then have the following set of
equations:
h
1 i θ
 1−γ
1−γ
∆at
1−γ θ 1−γ
ν
1−ν
)
(
θ
θ
βD Et (Vt+1 )
+e
Vt = (1 − β) ct ((1 − Lt ))
(A.54)


mt+1 = βD

ct+1
ct

 ν(1−γ)
−1 
θ

(1 − Lt+1 )
(1 − Lt )

 (1−ν)(1−γ)
θ

1−γ
Vt+1
1−γ
Et Vt+1

!1− θ1

(1−γ)
e( θ −1)∆at

(A.55)
(1 − ν)
ct
= wt
ν (1 − Lt )
1
Φ0 (It /Kt )

= qt ,

(A.56)
(A.57)



1
 σ−1
−1
σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1 
∆at+1
σ
σ
σ
σ
qt = Et mt+1
α(Kt+1 )
+ (1 − α)e
(Lt+1 )
αKt+1
µt+1
(A.58)


 


It+1
It+1
−
+ qt+1 Φ
+ (1 − δ)
Kt+1
Kt+1
A.9

A

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

1
 σ−1
−1
σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
σ−1
1 
α(Kt ) σ + (1 − α)e σ ∆at (Lt ) σ
(1−α)e σ ∆at Lt σ = wt (A.59)
µt

Ytm

σ−1
σ



= αKt

+ (1 − α)e

(Lt )

σ−1
σ

σ
 σ−1

(A.61)

Yt = ct + It

(A.62)

Kt+1 e∆at = Φ(It /Kt )Kt + (1 − δ)Kt ,

(A.63)

∆at+1 = ζ + xt + σa a,t+1
xt = ρxt−1 + σx x,t

(A.64)
(A.65)

ln(µt ) = (1 − ρµ )ln(µ̄) + ρµ ln(µt−1 ) + µt .

(A.66)

1
Et [mt+1 ]

1
Y
µt t+1

− wt+1 Lt+1 − It+1 + qt+1 Kt+2 e∆at+1
qt Kt+1
dft =

(A.67)

.

µt − 1
Yt
µt

f
Xtf = Et [mt+1 ((1 − ∆t+1 )Xt+1
e∆at + dft+1 e∆at )].

f
Rt+1

A.9

(A.60)

Yt = Ytm

Rt =
i
Rt+1
=

σ−1
∆at
σ

=

f
dft+1 e∆at + (1 − ∆t+1 )Xt+1
e∆at

Xtf

(A.68)
(A.69)
(A.70)

(A.71)

Steady State

In the steady state, all transformed variables are constant.
We begin by finding steady state investment. From equation (A.63), and
using the assumed properties of the Φ(·) function, in particular that in the steady
state Φ(·) = δ + eζ + 1 we have that KI = δ + eζ − 1. Next, using the fact that
(1−γ)
m̄ = βDe( θ −1)ζ ,

from equation (A.58) we have that
A.10

(A.72)

A


1 = m̄ 

1
µ̄


α

K̄
L̄

FULL EQUATIONS OF MODEL

1
! σ−1

 σ−1
σ
+ (1 − α)e

σ−1
ζ
σ


α



 −1
σ

K̄
L̄

+ 1 − δ  . (A.73)

Rearranging, we have


K̄
L̄

"



σ−1
ζ
σ

= 

1
m̄

(1 − α)e
 σ−1
−α
− 1 + δ αµ

σ
# σ−1

.

(A.74)

Continuing, from (A.60) and (A.62) we have that
c̄
Ȳ
K̄
= − (eζ + δ − 1) ,
L̄
L̄
L̄

(A.75)

where
Ȳ
=
L̄


α

K̄
L̄

σ
! σ−1

 σ−1
σ
+ (1 − α)e

σ−1
ζ
σ

.

(A.76)

Now, combining the definition for the wage with the first order condition for
labor, and rearranging, we have
 
(1 − ν)
1
c̄
M ¯P L =
,
(A.77)
µ̄
ν (1 − L̄)
where

M ¯P L = (1 − α)e

σ−1
ζ
σ


α

K̄
L̄

1
! σ−1

 σ−1
σ
+ (1 − α)e

σ−1
ζ
σ

.

(A.78)

Rearranging, we have
 
1
M ¯P L.
µ̄

c̄
ν (1 − L̄)
=
1 − ν L̄
L̄

(A.79)

Now combining (A.75) and (A.79), we have
Ȳ
K̄
ν (1 − L̄)
− (eζ + δ − 1) =
1 − ν L̄
L̄
L̄

 
1
M ¯P L.
µ̄

(A.80)

Solving for L̄, we have

L̄ =

ν
1−ν
Ȳ
L̄

−

(eζ

+δ−

 

M ¯P L

1
µ̄

1) K̄
L̄

+

Turning now to the value function, we have
A.11

ν
1−ν

 
1
µ̄

M ¯P L

.

(A.81)

B


V̄ = 

B

PROOFS

θ

ν

(1 − β) c̄ ((1 − L̄))
1−γ
1 − e( θ )ζ β

1−ν

 1−γ
 1−γ
θ

.

(A.82)

Proofs

B.1

Comparative statics of markups

Proposition 3.

∂ K̄
L̄
∂ µ̄

< 0. If steady-state markups µ̄ increase, the steady state

capital-to-labor ratio

K̄
L̄

will decrease.

Proof. Equation A.74 gives the steady state level of the capital-to-labor ratio.
Differentiating with respect to µ̄, we have

∂ K̄
L̄
=
∂ µ̄

"

1
m̄

−1+δ

 µ̄ σ−1
α

(1 − α)e


−α

# 2σ−1
1−σ

σ−1
ζ
σ

1
−1+δ
m̄

σ
(σ − 1)
1−σ

(A.83)

 σ−1
1
1
µ̄σ−2
σ−1 .
α
(1 − α)e σ ζ

σ
is negative, but not both.
This term is negative, since either (σ − 1) or 1−σ
Note that both bracketed terms are positive: the first, because the capital-to-labor
ratio is positive; the second, because the steady state real interest rate cannot be
negative.

Corollary 1.
ratio

K̄
Ȳ

∂ K̄
Ȳ
∂ µ̄

< 0. If steady-state markups µ̄ increase, the capital-to-output

will decrease.

Proof. We have K̄
= K̄
· ȲL̄ . We can write the elasticity of the capital-to-output
Ȳ
L̄
ratio with respect to markups as
 K̄ ,µ̄ ≡
Ȳ

∂ K̄
∂ K̄ µ̄
∂ L̄ µ̄
µ̄
Ȳ
· K̄ = L̄ · K̄ + Ȳ · L̄ .
∂ µ̄
∂ µ̄
∂ µ̄
Ȳ

From equation A.76, we see that
 K̄ ,µ̄
Ȳ

∂ ȲL̄
∂ µ̄

L̄

=

(A.84)

Ȳ

∂ ȲL̄ ∂ K̄
L̄
∂ K̄ ∂ µ̄

. We thus have
"
#
L̄ K̄
∂ K̄
∂
µ̄
Ȳ L̄
= L̄ · K̄ 1 + K̄
.
L̄
∂ µ̄
∂
L̄
L̄ Ȳ
L̄

From equation A.76, we have that

A.12

(A.85)

B

∂ ȲL̄
∂ K̄
L̄

K̄
L̄
L̄
Ȳ

−α

PROOFS

  σ−1
σ
K̄
L̄

,
=    σ−1
σ−1
σ
K̄
ζ
α L̄
+ (1 − α)e σ

(A.86)

which is negative and less than 1 in absolute value, thus the term in square brackets in equation A.85 is positive. Since we have already shown

∂ K̄
L̄
∂ µ̄

< 0,  K̄ ,µ̄ < 0.
Ȳ

¯

Corollary 2.

∂ ȲI
∂ µ̄

< 0. If steady-state markups µ̄ increase, the steady state

investment-to-output ratio

I¯
Ȳ

will decrease.

Proof. This follows from equation 18. Since investment-to-output is proportional to the capital-to-output ratio, if this ratio declines, the investment ratio
will as well.
S
> 0. ∂LS
< 0, if σ ≤ 1. ∂KS
< 0, if σ ≥ 1. An increase
Proposition 4. ∂P
∂ µ̄
∂ µ̄
∂ µ̄
in steady state markups will increase the steady state profit share. If σ ≤ 1, an
increase in steady state markups will decrease the steady state labor share. if
σ ≥ 1, an increase in markups will decrease the capital share.

, an increase in markups
Proof. Since the profit share is given by P S = µ̄−1
µ̄
will increase the profit share. Thus the combined labor and capital share will
decrease. From the first order conditions of the firm, the ratio of the rental rate
of capital to the wage is given by
  −1
α
K̄ σ
rk
=
.
w
1 − α L̄

(A.87)

, the left hand side is the ratio of the capital share
Multiplying both sides by K̄
L̄
to the labor share, and thus we have
  σ−1
KS
K̄ σ
α
.
=
LS
1 − α L̄

(A.88)

Thus if σ < 1, a decrease in K̄
will lead to a decrease in the labor share relaL̄
tive to the capital share. When markups increase, there is a decrease in the combined labor and capital share. In addition, since there is a decrease in K̄
, labor
L̄
takes a smaller portion of this decreased overall share. Thus the labor share unambiguously declines. Similarly, when σ > 1, the capital share unambiguously
declines with an increase in markups. If σ = 1, production is Cobb-Douglas,
and the relative factor shares of capital and labor are unchanged by the capitalto-output ratio. In this case, both the capital and labor share unambiguously
decline with an increase in markups.
Proposition 5.

∂Q
∂ µ̄

> 0. If markups increase, Tobin’s Q will increase.
A.13

B
f

PROOFS

f

Y
Proof. We can write steady state Q as Q = 1 + XK = 1 + XY K
. From equation
f
14, if markups increase there will be an increase in XY , and since there will also
Y
, there will be an increase in Tobin’s Q.
be an increase in K
∂AR
∂ µ̄

Proposition 6.

> 0. If markups increase, the average return will increase.

Proof. This follows from equation 16. When markups increase, the profit share
increases and the capital-to-output ratio will decrease, thus the average return
will increase.

B.2

Comparative statics of D

Proposition 7.
return.

∂AR
∂D

< 0. An increase in D will lead to a decrease in the average

Proof. From equation A.72, an increase in D will increase m̄, which will lower
the steady state interest rate r̄, since r̄ = m̄1 . From equation A.74, a decrease in
r will also increase the capital-to-output ratio. Then from equation 16, this will
lower the average return.
∂K

∂K

Y
> 0, ∂DL > 0. An increase in D will lead to an increase in
Proposition 8. ∂D
the capital-to-output ratio and the capital-to-labor ratio.

Proof. An increase in D will decrease r. From equation A.74 and the further
derivations, a decrease in r will increase the capital-to-labor ratio and the capitalto-output ratio.
∂

I

Y
Corollary 3. ∂D
> 0. An increase in D will lead to an increase in the investmentto-output ratio.

Proof. This follows from equation 18. Since investment-to-output is proportional to the capital-to-output ratio, if this ratio increases, the investment ratio
will as well.
> 0 if σ < 1. An increase in D will lead to an increase in
Proposition 9. ∂LS
∂D
the labor share if σ < 1. If σ > 1, ∂LS
< 0.
∂D
Proposition 10. ∂KS
< 0 if σ < 1. An increase in D will lead to a decrease in
∂D
the capital share if σ < 1. If σ > 1, ∂KS
> 0.
∂D
Proof. This follows directly from equation A.88. If σ < 1, an increase in K̄
L̄
will lead to a increase in the labor share relative to the capital share. When D
increases, there is an increase in the capital-to-labor ratio, and the labor share
relative to the capital share increases. Since there is no change in the combined
labor and capital share, the labor share unambiguously increases, and the capital share declines. Similarly, when σ > 1, the capital share unambiguously
increases with an increase in D, and the labor share decreases. If σ = 1, production is Cobb-Douglas, and the relative factor shares of capital and labor are
unchanged by the capital-to-output ratio. In this case, both the capital and labor
share do not respond to a change in D.
A.14

C

Proposition 11.
to-output.

∂W
Y
∂D

TRANSITION DYNAMICS

> 0. An increase in D will lead to an increase in wealth-

Proof. From equation 14, a decrease in interest rates will lead to an increase in
the ratio of the security value to output. This result, combined with an increase in
the capital-to-output ratio, leads to an increase in the wealth-to-output ratio.

C

Transition dynamics

In this section we discuss the dynamics of our model economy. Although the
main purpose of this paper is to explain long term trends in the macroeconomic
data, a separate (and important) question is to try and explain the transition dynamics of the economy over the past forty years. As the data of section 2 shows,
although many of the data series show a fairly smooth transition from 1970 to
the present, there are exceptions, such as the spike in Tobin’s Q in the late 1990s.
The biggest challenge in modeling these changes is in determining the stochastic process under which they were generated. Are these increases in markups a
one-time occurrence? Or is there a stochastic process under which the permanent component of markups can change? A separate, but related, challenge in
modeling dynamics is to determine the timing when agents are aware that there
has been a shift in the economy. If agents realized starting in 1980 that profits
would increase in the future, then stock prices (and Q) should jump in 1980. If
instead there was a slow process or learning, we would see a graduate increase
in Tobin’s Q.
We consider four types of transition dynamics, leaving more detailed models
of the transition to future work. First, we will compute impulse response functions of our economy to a shock to markups, in order to examine the dynamics
of the model and the speed of convergence. Second, we solve the model around
its 2015 steady state, and then simulate the model, taking as initial conditions
the steady state value of all variables in 1970. Third, we feed in a smooth series
of markup shocks, so that the level of markups moves from its empirical level in
1970 to its level in 2015. Finally, we will feed in a series of markup shocks so
that the time series for markups matches the time series of markups in the data.
We examine the impulse response function of the model to a one-time shock
to markups, µt . Figure A.1 shows the model’s response to a one standard deviation increase in markups, which is an increase of .5%. The model responds as
we would expect: there is an increase in the profit share of .44 p.p., and a corresponding combined decrease in the combined labor and capital share of .44 p.p..
There is an increase in the wealth-to-output ratio of .014 (.52%), an increase of
.006 (.5%) in Tobin’s Q, and an increase in the average return of .2 p.p.. Finally, there is a decrease in the investment-to-output ratio of .2 p.p. (1.4%). The
transition to the new steady state is relatively fast: after a temporary increase in
markups, the effects have largely dissipated after 20 months.
In the second exercise, we solve the policy and transition functions of the
A.15

C
10 -3

6

Markup

10 -3 Profit share

5

TRANSITION DYNAMICS
10 -3 Labor share

-1

4

-2

3

-3

4

2

2
0

10

20

Wealth to output

0.015

-4
0

10

20

-3
Empirical
Tobins Q
10

8

0

10
10 -3

2

20

Avr. ret.

6
0.01

1.5
4

0.005

2
0

10

20

10 -3Inv. to output

0

1
0

10

20

Capital to output

0.01

0

-1

10

20

10 -4 Cap. share

-4
-6

0.005
-2

-8

-3

0
0

10

20

-10
0

10

20

0

10

20

Figure A.1: Impulse response to increase in markups of 1 s.d. (≈ .5%)
Markup

0

Profit share

0

Labor share

0.06

-0.05

0.04
-0.05

-0.1

0.02

-0.15

-0.1
0

50

100

150

Wealth to output

0.2

0
0

0

0

-0.05

-0.2

-0.1

50

100

150

Empirical Tobins Q

0

50

100

150

Average return

0

-0.02

-0.4

-0.15
0

50

100

150

Investment to output

0.04

-0.04
0

50

100

150

Capital to output

0.05

0

0.02

0

0

-0.05

0

-0.02

-0.1

-0.01

0

50

100

150

50

100

150

Capital share

0.02
0.01

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

Figure A.2: Transition from 1970 markups to 2015 markups, one time shock
model around its 2015 steady state. We then simulate the model, taking as the
initial condition the steady state value of all variables in 1970, in particular, the
1970 level of markups and capital-to-labor ratio. Figure A.2 shows the results
of this exercise. The transition between steady states is slower: it takes around
7 years for most variables to reach the 2015 steady state, starting at 1970 steady
state values. There are significant differences between some of the magnitudes
in the transition IRFs and the magnitudes when comparing stochastic stationary
states. The IRFs show an increase in the wealth-to-output ratio of .24 during the
transition, compared to an increase of .5 in the comparative statics exercise, and
an increase Tobin’s Q of .09, compared to an increase of .34 in the comparative
statics exercise. It is not surprising that the magnitudes are smaller in the transition exercise, for changes in markups are not permanent, and are assumed to
return to their steady state. The changes in the factor shares in the transition are
similar in magnitude to the changes in the comparative statics exercise.
In the third exercise, we solve the policy and transition functions of the model
around its 1970 steady state. We then feed in a smooth series of shocks, chosen
so that markups increase from their steady state level in 1970 to their level in
2015. Figure A.3 shows these results. The results of this transition exercise
A.16

C
0.15

Markup

0.1

Profit share

0

TRANSITION DYNAMICS
Labor share

0.1
0.05

-0.05

0.05
0
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15

0
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15

Wealth to output

Empirical Tobins Q

0.15

0.2

-0.1
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
0.1

Average return

0.1
0.1

0.05

0.05
0
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
0

Investment to output

0
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
0.05

-0.005

0

-0.01

-0.05

Capital to output

0
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
0

Capital share

-0.01

-0.015
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15

-0.1
-0.02
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15

Figure A.3: Transition from 1970 to 2015 steady state, smooth series of shocks
show linear dynamics, with a few exceptions: the transition path for wealthto-output and investment are non-linear. The magnitudes of the changes, once
again, show significant differences to that of the comparative statics exercise. In
the fourth exercise, we feed into the model a series of shocks such that markups
follow the exact empirical pattern of the data, from 1970 to 2015. Figure A.4
shows these results. Although there is an increase in markups over the period,
the increase is not smooth: during the early 1980s there is a significant decrease
in markups. This is due to an increase in the capital share in the data. Overall,
the magnitudes of the changes seen in figure A.4 are similar to those in figure
A.3.
0.2

Markup

0.1

Profit share

0.1

Labor share

0
0

0
-0.1

-0.2
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
0.5

Wealth to output

0

0.2

Empirical Tobins Q

0

-0.5
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
0.05

-0.2
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15

Investment to output

0.1

Avr ret

0

-0.2
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
0.2

-0.1
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15

Capital to output

-0.1
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
0.04

Capital share

0.02
0

0
0

-0.05
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15

-0.2
-0.02
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15

Figure A.4: IRF for full path of markups, 1970-2015

A.17

D

D

ADDITIONAL TABLES

Additional tables
Table A.1: Quantitative results: changes in productivity growth only
Moments
∆ Model ∆ Data
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
0.13
0.95
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
0.17
0.31
Tobin’s Q (P2)
−0.03
0.40
Real interest rate (P3)
−0.84% −2.00%
Average return (P3)
−1.17%
0.64%
Profit share (P4)
−0.00%
8.25%
Labor share (P4)
0.12%
−6.41%
Capital share (P4)
−0.12% −2.30%
Investment-to-output ratio (P5) −1.56% −0.19%
Equity Premium
−0.42% 0 − 2%

Table A.2: Quantitative results: changes in D and productivity growth
Moments
∆ Model ∆ Data
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
0.42
0.95
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
0.43
0.31
Tobin’s Q (P2)
−0.09
0.40
Real interest rate (P3)
−2.00% −2.00%
Average return (P3)
−3.11%
0.64%
Profit share (P4)
0.00%
8.25%
Labor share (P4)
0.31%
−6.41%
Capital share (P4)
−0.31% −2.30%
Investment-to-output ratio (P5)
0.13%
−0.19%
Equity Premium
−0.22% 0 − 2%

Table A.3: Ramey calibrated parameter results
Parameters chosen to match targets Symbol Value
Capital production elasticity
α
0.28
Production elasticity
σ
0.92
Firm exit rate
∆
0.0037
Rate of time preference
β
0.9958
Risk Aversion
γ
7.78
Hours supplied
ν
0.20

A.18

D

ADDITIONAL TABLES

Table A.4: Ramey 1970 calibration results
Targets
Model
Data
Source
Real interest rate
2.99% 3.00%
Federal Reserve
Wealth-to-output ratio
2.66
2.66
Financial Accounts
Investment-to-output ratio 15.69% 16.15%
NIPA
Labor share
72.11% 72.40%
Elsby (2013)
Equity premium
4.66% 4.71%
Croce (2014)
Labor supply
0.18% 0.18%
Croce (2014)

Table A.5: Ramey quantitative results: changes in markups only
Moments
∆ Model ∆ Data
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
0.55
0.95
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
−0.12
0.31
Tobin’s Q (P2)
0.31
0.40
Real interest rate (P3)
0.00%
−2.00%
Average return (P3)
4.56%
0.64%
Profit share (P4)
8.01%
8.25%
Labor share (P4)
−6.89% −6.41%
Capital share (P4)
−1.12% −2.30%
Investment-to-output ratio (P5) −0.94% −0.19%
Equity Premium
2.54%
0 − 2%

Table A.6: Ramey quantitative results: changes in markups, productivity growth
rates, interest rates
Moments
∆ Model ∆ Data
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
0.94
0.95
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
0.27
0.31
Tobin’s Q (P2)
0.13
0.40
Real interest rate (P3)
−2.00% −2.00%
Average return (P3)
0.52%
0.64%
Profit share (P4)
8.01%
8.25%
Labor share (P4)
−6.56% −6.41%
Capital share (P4)
−1.45% −2.30%
Investment-to-output ratio (P5) −0.86% −0.19%
Equity Premium
2.44%
0 − 2%

A.19

D

ADDITIONAL TABLES

Table A.7: De Loecker calibrated parameter results
Parameters chosen to match targets Symbol Value
Capital production elasticity
α
0.19
Production elasticity
σ
0.97
Firm exit rate
∆
0.0070
Rate of time preference
β
0.9962
Risk Aversion
γ
6.56
Hours supplied
ν
0.22

Table A.8: De Loecker 1970 calibration results
Targets
Model
Data
Source
Real interest rate
2.96% 3.00%
Federal Reserve
Wealth-to-output ratio
2.66
2.66
Financial Accounts
Investment-to-output ratio 12.77% 16.15%
NIPA
Labor share
69.90% 72.40%
Elsby (2013)
Equity premium
4.28% 4.71%
Croce (2014)
Labor supply
0.18% 0.18%
Croce (2014)

Table A.9: De Loecker quantitative results: changes in markups only
Moments
∆ Model ∆ Data
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
1.35
0.95
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
−0.77
0.31
Tobin’s Q (P2)
1.88
0.40
Real interest rate (P3)
0.01%
−2.00%
Average return (P3)
27.27%
0.64%
Profit share (P4)
30.18%
8.25%
Labor share (P4)
−22.55% −6.41%
Capital share (P4)
−7.62% −2.30%
Investment-to-output ratio (P5) −6.09% −0.19%
Equity Premium
2.53%
0 − 2%

A.20

E

Table A.10: De Loecker quantitative results:
growth rates, interest rates
Moments
Wealth-to-output ratio (P1)
Capital-to-output ratio (P1)
Tobin’s Q (P2)
Real interest rate (P3)
Average return (P3)
Profit share (P4)
Labor share (P4)
Capital share (P4)
Investment-to-output ratio (P5)
Equity Premium

changes in markups, productivity
∆ Model
1.72
−0.48
1.35
−2.03%
17.27%
30.18%
−22.47%
−7.71%
−5.79%
2.51%

∆ Data
0.95
0.31
0.40
−2.00%
0.64%
8.25%
−6.41%
−2.30%
−0.19%
0 − 2%

Additional figures

.8

1

1.2

1.4

Implied Markups

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Baseline
No Risk Premium

2005

2010

2015

With Price Gain
No Risk Premium, With Price Gain

Figure A.5: Implied Markups.

0

5

10

Decomposing the Wealth Share

-5

E

ADDITIONAL FIGURES

1980

1985

1990

1995
Liabilities
Business
Fixed Income

2000

2005

2010

2015

Housing
Pensions
Equity

Figure A.6: Wealth and Capital as a share of Gross Value Added.

A.21

