NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ANALYZING THE RISK OF TRANSPORTING CRUDE OIL BY RAIL
Charles F. Mason
Working Paper 24299
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24299

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018

Thanks are due Thomas van Eaton for superb research assistance, participants at the 2017 ASSA
meetings, the Workshop on Energy Transitions held at the University of Southern Denmark in
March 2017 as well as seminar participants at Washington State University and the University of
Wyoming for lively discussion. Particular thanks are due to Ben Gilbert, Max Maelstrom and
Lucy Qiu for their constructive feedback. Any remaining errors are solely my responsibility. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Charles F. Mason. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Analyzing the Risk of Transporting Crude Oil by Rail
Charles F. Mason
NBER Working Paper No. 24299
February 2018
JEL No. C14,L71,L92,Q35
ABSTRACT
In this paper, I combine data on incidents associated with rail transportation of crude oil and
detailed data on rail shipments to appraise the relation between increased use of rail to transport
crude oil and the risk of safety incidents associated with those shipments. I find a positive link
between the accumulation of minor incidents and the frequency of serious incidents, and a
positive relation between increased rail shipments of crude oil and the occurrence of minor
incidents. I also find that increased shipments are associated with a rightward shift in the
distribution of economic damages associated with these shipments; the implied marginal impact
of an additional 1,000 rail cars carrying oil between two states in a given month is $1,836. In
addition, I find larger average effects associated with states that represent the greatest source of
tight oil production.

Charles F. Mason
Department of Economics and Finance
University of Wyoming
1000 E. University Avenue
Laramie, WY 82071-3985
bambuzlr@uwyo.edu

1

I NTRODUCTION

Within the past ten years, widespread use of new extractive technologies, such as 3-D imaging,
horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing, has greatly expanded US oil production. What was
fairly recently regarded as a sunset industry has witnessed a renaissance, with production levels
coming very lose to historic highs in 2014. While this increase in production created substantial net
benefits in the form of increased domestic producer surplus, it also presented logistical challenges
(Transportation Research Board, 2017). Much of the new production occurs in new regions; as a
consequence, these production basins are not well serviced by existing oil pipelines; consequently,
to deliver their product to market firms have increasingly turned to rail as a mode of transport.1 In
turn, this has lead to concerns related to safety: the concern is that the increased shipments of oil
by rail may lead to a greater risk of accidents, with related concerns for damages. These concerns
are underscored by the tragic derailment on 6 July, 2013 of a freight train carrying crude oil in the
Quebec town of Lac-Mégantic. The derailment killed 47 people, spilled over one million gallons
of crude oil, and caused widespread destruction; estimated damages exceeded $100,000,000.
Horrific as this event was, it was not singular, nor was 2013 a unique year: statistics compiled by the U.S. Department of transportation point to a steady stream of train derailments in
the U.S. between 2009 and 2014, with corresponding increases in damages. These patterns are
particularly noteworthy in light of recent trends in U.S. tight oil production, particularly from the
Bakken play (which was the source of the crude on the train that derailed in Quebec).
Figure 1 offers a feel for recent trends in serious rail incidents.2 The figure compares
all serious events for each quarter between 2009 and 2014 related to all shipments (depicted as
circles) against shipments of crude oil (depicted as diamonds, and connected by the dashed line).
1

While building new pipelines is a potential resolution to the issue of insufficient takeaway capacity, there are
important cost considerations: new pipelines are costly, and there are important regulatory obstacles to be overcome.
In addition, the uncertainty associated with the evolution of crude prices induces an option value associated with
delaying investment (Covert and Kellogg, 2017).
2
Publicly available data on rail incidents is provided by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, the US governmental authority responsible for regulating rail shipments of crude oil. A subset of these
incidents are referred to as “serious;” this category is reserved for events where substantial costs are incurred as a
result of the event, or where there are serious injuries or fatalities.

Two patterns emerge. First, the general pattern of serious incidents did not rise over this six year
horizon. Second, there was an increasing tendency for serious incidents associated with crude oil
shipments: There was only one serious incident prior to the middle of 2011, while serious incidents
occurred in every quarter but one after the middle of 2013 – with three quarters exhibiting multiple
serious incidents.
Indeed, in response to the apparent heightened risk of shipping oil by rail, the US Department of Transportation (DOT) adopted a new rule governing rail shipments of oil; this rule took
effect in July 2015. Trains with a continuous block of at least 20 cars loaded with a flammable
liquid, or trains with at least 35 such cars, are defined as “high-hazard flammable trains” (HHFT).
The new rule requires any tank cars constructed after September 2015 that are used in HHFTs to
meet a tougher standard.3 Trains with 70 or more cars carrying flammable liquids are required to
have in a functioning two-way end-of-train device or a distributed power braking system. In addition, a maximum speed of 50 miles per hour is now imposed on all HHFT; if such a train includes
any cars that fail to meet the 117 standard, the speed limit is 40 miles per hour. The above observations, as well as the policy response they engendered, point to the importance of understanding
the risks associated with rail shipments.
Such an empirical undertaking is complicated by the relative rarity of large scale events.
Similar considerations apply in other situations, where high-consequence events are uncommon.4
Examples include meltdowns at nuclear power plants (David et al., 1996; Escobar Rangel and
Lévêque, 2014) or maritime disasters (Edwards and Kauffman, 2016). One promising approach in
these settings is to focus on lesser events that can be thought of as precursors to disasters.5 I adopt
3

This new standard, referred to as DOT 117, requires rail cars include a 9/16 inch tank shell, 11 gauge jacket,
1/2 inch full-height head shield, thermal protection, and improved pressure relief valves and bottom outlet valves.
4
An additional issue that can arise in such situations is the difficulty of framing a suitable model to predict
the rare event. Indded, Ord et al. (2010, p. 203) note that “any scientific risk assessment is only able to give us
the the probability of a hazard occurring conditioned on the correctness of [the risk assessment’s] main argument.”
The approach I propose below is subject to this qualification. But the authors also suggest that it may be sufficient
to consider an “adequate” model, as opposed to a correct one, which I believe is a reasonable interpretation of my
approach.
5
Examples include unplanned outages, or “scrams,” at nuclear power plants (David et al., 1996; Hausman,
2014) or deficiencies during maritime safety inspections (Edwards and Kauffman, 2016). Taking such an approach
to appraising safety at nuclear power plants, David et al. (1996) identify a precautionary affect that followed in the
aftermath of the Three Mile Island incident, while Hausman (2014) identifies the role played by deregulation of

2

similar approach in this paper, so as to provide an empirical assessment of the risks associated with
shipping a given amount of crude by rail. The approach I propose is two-pronged: the first step is
to establish an empirical link between the prevalence of lesser incidents and the probability of a
more serious incident occurring.6 I then establish a link between various measures of rail activity
and the prevalence of minor incidents. I construct an empirical model that links rail incidents to
the quantity of oil shipped by rail using data from the Department of Transportation. This data
includes monthly observations on trail traffic between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2014
(including the number of carloads of various commodities shipped, associated weight of those
shipments, and miles the shipments traveled) as well as information on safety incidents associated
with these shipments.
I find a statistically important link between the number of cars containing crude oil shipped
by rail in a given month and the distribution of incidents; in particular, increases in shipments are
associated with a rightward-sift in the distribution. I also find a statistically important link between
the occurrence of minor incidents on shipments between a given state pair in the preceding three
months and the likelihood of a serious incident occurring on a shipment between that state pair in a
particular month. Combining these two results yields the conclusion that crude by rail deliveries are
linked to the prevalence of serious incidents. I then consider a variety of alternative interpretations,
including the total volume of shipments and multiple measures of rail activity; the central theme
that emerges is the importance of crude deliveries. In addition, I find that increased crude deliveries
between a given state pair in a given month imply a rightward shift in the distribution of dollar
damages from spills. The implied marginal impact of an additional 1,000 rail cars carrying oil
between two states in a given month is estimated as $1,836. These various effects are noticeably
more important in states where recent increases in oil production – mainly associated with the
deployment of unconventional techniques – has been most pronounced.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, I discuss the data used
electricity markets.
6
Transportation Research Board (2017, p. 69) argue that lesser incidents may “be an indicator of safety risks
not being properly managed.”

3

in my analysis. I describe my empirical strategy in section 3. In section 4, I discuss the results. I
offer concluding remarks in Section 5.

2

DATA

The data I use in this endeavor comes from two divisions in the Department of Transportation
(DOT). Information on rail incidents are drawn from the Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety
Administration (PHMSA) website. These data list the date, location and shipping source of each
incident, along with information on the amount of materials released and costs associated with the
incident, for all shipments over the selected time frame. I use information on incidents occurring
between 1 January 2009 and 31 December 2014. Incidents can reflect minor occurrences, such as
small leaks, or major events such as train derailments. In addition to the information described
above, there is an indicator variable that identifies “serious incidents.”7 From this database, I
extracted all records of incidents involving crude oil shipments.
Table 1 provides a summary overview of this data. The table is split into two parts. Part A,
the top panel, summarizes the data on serious incidents involving crude oil shipments, while part B,
the bottom panel, summarizes the data on minor incidents involving crude oil shipments. For each
part, I show the fraction of weeks between 2009 and 2015 in which an event was observed; minor
events were about 7 times as common – happening in roughly 50% of the weeks, while serious
incidents occurred in about 7% of the weeks. For serious incidents, I present information on the
period of time between events; as minor incidents were substantially more common I focus on the
number of events in those weeks where an incident did occur. For each panel, I show the average
value, the standard deviation of that value, the median value, and the skewness of the sample. On
average, just over 13 weeks passed between serious incidents. This data is sharply asymmetric,
7

PHMSA defines a serious incident as involving “a fatality or major injury caused by the release of a hazardous
material, the evacuation of 25 or more persons as a result of release of a hazardous material or exposure to fire, a
release or exposure to fire which results in the closure of a major transportation artery, the alteration of an aircraft
flight plan or operation, the release of radioactive materials from Type B packaging, the release of over 11.9 gallons
or 88.2 pounds of a severe marine pollutant, or the release of a bulk quantity (over 119 gallons or 882 pounds) of a
hazardous material.” See http://www.phmsa.dot.gov/resources/glossary#S.

4

with a large standard deviation and a skewness value well above 0 (the level associated with a
symmetrically distributed sample). The median time between serious incidents is much smaller
than the mean value, again indicating a distribution skewed towards larger values. For minor
incidents, the data are a bit less skewed, and with a median value that is much closer to the mean.
In those weeks where an incident occurred, there were typically about two incidents. Combined
with the information on the frequency of weeks with events, this indicates the number of minor
incidents was similar to the number of weeks in the sample.
A visualization of the incident data is conveyed in Figure 2. The left panel of the figure
depicts serious incidents involving crude oil shipments; here I plot the week in which the incident
occurred against the number of weeks between major incidents (shown on the y-axis). The takeaway message here is that serious incidents became more common over time thru the first half of
2014, with the time between such incidents falling from several months to less than one month. In
the right panel, I plot the number of minor incidents per week. Here too, the frequency of incidents
also rose through the middle of 2014. Put together, this graphic points towards a negative relation
between the number of minor incidents and the time between serious incidents; it also suggests a
link between accumulating minor incidents and the prevalence of serious events.8
I combine the data on incidents with information on rail shipments, taken from DOT “waybill” data. For any rail shipment, the waybill lists nearly 200 pieces of information. Included in this
list are the following: state, FIPS and zip code of shipment origin and destination; shipment contents (listed as a commodity, identified both by name and numeric code); number of cars containing
the commodity; date of shipment; and the waybill number. I have data on all rail shipments in the
US between 1 January 2009 and 31 December 2014.9 Out of this very large dataset I identified all
records involving crude oil shipments.
Most crude oil shipments originate in “PADD 2”, which includes North Dakota, and “PADD
8

One way to interpret this last point is that minor incidents are harbingers of more serious events (Transportation
Research Board, 2017). This feature occurs in other situations involving potential catastrophes, such as major adverse
events at nuclear power plants (Escobar Rangel and Lévêque, 2014).
9
This data is confidential and proprietary; it was provided to the NBER working group on oil infrastructure. A non-confidential subset of the waybill records is available from the Surface Transportation Board (see
https://www.stb.gov/STB/industry/econ waybill.html); this subset comprises roughly 2% of all waybills.

5

3,” which includes Texas.10 These are large oil producing states where important basins of production are located in remote areas, and hence are poorly served by existing pipeline infrastructure.
Figure 3 highlights the relative isolation of these oil fields. It is apparent that several oil producing
areas (indicated as cross-hatched areas) are not proximate to the existing pipeline infrastructure;
of particular importance here is the isolation of two major oil producing basins: the Bakken, in
North Dakota, and the Permian, in West Texas. By contrast, these regions are reasonably close to
a number of rail lines. This observation underscores the emerging significance of the rail mode of
transportation for crude oil. As a result, shipments of crude oil by rail expanded relatively rapidly
between 2010 and 2012, and the prevalence of incidents involving rail shipments of crude oil also
increased sharply – as illustrated in Figure 4. At the same time, oil by rail shipments started taking
up greater percentages of the cars carried in a given train, travelled longer distances, and went
through an increasing number of US counties (Transportation Research Board, 2017). One implication of these trends was that an increasing number of people felt exposed to risks associated with
serious incidents, which in turn lead to increased political pressure to raise regulatory oversight of
rail shipments of oil (Molinski, 2015).
Table 2 provides summary information on crude oil shipments by rail from this sample
period. I offer evidence using three measures of activity: the number of rail cars carrying crude
oil, the number of miles oil is transported and the weight of product in cars carrying crude oil. The
third measure is not a simple transformation of the first, as some cars dedicated to transporting
crude are likely to be empty: if crude is transported from the oil patch to a refinery the car will
be empty on the return run back to the oil patch. As such, these measures provide information on
different pathways for oil shipments to lead to potential incidents. One notion is that oil shipments
contribute to incidents by increasing congestion on rail lines; this idea would be related to the
number of cars transported during a given period of time, perhaps combined with the distance
traveled. Alternatively, oil shipments could increase wear and tear on the rail lines; this effect
10

The acronym PADD stands for “Petroleum Administration for Defense District”; its use originated during
World War II. The US Energy Information Administration provides data on oil movements by various modes from
each PADD; see https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/PET_MOVE_RAIL_A_EPC0_RAIL_MBBL_M.htm.

6

would be related to the combined weight of the shipment.11 Evidently the role of rail as a mode for
transporting oil increased dramatically in importance during the sample period, with the number
of annual shipments increasing by a factor of roughly 15 between 2009 and 2014. Also, each of
the three measures of activity increasing over the six year period: both the number of rail cars
carrying crude oil and the miles travelled increased by a factor of roughly 20. The weight of crude
oil shipments increased even more dramatically during this period; the combined weight of crude
oil conveyed by rail increased by a factor of over 150, while the average weight per shipment
increased by roughly ten-fold.
Figure 5 fleshes out the relation between rail activity and the prevalence of serious incidents; Figure 6 provides complementary information for minor incidents. In these figures, all
variables are shown as percentage of total shipments associated with crude oil shipments; both figures display the quarterly average of all rail shipments associated with crude deliveries, using three
measures of rail activity (number of cars shipped, miles travelled, and weight conveyed). Onto
these plots, Figure 5 overlays the fraction of serious events associated with crude shipments, while
Figure 6 overlays the fraction of minor incidents associated with crude shipments. A correlation
between the three measures of rail activity and the frequency of incidents is apparent, particularly
for mileage traveled and weight conveyed; this relation is particularly clear for minor incidents.
These figures anticipate results from a more formal analysis, which I turn to next.

3

E MPIRICAL S TRATEGY

My empirical approach is to trace out a connection between rail shipments of crude oil and incidents. Because there are relatively few major incidents involving crude oil shipments, I undertake
this analysis in two steps. In the first step, I tie the occurrence of serious incidents to the preponderance of lesser incidents that precede the major event. In the second step, I connect the number
11

Vartabedian (2015) notes that “[t]rack problems were blamed on 59% of the crashes, more than double the overall
rate for freight train accidents.” Similarly, Brown (2017) notes that government inspectors found thousands of safety
defects on rail lines used to haul volatile crude oil, including worn rails; broken, loose; and cracked steel bars.

7

of rail cars shipped to the number of minor incidents.
I use two approaches in the first part of the analysis. The first of these approaches uses
survival analysis, which makes use of “time to failure” model. Here, I focus on the number of
weeks between serious incidents, regarding the occurrence of such an incident as the “failure.”
The explanatory variable in this model is the accumulated number of minor incidents during the
period between the preceding serious event and the current serious event. Analysis of failure times
proceeds by modeling the hazard rate as a function of a set of explanatory variables.
Survival models are comprised of two parts: a baseline hazard function λ0 (t), which describes the way the risk an event occurs within a particular period of time (given baseline levels
of the relevant covariates), and the effect of the covariates upon the hazard.12 In the application at
hand, the “event” corresponds to a serious incident, and the covariate of interest is the number of
minor incidents that have occurred since the last event took place. Two alternative approaches to
analyze failure times have commonly been utilized.
The first uses the Cox semi-parametric proportional hazards model. In this model, the
probability that the number of periods between serious incidents equals some value t equals:
 Zt

βx
F(t) = 1 − exp − λ0 (s)e du ,
0

where x is the accumulated number of minor incidents and β is the parameter of interest. The
second approach assumed functional form for the baseline hazard function. I discuss two such
models below: the Weibull proportional hazards model and the exponential proportional hazards
model. Under the first, the distribution of failure times follows a Weibull density function, which
implies the hazard rate changes monotonically over time. Under the second, the hazard rate is
constant. This restriction may be tested by comparing the shape parameter p, discussed below,
with 1.
An alternative approach is to treat each shipment as an independent observation, where
there is a risk of a major incident occurring. Here I model the risk using a Logit framework, where
12

For a discussion of survival time models, see Lawless (2003).

8

I conjecture that the risk of a serious incident is related to the accumulation of minor incidents in
the recent past. I investigate four notions of “recent past”, corresponding to three-month periods
(i.e., the past 3 months, the past 6 months, the past 9 months and the past 12 months).
The goal in the second step of my analysis is to explain the number of minor events associated with a particular combination of originating and terminating states, during a particular month.
The key explanatory variable here is the number of rail car shipments between that state pair in
that month. There are likely to be geographically idiosyncratic features at play, for example, because the potential pathways for shipments are exogenously fixed in advance of the sample period.
Accordingly, I use a fixed effects approach, where the state pairs form the basis for these fixed
effects.
The left-side variable in this step is strongly skewed, which suggests that ordinary least
squares is ill-advised. Accordingly, I base this part of the analysis on models emanating from
the literature on count data; two models have received considerable attention in this vein: the
Poisson and Negative Binomial models (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005). While I discuss results
using each approach, I mainly focus on the Negative Binomial regression model. Related to this
line of inquiry, I also explore the relation between the number of rail cars shipped between a given
pair of states in a given month and the magnitude of harm arising from an event, as measured by
the dollar harm associated with the event.13
This second line of investigation requires combining the two datasources. To this end,
the data was first aggregated by month, for each pair of originating and destination states. I then
merged information over space and time. Thus, an individual observation represents for each
month and originating-destination state pairs: the number of cars in which oil is shipped, the
number of incidents that occurred, the amount of oil spilled in any incidents that occurred, and the
dollar damages associated with any incidents. For many months in the sample, oil is shipped with
out incident (so that the last three variables are identically equal to zero). Because not all states
13

This harm can come from five sources: the value of spilled oil, the cost associated with damaged capital (such
as rail cars), the damages borne by property owners near the event location, the costs associated with any emergency
responders, and any costs associated with remediation.

9

are associated with oil shipments in any particular month, the panel is unbalanced; addressing this
imbalance is an important motivation for including state-level fixed effects.

4

R ESULTS

I now turn to a discussion of the results.

4.1

Serious Incidents

The first part of my analysis evaluates the link between minor incidents and serious incidents. The
hypothesis of interest is that the accumulation of minor incidents can explain the tendency for
serious incidents to occur. I evaluate this possibility by using three time to failure models (where
the “failure time” is measured by the time that elapses between serious incidents), as well as a
Logit framework.
The results from the time-to-failure analysis are collected in Table 3. The second column
presents results based on the exponential hazard model, the third column lists results from the
Weibull model, and the fourth column gives results from the Cox proportional hazard model. In
each case, a negative estimated coefficient indicates that increases in the number of minor incidents
shifts the hazard function governing the probability a serious incident will occur in the current
period to the left (i.e., it raises the probability of a serious incident in the near future). For each
of the three survival time models, the estimated coefficient on the accumulated number of minor
incidents is negative; this effect is significant at the 10% level for the two parametric models and
at the 1% level in the Cox semi-parametric model.14
The results from the Logit analysis are collected in Table 4. I report results from four
regressions, based on the various interpretations of “recent past”. Regression (1), reported in the
second column, includes the past 3, 6, 9 and 12 months; regression (2) includes the past 3, 6
14

As I noted above, the empirical validity of the exponential model can be assessed by comparing the shape
parameter p to 1 in the Weibull regression; the estimated parameter here is 0.905, which does not statistically differ
from 1.

10

and 9 months; regression (3) includes the past 3 and 6 months; and regression four only includes
the past 3 months. For each of these notions, I tabulated the number of minor incidents during
the period in question for each state pair, and used that variable as a regressor. The left-side
variable is an indicator taking the value 1 if a serious incident is observed in the particular state
pair in the particular month, and zero otherwise. The results consistently point to the preceding
3 months as having explanatory value: increases in the number of minor incidents in that period
exert a statistically important effect on the probability of a serious incident; in ballpark terms,
each additional 3 minor incidents doubles the chance of a serious incident. None of the other time
frames appear to exert an important effect.
Based on these results, I conclude there is empirical evidence that minor events can predict
the potential for serious incidents.

4.2

The Role of Rail Traffic

I now turn to an appraisal of the impact of the volume of rail traffic upon incident occurrence and
consequence. I discuss two sets of regression results, each detailing the effect of crude oil rail
traffic upon a measure of adverse impact. The first batch of results relates to the impact on the
frequency of minor incidents, which the results from the preceding sub-section suggest is a marker
for increased risk of serious incidents, while the second describes the impact of rail traffic upon
the economic costs arising from an incident.
Table 5 lists results from six regressions tying the volume of rail traffic in crude oil shipments to minor incidents. These results are based on two models of count data – the Poisson model
and the Negative Binomial model.15 For each count model, I present results from three regressions
that allow for originating and terminating state-pair fixed effects. The first regression only includes
a variable measuring rail traffic (thousands of cars carrying crude oil). The second regression for
each model also allows for seasonal fixed effects, including an indicator variable taking the value
15

All regressions were run in STATA, using the fixed effects option in the XT package. Robust standard errors
were computed using the “oim” (information matrix) option in the Poisson regressions, and the ‘r’ (robust) option in
the Negative Binomial regressions.

11

1 during the months of November, December, January and February. The third regression allows
for idiosyncratic monthly effects, as reflected in the indicator variables Dmn, where n = 1 refers to
January, n = 2 refers to February, and so on. For these two variations, the idea is to control for possible weather-related effects. Including these controls is motivated by concerns that rail shipments
might be exposed to greater risk during cold months, for example because of contraction in steel
wheels or rail lines (Lowy, 2015). Alternatively, cargo contents might be subject to contraction
during colder months, which might facilitate “sloshing;” the concern being that if the rail car starts
to rock from side to side this energy might induce a pattern of waves within the container, with
the momentum associated with these waves then exacerbating the tendency for the car to rock,
potentially leading to derailment.
In each regression, the key parameter of interest is the coefficient on the number of cars
carrying crude oil between a particular pair of states in a particular month, measured in thousands
of cars. I note that the estimated coefficient on this variable is positive and statistically significant
in each of the regressions, with broadly similar values (ranging from 0.228 to 0.322). Moreover,
allowing for temporal effects has little effect upon the estimated role of rail traffic: none of the
time-related indicator variables exerts a significant effect. In general, the negative binomial model
points to a more substantial effect associated with rail traffic.16
In the results reported in this Table, the estimates indicate that an additional serious incident
is likely to occur for each additional 3-4,000 rail cars shipping oil between a particular pair of states
in a particular month. Referring back to Table 2, the number of rail cars carrying oil increased by
roughly 40,000 between 2013 and 2014, which suggests this estimated impact is non-trivial.
Before proceeding to a discussion of the second and third sets of regression results, I pause
briefly to consider the fixed effects. Upon retrieving the estimated residuals from a regression from
Table 5, it is straightforward to back out the state-pair fixed effects. Doing so, one finds that the
largest five fixed effects are all associated with crude oil shipments out of North Dakota. In light
of the importance of this state as a source of rail shipments of crude oil, this result suggests an
16

A test of the appropriateness of the Poisson model is available in a version of the negative binomial model
without fixed effects. For these data, such a test points strongly to the preferability of the negative binomial model.

12

intriguing possibility: that increased rail traffic might accelerate depreciation of certain rail routes,
increasing the risk of worrisome incidents. I discuss this idea in greater detail below.

4.3

Consequences

I now turn to an evaluation of the relation between rail traffic and the consequences of spills.
Table 6 contains the relevant results. Here, I list results from six regressions. The first of these is
a fixed effects regressions of the relation between rail traffic and the economic damages resulting
from an incident, using a Negative Binomial model. As above, the key parameter of interest is the
coefficient on the number of cars carrying crude oil between a particular pair of states in a particular
month, measured in thousands of cars. Again, this coefficient is positive and statistically significant
in each of the four regressions, indicating that increased rail traffic shifts the distributions governing
quantity of oil spilled and resultant damages to the right – thereby increasing expected harm.17
These results can be used to infer the expected impact of a one unit increase in rail traffic.
The expected value of total economic damages is

E (D) = exp(βˆ x),
where E (D) is expectations operator applied to total economic damages, x is average rail traffic,
and βˆ is the estimated coefficient on rail traffic. Thus, a one-unit increase in average rail traffic
will raise expected damages by βE (D). In the sub-sample used for the second batch of results in
Table 6 the average value of dollar damages is $3,375; accordingly, the predicted marginal impact
of an increase in rail traffic, starting from the average value, is $1,836.
It is worth noting that the approach I employ in this part of the analysis implies a focus
on expected effects, which is to say it implicitly assumes risk neutrality on the part of the relevant
decision-maker. There are reasons to be skeptical of such an assumption. One might well argue
17

I note that the sample included a small number of observations for which there was no information relating
to dollar damages. Accordingly, these observations were dropped from the two regressions for economic damages,
resulting in a slightly smaller sample. I also considered the potential role for monthly fixed effects; these results were
not substantially different from those reported in Table 6.

13

that society exhibits some risk aversion, particularly in the face of low-risk, high-consequence
events (Laes et al., 2011). Indeed, Krupnick et al. (1993, p. 1275) that the tendency for an implicit
assumption of risk neutrality to mis-assess the ex ante damages society might place on environmental catastrophes the smaller is the probability of the event, or the larger are the consequences of
such an event; both these attributes seem apropos to the problem at hand. Likewise, Sunstein and
Zeckhauser (2011) argue that agents are likely to overweight low probability events, particularly
when large externalities result – as is plainly the case with serious rail events such as derailments.
And the implicit assumption that one can view decision-makers as making choices consisted with
an expected utility framework is far from innocuous, particularly in the context of low-probability,
high-consequence events (Machina, 1982). Altogether, these points suggest that the analysis I presented above might underestimate the true expected social cost associated with the risk of a serious
incident associated with shipping oil by rail.18
The second set of results are based on a quantile regression approach. Here, I evaluated the
relation between total economic costs and rail traffic (in thousands of cars) along with an indicator
variable for winter months, for five percentiles: 75%, 80%, 85%, 90% and 95%. These results give
a feel for the impact of rail traffic upon costs as one moves into the tail of the distribution over
costs. The key points to be gleaned from these regressions are that rail traffic becomes ever more
important, in magnitude, as one moves from left to right in the distribution; these effects are also
statistically at the 5% level in the 80th , 85th and 90th percentiles, and at the 10% level in the 95th
percentile. Altogether, these results paint a picture wherein increased rail traffic pushes the distribution of costs to the right, with the most substantial impacts arising in the tail of the distribution;
on balance, these results are qualitatively consistent with the Negative Binomial regression results
reported in the second column.
18

When these large consequence, low probability events lead to spatial correlated externalities, as seems likely
with train derailments, inefficiently low levels of private insurance are likely to be undertaken (Gollier, 2005). On the
other hand, Sunstein and Zeckhauser (2011) note that such an environment can readily lead society to overreact to the
potential for large consequence, low probability events, for example by enacting overly burdensome regulations.

14

4.4

Robustness Checks and Extensions

In this subsection, I discuss a variety of robustness checks and extensions.
The preceding analysis supposed that the volume of rail traffic associated with crude oil
shipments was directly related to the preponderance of minor incidents. Much of this rail traffic
emanates from North Dakota, so an alternative interpretation might be that it is the flow of traffic
from North Dakota that is at issue. If so, other commodities that are important sources of rail
traffic would also be correlated with the preponderance of minor incidents. An obvious example
here would be wheat (Bushnell et al., 2017). An alternative argument might be that it is the total
volume of rail traffic that influences minor incidents. To evaluate these alternative conjectures, I
revisit the negative binomial regression analysis from Table 5, now including two new explanatory
variables: the number of cars shipping wheat in a given month between a particular state pair, and
the total number of rail cars in a given month between a particular state pair (each measured in
thousands). In this alternative specification I retain the variable measuring oil by rail traffic, as
well as the temporal dummy variables.
These results are contained in Table 7. There are three takeaway messages here. First,
both the volume of wheat shipments and the total volume of traffic are irrelevant in explaining
the prevalence of minor incidents. Second, there is no indication of monthly effects, nor does the
dummy variable for winter months exert much influence. Third, in all specifications the statistical
importance of crude oil shipments remains (although the significance levels in regressions 2, 3, 5
and 6 – which include all traffic – falls below the 5% level).19 I conclude that the relation identified
in Table 5 is not an artifact of using crude shipments rather than wheat or all shipments.
The second set of robustness results use different measures of rail activity as explanatory
variables to explain the prevalence of minor incidents, with results collected in Table 8. Here
I investigate the potential role played by distance traveled (measured in million miles) and the
weight of the product transported (measured in million tons). For each of these variables I analyze
19

In the regressions with the dummy variable for winter, the confidence levels are 5.2%; in the regressions with
dummies for each month, the confidence levels are 6.4%.

15

three specifications: one including the variable allocated to crude shipments and all shipments
(regression 1 for miles and 4 for weight); one including the variable allocated to crude shipments
and all shipments along with an indicator variable taking the value 1 for winter months and 0
otherwise (regression 2 for miles and 5 for weight); and one including the variable allocated to
crude shipments and all shipments along with 11 indicator variables – one for each month from
January to November (regression 3 for miles and 6 for weight). The key results here are: (i)
there is no indication that time of year influences the prevalence of minor incidents; (ii) all miles
travelled does seem to explain minor incidents, but weight of all commodities does not – suggesting
that combined congestion might matter, but aggregate wear and tear is less important; (iii) in
all specifications, the variable related to crude shipments is statistically important and consistent
across specifications. Altogether, these results indicate that the that the relation identified in Table 5
is not an artifact of using the number of rail cars carrying crude, rather than distance travelled or
weight transported.
I next consider the robustness of the two-step linkage I utilized in the discussion above.
The empirical strategy I laid out is necessitated by the paucity of serious events associated with
crude oil shipment. But there are many serious incidents involving other commodities; might one
be able to identify a more direct linkage between measures of activity and the tendency for serious
events to occur? I get at this idea with two sets of extensions.
The first set of extensions, reported in Table 9, focus on the possible role played by all
shipments and crude shipments in determining the probability of a serious event. The left side
variable in this set of regressions is an indicator variable taking the value 1 for all month –state pair
observations in which a serious event took place, and 0 otherwise; here I use a Logit approach. The
right-side variables blend together number of cars and miles travelled by defining a variable, “Million CarMiles”, that is the multiple of cars and million miles traveled. I investigate two variations,
one where the current values of Million CarMiles for both all shipments and crude shipments is
used, and one where both current and lagged values are used (here I allow for values from once-,
twice- and thrice-lagged months to exert an effect). For both of these frameworks I present two

16

regressions, one focusing on the variables described above, and one where these variables are
augmented by an indicator variable for winter months. The pattern of results here mimic earlier
results: there is no indication that serious events are more likely to occur in winter months, and
the role of crude shipments is of paramount importance. The second of these observations takes
on added significance here: crude shipments raise the chance of serious events of all shipments,
suggesting a spillover effect. One plausible explanation for such a spillover relates to crowding –
if crude shipments raise the volume of traffic, they could make rail lines more congested, thereby
elevating the chance of a serious event. That the various lagged variables do not seem to influence
the chance of a serious event is consistent with such an interpretation. Finally, the fifth regression
in this table combines the two contemporary measures of CarMiles with the number of minor incidents for the relevant month – state pair. In light of the results in Table 4, I investigate the impact of
the number of minor incidents in each of the three preceding months. Parallel to the other results
in the Table, I allow for differential effects associated with crude oil shipments and all shipments.
The key point here is that the only statistically important variable in this regression is the number
of minor incidents associated with crude shipments, in the current month.
Results from the second set of extensions in this line of inquiry are presented in Table 10.
As in the last regression of the preceding table, I include the number of rail cars (for both crude
shipments and all shipments) with the number of minor incidents for the relevant month – state
pair as well as each of the three preceding months. Parallel to the results from the earlier tables,
I include the three measures of rail activity (cars, miles, weight); as above, I allow for differential
effects associated with crude oil shipments and all shipments. I present results from five permutations in this analysis. Regression 1 include current and previous counts of minor incidents for all
shipments shipments, while regression 2 includes current and previous counts of minor incidents
for all shipments and crude shipments. Regression 3 excludes the count variables, focusing on a
comparison of the three measures of rail activity. Regressions 4 and 5 adapt regressions 1 and 2,
respectively, by including the three measures of activity.
Regressions 1 and 2 each reveal a role played by the number of minor incidents in predict-

17

ing serious events, though only crude incidents are statistically significant when minor incidents
for both all and crude shipments are included. This pattern persists in regressions 4 and 5: again it
is crude incidents that provide explanatory power. Perhaps the most intriguing results in the table
have to do with a comparison of the three measures of activity. First, I note that the distance a commodity is shipped appears to not predict the likelihood of a serious event; this holds true in each
of regression 3, 4 and 5. By contrast, in the two regressions where the current and past numbers of
minor crude incidents are excluded, regressions 3 and 4, the number of cars carrying crude plays
a statistically important role. In each of regressions 3 – 5, the weight of crude shipped (but not
weight of all shipments) is statistically important. Interestingly, this role is negative, suggest that
heavier cars are less risky than lighter cars. While this results seems counter-intuitive at first blush,
there is an explanation. Because crude is shipped as a liquid, it is prone to “sloshing” – if the car
starts to rock from side to side this energy might induce a pattern of waves within the container.
One conjecture is that the momentum associated with these waves can amplify the tendency for
the car to rock, leading to derailment. To the extent that such an explanation holds true, it would
require that there be sufficient free space within the container, which would translate in to less
material – and hence less weight. The negative coefficients on weight of crude shipped might be
evidence in support of this conjecture. By contrast, the variable measuring weight associated with
all shipments combines both liquid and non-liquid material, and so is less likely to be consistent
with the sloshing hypothesis.
The third set of extensions represents a first pass at the potential for depreciation of rail
lines. Here, I add a new explanatory variable – the interaction of origin-destination state pair
with the amount of weight shipped in the particular month, aggregated across all shipments. This
variable provides information on the amount of wear and tear for the particular combination of
space and time. I add this variable to the explanatory variables considered above, namely number
of cars (measured in thousands, for both crude shipments and all shipments), distance travelled
(measured in millions of miles, for both crude shipments and all shipments), and the number
of minor incidents (for both crude shipments and all shipments). The dependent variable is the

18

indicator variable taking the value 1 when a serious incident occurred in a given month for a
shipment between a particular state pair. As in the earlier analyses, I allow for state-pair fixed
effects. I also include interaction terms between weight and an indicator variable that takes the
value 1 for shipments originating in an area where tight oil production occurs (which I denote as
Dtight), or from the state of Texas (which I denote as Dtight TX); these interaction terms allow
for the possibility that specific deterioration effects can be ascribed to shipments from tight oil
provinces, as some have conjectured might have occurred (Vartabedian, 2015; Brown, 2017). This
exercise is complicated by the fact that there are a large number of potential state pairs, many
of which have limited traffic; I deal with this complication by focusing on those state pairs with
sufficient volume to facilitate successful conversion of the estimation package.20
I report results from four regressions in Table 11. Regressions 1 and 3 include contemporaneous effects only, while regressions 2 and 4 allow for lagged effects from the accumulated
number of minor incidents (for both crude shipments and all shipments). All four regressions include the variable capturing the interaction between shipped weight and the indicator for states
with tight oil, while regressions 3 and 4 also include the interaction between weight and shipments
from Texas. Four key points emerge. The first three reflect those explanatory variables that are
statistically important in explaining the prevalence of serious incidents, each with a positive effect.
These variables are the volume of crude shipped between a particular state pair in a given month,
the distance travelled by all rail shipments between a particular state pair in a given month, and
the number of minor incidents associated with crude shipments between a particular state pair in
a given month. All other variables are statistically unimportant. The final key point is that the interaction terms relating weight of shipments from the tight oil basins are consistently unimportant.
I conclude from this last point that there is little evidence to support the hypothesis that increased
rail traffic, associated with the increased production tied to the increasing importance of tight oil
20

These regressions were conducted using the STATA package xtlogit. The procedure I followed was to first
use the logit package, identify which of the over 2100 state pairs were retained in the logit regression (i.e., those state
pairs that were not dropped because of insufficient variation), and then use these retained state pairs in the xtlogit
regressions. This yielded 28 state pairs, with roughly one-fourth of these corresponding to shipments from the two
tight oil producing states.

19

plays, has exacerbated depreciation of rail lines.

5

C ONCLUSION

My goal in this paper was to assess the relation between crude oil shipments by rail and safety
incidents related to those shipments. Using a two-step procedure, I first confirm a link between
the accumulation of minor incidents and the frequency of serious incidents, with a greater number
of accumulated minor incidents associated with a shorter time between serious incidents; I then
confirm a positive relation between increased rail shipments of crude oil and the occurrence of
minor incidents. The preferred specification in the second step allows for state-level fixed effects;
in this context, I find that the largest fixed effects are associated with states that represent the
greatest source of tight oil production in the continental U.S.
These results offer some support for the perception that increased rail deliveries of crude
oil, particularly from locations often associated with the fracking boom, carry an increased risk
of accidents. Indeed, my analysis reveals a positive relation between increased rail deliveries
and economic damages associated with safety incidents. My results imply an expected marginal
impact of $1,836, which can be interpreted as a blend of private costs and some external costs.21
These costs do not include the social costs associated with environmental damages from oil spills,
property damages from major incidents (e.g., resulting from spill-induced fires) and any loss of
life. These aspects arguably comprise the most important external costs associated with any rail
incidents.22
Whether the increase in safety related external costs arising form increased rail traffic is
sufficient to rationalize the extra costs associated with building rail cars to a more exacting safety
21

The values for reported damages in the dataset reflect the damages from lost product and damaged capital,
both of which are private costs; along with any damages borne by nearby property owners, any costs associated with
emergency responders, and any remediation costs, which are externalities.
22
The costs I have in mind here do not include pollution-related externalities. While these other externalities can
be quite large (Clay et al., 2017), they do not have any bearing on the economic efficiency of the increased rail safety
standards.

20

standard is a separate issue. This point ties into the broader question of determining appropriate
public policies to deal with potential catastrophes – a thorny question in its own right. For that
matter, it is not clear that the extra external costs associated with increased rail transport exceed
the extra costs associated with other forms of delivery (Molinski, 2015). Indeed, the risk associated with pipeline delivery was a prominent feature of the recent protests against the Dakota
Access Pipeline, which would offer an alternative means of transporting crude oil from the Bakken
play.23 Determining the optimal role of rail transport within the portfolio of crude oil transportation
options remains an important focus for future research.
A key element related to the broader policy debate regarding rail standards is the likely
future trajectory of crude oil production in the U.S., particularly in relatively remote areas. While
domestic crude production softened during 2015, it has rebounded more recently; indeed, there are
indications that domestic crude production will increase steadily during the foreseeable future.24
An important effect that could impact this prospective growth is the scope of crude oil delivery
infrastructure. Indeed, Agerton and Upton Jr. (2017) argue that pipeline delivery constraints played
a particularly important role in domestic crude markets in the period near the end of my sample. As
such, there are reasons to expect strong demand for rail as a delivery mode going forward, pointing
to the likely future relevance of the analysis in this paper.

23

Herrnstadt and Sweeney (2017) provides evidence that the perceived risk associated with pipelines may be
relatively small.
24
The U.S. Energy Administration projects annual growth of 4-5% over the next few years (see https://www.
eia.gov/outlooks/steo/). The International Energy Administration is similarly bullish, opining that “U.S. shale
oil producers will boost their output by 8 million barrels a day between 2010 and 2025” (Ivana Kottasová, 2017). Part
of the push for this increased production comes from the decision to lift the 40-year old ban on exporting crude oil,
which took effect in late 2015 (Brown et al., 2014).

21

R EFERENCES
Agerton, M. and Upton Jr., G. B. (2017). Decomposing Crude Price Differentials: Domestic Shipping Constraints or the Crude Oil Export Ban? Baker Institute Working Paper, Rice University.
Brown, M. (2017). APNewsBreak: Thousands of Defects Found on Oil Train Routes, US News
and World Report p. https://apnews.com/17ff7868111b4ecd9455e42e48ba101a. April 5.
Brown, S. P., Mason, C. F., Krupnick, A. and Mares, J. (2014). Crude Behavior: How Lifting the
Export Ban Reduces Gasoline Prices in the United States. RFF Discussion paper 14-03-REV.
Bushnell, J. B., Hughes, J. E. and Smith, A. (2017). Food vs. Fuel? Impacts of Petroleum Shipments on Agricultural Prices. NBER Working Paper No. 23924.
Cameron, A. C. and Trivedi, P. (2005). Microeconometrics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Clay, K., Jha, A., Muller, N. and Walsh, R. (2017). The External Costs of Transporting Petroleum
Products by Pipelines and Rail: Evidence From Shipments of Crude Oil from North Dakota.
NBER Working Paper No. 23852.
Covert, T. R. and Kellogg, R. (2017). Crude by Rail, Option Value, and Pipeline Investment.
NBER Working Paper No. 23855.
David, P. A., Maude-Griffin, R. and Rothwell, G. (1996). Learning by Accident? Reductions in
the Risk of Unplanned Outages in U.S. Nuclear Power Plants after Three Mile Island, Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty 13: 175–198.
Edwards, M. and Kauffman, M. (2016). Data Tools to Identify Safety and Environmental Risks to
the Marine Transportation System, Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board pp. 101–112. No. 2549.
Escobar Rangel, L. and Lévêque, F. (2014). How Fukushima Dai-ichi Core Meltdown Changed
the Probability of Nuclear Accidents?, Safety Science 64(Supplement C): 90–98.
Gollier, C. (2005). Some Aspects of the Economics of Catastrophic Risk Insurance. CESifo
Working Paper No. 1409.
Hausman, C. (2014). Corporate Incentives and Nuclear Safety, American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 6: 178–206.
Herrnstadt, E. and Sweeney, R. L. (2017). What Lies Beneath: Pipeline Awareness and Aversion.
NBER Working Paper No. 23858.
Ivana Kottasová, I. (2017). America’s oil and gas output could soar 25% by 2025, CNN Money
pp. http://money.cnn.com/2017/11/14/news/economy/us--oil--gas--shale--iea/
index.html. November 14.
Krupnick, A. J., Markandya, A. and Nickell, E. (1993). The External Costs of Nuclear Power: Ex
Ante Damages and Lay Risks, American Journal of Agricultural Economics 75: 1273–1279.
22

Laes, E., Meskens, G. and van der Sluijs, J. P. (2011). On the Contribution of External Cost Calculations to Energy System Governance: The Case of a Potential Large-Scale Nuclear Accident,
Energy Policy 39: 5664–5673.
Lawless, J. F. (2003). Statistical Models and Methods for Lifetime Data, J. Wiley, New York.
Lowy, J. (2015).
Here’s Why So Many Oil Trains have Derailed this
Year, Business Insider .
March 10. http://www.businessinsider.com/
heres-why-so-many-oil-trains-have-derailed-this-year-2015-3.
Machina, M. (1982). Expected Utility Analysis without the Independence Axiom, Econometrica
50: 277–323.
Molinski, D. (2015). How to Transport Oil More Safely, Wall Street Journal p. R.1. September
14.
Ord, T., Hillerbrand, R. and Sandberg, A. (2010). Probing the improbable: methodological challenges for risks with low probabilities and high stakes, Journal of Risk Research 13: 191–205.
Sunstein, C. R. and Zeckhauser, R. (2011). Overreaction to Fearsome Risks, Environmental and
Resource Economics 48: 435–449.
Transportation Research Board (2017). Safely Transporting Hazardous Liquids and Gases in a
Changing U.S. Energy Landscape, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC. Special
Report 235.
Vartabedian, R. (2015).
Why Are So Many Oil Trains Crashing?
Track Problems May Be to Blame, Los Angeles Times pp. http://www.latimes.com/nation/
la--na--crude--train--safety--20151007--story.html. October 7.

23

2009q1

2010q1

2011q1

2012q1
quarter

2013q1

2014q1

number of serious incidents, all shipments
number of serious incidents, crude oil shipments

24

2015q1

0
1
2
3
number of serious incidents, crude oil shipments

0

number of serious incidents
5
10

15

Figure 1: Serious Incidents, All Shipments vs. Crude Oil Shipments

Figure 2: Minor Incidents and Time Between Serious Incidents
Minor Incidents

2010w26

0

0

minor oil spills per week
5

weeks between serious oil spills
20
40
60
80

10

100

Serious Incidents

2011w26

2012w27
week

2013w26

2014w26

2009w26

25

2010w26

2011w26

2012w27
week

2013w26

2014w26

Figure 3: Rail and pipeline location, in relation to major oil producing areas

26

2009m1

0

0

monthly number of minor incidents
50
100
150
200
250

5000
10000
15000
20000
monthly oil car shipments by rail

Figure 4: Minor Rail Incidents vs. Number of Railcars Shipping Oil, 2009-2014

2010m1

2011m1

2012m1
ym

2013m1

2014m1

monthly number of minor incidents
monthly oil car shipments by rail

27

0

0

10

percentage points
1
2
3

20
30
40
percentage points

4

50

Figure 5: Fraction of Crude Shipments, Serious Rail Incidents vs. Rail Activity, 2009-2014

2009q1

2010q1

2011q1

2012q1
quarter

2013q1

2014q1

2015q1

pct. of shortline miles associated with crude oil shipments
pct. of railcars associated with crude oil shipments
pct. of actual car weight associated with crude oil shipments
pct. of serious incidents associated with crude oil shipments

28

0

0

10
20
percentage points

percentage points
1
2
3

30

4

Figure 6: Fraction of Crude Shipments, Minor Rail Incidents vs. Rail Activity, 2009-2014

2009q1

2010q1

2011q1

2012q1
quarter

2013q1

2014q1

2015q1

pct. of shortline miles associated with crude oil shipments
pct. of railcars associated with crude oil shipments
pct. of actual car weight associated with crude oil shipments
pct. of minor incidents associated with crude oil shipments

29

Table 1: Crude Oil Rail Incidents
A. Serious Incidents
Fraction of weeks
Number of weeks between events
with an event
Mean Std. Dev. Median Skewness
0.07
13.23
20.34
6.50
3.18
B. Minor Incidents
Fraction of weeks
Number of events per week
Mean Std. Dev. Median Skewness
with an event
0.50
2.27
1.72
2.00
2.08

30

Table 2: Annual Crude Oil Shipments
rail cars carrying oil
year oil shipments
total
per shipment
2009
167
942
5.6
2010
294
9554
32.5
2011
665
15818
23.8
2012
1762
74525
42.3
2013
2508
147940
59
2014
2508
186954
74.5
Total
7904
435708
55.1

31

distance (thousand miles)
total
per shipment
170.8
1.023
375.2
1.276
843.9
1.269
2096.8
1.190
3001.8
1.197
3242.2
1.293
9730.7
1.231

weight (thousand tons)
total
per shipment
1738.1
10.408
18613.8
63.312
29473.1
44.320
124203.0
70.490
223371.0
89.063
266733.1
106.353
664132.1
84.025

Table 3: Regression Analysis of Time Between Serious Incidents
Regression model
regressor
Cumulative number
of minor incidents
constant
p
χ2 statistic

Exponential
-0.019∗
(0.011)

Weibull
-0.019∗
(0.010)

-2.255∗∗∗
(0.504)
0.905
(0.146)

-1.956∗∗∗
(0.272)

3.101∗

3.599∗

Cox
-0.025∗∗∗
(0.009)

7.644∗∗∗

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*: significant at 10%; **: significant at 5%; ***: significant at 1%

32

Table 4: Logit Analysis of Serious Incidents

# minor incidents, past 3 mos.
# minor incidents, past 6 mos.
# minor incidents, past 9 mos.
# minor incidents, past 12 mos.
constant
χ2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.363**
(0.168)
-0.218
(0.197)
0.134
(0.204)
0.005
(0.133)
-4.190***
(0.318)
37.390

0.363**
(0.165)
-0.219
(0.192)
0.141
(0.104)

0.305*
(0.166)
0.003
(0.092)

0.310***
(0.052)

-4.190***
(0.314)
36.512

-4.117***
(0.296)
35.834

-4.116***
(0.296)
35.731

Dependent variable: indicator for serious incident
Robust standard errors in parentheses
504 observations
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

33

Table 5: Regression Analysis of Relation Between Crude Rail Car Shipments and Minor Incidents

Thousand crude cars

0.229***
(0.032)

Poisson
0.228***
(0.035)

Dm1
Dm2
Dm3
Dm4
Dm5
Dm6
Dm7
Dm8
Dm9
Dm10
Dm11
Winter dummy

0.246***
(0.035)
-0.303
(0.532)
-0.045
(0.588)
0.200
(0.542)
0.309
(0.500)
0.455
(0.510)
-0.356
(0.515)
-0.310
(0.505)
-0.082
(0.416)
-0.025
(0.527)
0.194
(0.507)
-0.282
(0.461)

-0.215
(0.222)

constant
χ2

50.007

44.831

185.292

Negative Binomial
0.317*** 0.312*** 0.322***
(0.078)
(0.077)
(0.082)
-0.062
(0.458)
0.031
(0.453)
0.362
(0.404)
0.489
(0.391)
0.533
(0.390)
-0.045
(0.424)
-0.041
(0.418)
0.225
(0.397)
0.156
(0.408)
0.446
(0.387)
-0.002
(0.413)
-0.277
(0.186)
-0.618** -0.527*
-0.754*
(0.282)
(0.288)
(0.413)
16.420
18.984
22.979

All regressions include fixed effects for origination-destination state pairs
Robust standard errors in parentheses
913 observations
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

34

Table 6: Analysis of total damages

Thousand crude cars

Winter dummy

constant
χ2

Negative
Binomial
0.544***
(0.078)

75%
294.31
(188.17)

Percentile regressions
80%
85%
90%
691.24*** 1318.0*** 1787.6***
(211.90)
(348.05)
(632.22)

-0.243
(0.211)

0.294
(0.478)

0.000
(0.418)

0.000
(0.000)

-776.35
(577.54)

-1011.6
(1011.4)

-4.824***
(0.146)
50.438

-0.883
(0.621)

-1.382**
(0.551)

-1.318***
(0.348)

774.56
(551.83)

2809.4***
(898.41)

Robust standard errors in parentheses
904 observations
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

35

95%
2080.5*
(1287.5)

Table 7: Regression Analysis of Minor Incidents Including Wheat and All shipments

Thousand crude cars
Thousand wheat cars

(1)
0.322***
(0.082)
0.020
(0.831)

Thousand all cars
Dm1
Dm2
Dm3
Dm4
Dm5
Dm6
Dm7
Dm8
Dm9
Dm10
Dm11

-0.062
(0.458)
0.031
(0.453)
0.363
(0.404)
0.489
(0.391)
0.533
(0.391)
-0.045
(0.424)
-0.041
(0.418)
0.225
(0.397)
0.156
(0.408)
0.446
(0.387)
-0.002
(0.414)

(2)
0.244*
(0.132)

(3)
0.244*
(0.132)
-0.080
(0.843)
0.088
(0.112)
-0.058
(0.459)
0.053
(0.452)
0.355
(0.404)
0.479
(0.392)
0.510
(0.394)
-0.058
(0.425)
-0.055
(0.419)
0.210
(0.398)
0.147
(0.408)
0.457
(0.386)
-0.002
(0.414)

0.087
(0.113)
-0.058
(0.459)
0.053
(0.452)
0.356
(0.404)
0.477
(0.392)
0.507
(0.393)
-0.058
(0.425)
-0.055
(0.419)
0.211
(0.398)
0.146
(0.408)
0.458
(0.386)
-0.000
(0.414)

Winter dummy
constant
χ2

-0.756*
(0.417)
22.976

-0.853**
(0.424)
23.649

-0.850**
(0.425)
23.671

(4)
0.312***
(0.078)
0.114
(0.818)

-0.275
(0.186)
-0.535*
(0.293)
18.985

All regressions include fixed effects for origination-destination state pairs
Robust standard errors in parentheses
913 observations
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

36

(5)
0.242*
(0.124)

0.078
(0.105)

(6)
0.242*
(0.124)
-0.001
(0.834)
0.078
(0.106)

-0.262
(0.187)
-0.626**
(0.307)
19.668

-0.262
(0.187)
-0.626**
(0.309)
19.668

Table 8: Regression Analysis of Minor Incidents Related to Miles (1, 2, 3) and Weight (4, 5, 6)

Million Miles, Crude Shipments
Million Miles, All Shipments

(1)
9.842**
(4.563)
12.380**
(5.743)

(2)
10.004**
(4.427)
11.510**
(5.594)

(3)
11.559**
(4.857)
10.566*
(5.617)

Million Tons, Crude Shipments
Million Tons, All Shipments
Winter dummy

-0.223
(0.186)

Dm1
Dm2
Dm3
Dm4
Dm5
Dm6
Dm7
Dm8
Dm9
Dm10
Dm11
constant
χ2

-1.060***
(0.327)
27.041

-0.965***
(0.334)
29.243

-0.068
(0.455)
0.105
(0.447)
0.325
(0.405)
0.436
(0.393)
0.453
(0.392)
-0.061
(0.424)
-0.126
(0.426)
0.158
(0.399)
0.135
(0.405)
0.447
(0.383)
-0.023
(0.415)
-1.137**
(0.442)
33.659

All regressions include fixed effects for origination-destination state pairs
Robust standard errors in parentheses
913 observations
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

37

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.119*
(0.070)
0.031
(0.053)

0.124*
(0.068)
0.024
(0.051)
-0.269
(0.186)

0.117*
(0.071)
0.028
(0.054)

-0.587* -0.489
(0.303) (0.310)
8.959 11.104

-0.052
(0.461)
0.034
(0.453)
0.375
(0.404)
0.476
(0.392)
0.529
(0.391)
-0.068
(0.425)
0.022
(0.420)
0.194
(0.398)
0.133
(0.409)
0.453
(0.387)
0.014
(0.414)
-0.705*
(0.429)
16.233

Table 9: Logit Analysis of Serious Incidents, 2

Millon Crude CarMiles
Millon All CarMiles

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.359*
(0.195)
-0.039
(0.177)

0.359*
(0.195)
-0.039
(0.177)

0.848**
(0.408)
0.181
(0.206)
-0.484
(0.608)
0.091
(0.323)
-0.702
(0.525)
0.109
(0.168)
0.101
(0.171)
0.103
(0.160)

0.851**
(0.410)
0.182
(0.206)
-0.483
(0.608)
0.088
(0.325)
-0.705
(0.527)
0.110
(0.169)
0.102
(0.171)
0.103
(0.160)

0.168
(0.197)
-0.023
(0.180)

Millon Crude CarMiles, L1
Millon Crude CarMiles, L2
Millon Crude CarMiles, L3
Millon All CarMiles, L1
Millon All CarMiles, L2
Millon All CarMiles, L3
Count (Crude)
Count (Crude), L1
Count (Crude), L2
Count (Crude), L3
Count (All)
Count (All), L1
Count (All), L2
Count (All), L3
Winter dummy
N
χ2

2558
5.357

0.013
(0.271)
2558
5.360

2454
15.214

-0.033
(0.282)
2454
15.227

All regressions include fixed effects for origination-destination state pairs
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

38

0.717**
(0.314)
-0.051
(0.426)
0.391
(0.288)
0.077
(0.349)
-0.191
(0.216)
0.033
(0.189)
0.170
(0.183)
0.093
(0.180)
0.058
(0.288)
2454
15.805

Table 10: Logit Analysis of Serious Incidents, 3

Count (All)
Count (All), L1
Count (All), L2
Count (All), L3

(1)

(2)

0.175
(0.135)
0.060
(0.140)
0.288**
(0.121)
0.195
(0.127)

-0.190
(0.216)
0.027
(0.189)
0.175
(0.183)
0.095
(0.180)
0.775**
(0.311)
-0.078
(0.440)
0.450
(0.290)
0.077
(0.355)

Count (Crude)
Count (Crude), L1
Count (Crude), L2
Count (Crude), L3
Thousand Cars, Crude Shipments
Million Miles, Crude Shipments
Million Tons, Crude Shipments
Thousand Cars, All Shipments
Million Miles, All Shipments
Million Tons, All Shipments
Winter dummy
N
χ2

0.013
(0.170)
7687
9.937

0.046
(0.288)
2247
14.745

(3)

2.008**
(0.973)
-0.992
(4.224)
-1.043**
(0.521)
0.169
(0.123)
1.178
(1.125)
-0.014
(0.113)
0.073
(0.277)
2486
16.560

All regressions include fixed effects for origination-destination state pairs
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

39

(4)

(5)

0.029
(0.180)
0.152
(0.169)
0.323**
(0.157)
0.189
(0.161)

-0.174
(0.221)
0.031
(0.192)
0.180
(0.188)
0.127
(0.187)
0.938**
(0.431)
0.251
(0.464)
0.773**
(0.380)
0.086
(0.473)
1.696
(1.091)
-2.489
(16.655)
-1.339**
(0.605)
0.099
(0.092)
0.929
(1.186)
0.084
(0.115)
0.084
(0.297)
2178
31.985

2.011**
(0.957)
-1.098
(4.669)
-1.342**
(0.553)
0.136
(0.106)
0.857
(1.187)
0.086
(0.117)
0.110
(0.293)
2178
23.157

Table 11: Logit Analysis of Serious Incidents, 4
(1)
(2)
Thousand Cars (Crude) 1.500** 1.414*
(0.755) (0.842)
Thousand cars (All)
-0.419
-0.581
(0.536) (0.589)
Million Miles (Crude)
-0.970
-1.089
(3.273) (3.654)
Million Miles (All)
3.536** 3.506*
(1.728) (1.848)
Count (Crude)
1.057** 1.166**
(0.440) (0.474)
Count (Crude) L1
0.554
(0.541)
Count (Crude) L2
0.781
(0.513)
Count (Crude) L3
-0.337
(0.727)
Count (All)
-0.066
-0.033
(0.247) (0.245)
Count (All) L1
-0.038
(0.244)
Count (All) L2
0.197
(0.224)
Count (All) L3
-0.056
(0.264)
Dtight x Weight
3.088
3.817
(4.291) (4.303)
Dtight TX x Weight
N
χ2

2111
49.938

2025
57.548

(3)
1.500**
(0.755)
-0.419
(0.536)
-0.970
(3.273)
3.536**
(1.728)
1.057**
(0.440)

-0.066
(0.247)

-0.130
(0.308)
3.217
(4.292)
2111
49.938

(4)
1.414*
(0.842)
-0.581
(0.589)
-1.089
(3.654)
3.506*
(1.848)
1.166**
(0.474)
0.554
(0.541)
0.781
(0.513)
-0.337
(0.727)
-0.033
(0.245)
-0.038
(0.244)
0.197
(0.224)
-0.056
(0.264)
-0.038
(0.326)
3.855
(4.301)
2025
57.548

All regressions include state-pair fixed effects and interactions between weight and state pairs
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

40

