                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?EVIDENCE
                    FROM ILLEGAL INSIDER TRADES

                                       Kenneth R. Ahern

                                      Working Paper 24297
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24297


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




I thank seminar participants at Indiana University for useful feedback on this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kenneth R. Ahern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Do Proxies for Informed Trading Measure Informed Trading? Evidence from Illegal Insider
Trades
Kenneth R. Ahern
NBER Working Paper No. 24297
February 2018
JEL No. D53,D83,D85,G12,G14,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper exploits hand-collected data on illegal insider trades to test whether standard
illiquidity measures can detect informed trading. Controlling for unobserved cross-sectional and
time-series variation, sampling bias, and strategic timing of insider trades, I find that only
absolute order imbalance and the negative autocorrelation of order flows are statistically and
economically robust predictors of insider trading. However, this result only holds for short-lived
information. When information is long-lived, none of the measures of illiquidity I consider detect
informed trading, including bid-ask spreads, Kyle's lambda, and Amihud illiquidity. These
results suggest that standard measures of illiquidity have limited applications.


Kenneth R. Ahern
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway, HOH 718
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
kenneth.ahern@marshall.usc.edu
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                              1



        “The construction of proxies for [information asymmetry] via empirical analysis of
        [observable market phenomena] ranks as one of the most important goals of empirical
        microstructure research.” — Joel Hasbrouck, 2007


  A central theory of finance is that information asymmetry drives liquidity in financial markets
(Kyle, 1985; Glosten and Milgrom, 1985). To implement this theory, finance scholars have developed
a battery of proxies for information asymmetry based on measures of illiquidity, such as bid-ask
spread decompositions (Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans, 1997), order imbalance (Easley,
Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman, 1996), and price impact (Glosten and Harris, 1988). Though the
theory is compelling and these proxies are widely used, there is little credible empirical evidence that
the proxies are valid. This is because validating the proxies requires the rare opportunity to directly
observe informed trading. Given the importance of information asymmetry in finance, it is crucial
to assess which empirical proxies of informed trading are valid and under what circumstances.
  In this paper, I exploit detailed data on illegal insider trading to provide new evidence on the
validity of a host of proxies for informed trading. Though illegal insider trading does not represent
all informed trading, these data help to overcome a number of empirical obstacles. First, the legal
documents in insider trading cases provide direct observations of the timing of information flows
and trades. Second, the trades documented in illegal insider trading cases are, by definition, based
on material non-public information, not speculation or public information. Third, the data include
observations of informed trading in a wide range of firms and events. Finally, the longevity of
information varies in the data, allowing a comparison of short-lived versus long-lasting information.
  The observations of insider trading are hand-collected from all insider trading cases filed by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Department of Justice (DOJ) between 2009
and 2013, as collected in Ahern (2017). The sample includes 312 different firms in 410 different
insider trading events over the period 1996 to 2013. Mergers and acquisitions are the most common
event in the sample (52%), followed by earnings announcements (28%), news about drug regulation
(9%), and other announcements about operations, security issuance, and financial distress. Firms
range from recently public firms to the largest firms in the economy, including Microsoft, Procter
& Gamble, and Berkshire Hathaway, and the median sample firm is comparable to the median firm
on the NYSE.
2                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



    Using direct observations of insider trading, I compare the power of widely used measures of
illiquidity to predict informed trading. Specifically, using intraday data from the NYSE Trades
and Quotes (TAQ) database, I calculate quoted, effective, and realized spreads, price impact,
absolute order imbalance, Kyle’s λ, and parameters from the spread decomposition of Madhavan,
Richardson, and Roomans (1997) (MRR). Using daily data, I also calculate the illiquidity measure
of Amihud (2002).
    There are two primary obstacles to using illegal insider trading to test the predictive power of
illiquidity measures. First, informed trading does not occur in a random set of firms and dates.
This means that omitted variables could cause a spurious relationship between illiquidity and
informed trading. For example, high-tech firms might have higher illiquidity for reasons unrelated
to information asymmetry and at the same time, high-tech firms might also have greater informed
trading. Similarly, omitted variables could drive both the time series pattern of illiquidity and
informed trading.
    To address these concerns, I use event fixed effects, event-day fixed effects, and time-varying
macroeconomic and firm-level factors to absorb omitted variables. The event fixed effects control
for all time-invariant properties of the firm and event, such as the type of event, the firm’s industry,
financial policies, and geographic location. The event-day fixed effects control for the average runup
of informed trading and illiquidity before the public announcement of the event. The time-varying
factors control for systematic risk and a firm’s daily returns and trading volume.
    A related concern caused by non-random trading is strategic timing by informed traders. The
theoretical model of Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2016) predicts that insiders with long-lived informa-
tion will strategically trade on days with low levels of illiquidity, generating a negative relationship
between insider trading and illiquidity. To address this concern, I exploit the variation of inside
traders’ lead time before their private information becomes public. When lead times are shorter,
inside traders have less ability to be strategic, and the timing of their trades is closer to random.
    The second primary obstacle when using illegal insider trading data is potential sampling bias. If
regulators use illiquidity to detect illegal insider trading, then my tests would show that illiquidity
is related to the likelihood of getting caught rather than the likelihood of insider trading itself. To
address this concern, I first describe the many methods used by the SEC to detect insider trading, of
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                              3



which abnormal market data is just one. Second, I use empirical proxies to measure the likelihood
that the SEC used market data to detect insider trading in a particular case. The proxies are based
on the network structure of inside traders and the involvement in a case by regulatory agencies
that do not monitor the stock market.
  My first results show that in tests that do not control for strategic timing, none of the measures
of illiquidity are statistically correlated with insider trading except Kyle’s λ. However, the effect of
Kyle’s λ is negative and statistically significant, consistent with the prediction of Collin-Dufresne
and Fos (2016), but contrary to conventional wisdom.
  When I control for strategic timing, the results are strikingly different. I find that the greater is
the urgency of trading, the stronger is the positive correlation between measures of illiquidity and
insider trading. Given that urgency is high, a one standard deviation increase in the quoted bid-
ask spread is associated with an increase in the likelihood of insider trading by 26% of the average
likelihood. Other measures, including the effective spread and Kyle’s λ, have similar economic
magnitudes. Using a stricter criteria for urgency reduces the magnitude of these effects by about
half, but they remain highly statistically significant. These results show that when information is
short-lived, standard measures of illiquidity are reliable predictors of insider trading.
  However, only two measures of illiquidity are robust to controls for sampling bias: absolute order
imbalance and the autocorrelation of order flow. Kyle’s λ and Amihud Illiquidity are slightly less
robust. The remaining measures of illiquidity either lose their statistical significance or are directly
correlated with the SEC’s detection mechanism. In particular, all of the quote-based measures of
spreads and price impact are related to the likelihood of detection through abnormal market data.
  To directly compare the predictive power of the illiquidity measures, I compare each measure’s
predictive power controlling for the other measures. Consistent with the prior results, these tests
show that absolute order imbalance and the autocorrelation of order flows are the most statistically
significant and economically meaningful predictors of informed trading.
  Robustness tests provide a number of additional results. First, the predictive power of Kyle’s
λ is sensitive to modeling assumptions. Second, using the occupation of inside traders to measure
their sophistication, I find that illiquidity is driven by the trades of sophisticated buy side managers
and analysts. Third, intraday price range and volatility and dollar-based spreads do not predict
4                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



insider trading in any tests. Fourth, the main results of the paper do not change when conditioning
on firm size, year, type of event, the source of the information, and whether the event was positive
or negative.
    This paper’s results have a number of important implications. First, though standard illiquidity
measures have the power to predict informed trading, they are only effective when information
is short-lived and traders cannot strategically time their trades. When information is long-lived,
strategic timing nullifies the predictive power of all of the illiquidity measures. Second, the illiquidity
measures that are the most reliable predictors are based on order flows, not prices or quotes. This
suggests that market makers do not adjust prices and quotes in response to informed trading,
contrary to the assumptions of many theoretical models. Finally, for practical purposes, the relative
efficacy and simplicity of calculation makes Amihud Illiquidity an attractive option to measure
information asymmetry, assuming information is short-lived.
    The central contribution of this paper is to provide credible evidence on the validity of standard
measures of illiquidity using direct observations of informed trades. Using direct observations
provides an advantage over prior studies that rely on indirect proxies for informed trading, such
as institutional holdings and R&D expenses (Van Ness, Van Ness, and Warr, 2001), reductions
in analyst coverage (Kelly and Ljungqvist, 2012), family-firms (Anderson, Reeb, and Zhao, 2012),
geographic proximity (Coval and Moskowitz, 2001), and retail short-sellers (Kelley and Tetlock,
2017). Cornell and Sirri (1992) and Chakravarty and McConnell (1999) also use direct observations
of informed trading, but only for single trading events. Petchey, Wee, and Yang (2016) study a
single measure of informed trading from illegal trading before merger announcements, but do not
control for strategic timing, event-day fixed effects, or sampling bias. Other papers study the
correlations of different measures of illiquidity based on different data frequency (Goyenko, Holden,
and Trzcinka, 2009; Hasbrouck, 2009), without studying information asymmetry.
    This paper is most closely related to Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2015) and Kacperczyk and Pag-
notta (2017). Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2015) show that activist hedge funds who privately increase
their ownership in target firms before they are required to publicly disclose their ownership posi-
tions strategically time their trades to avoid illiquidity. Thus, they find a negative relationship
between measures of illiquidity and informed trading. Compared to Collin-Dufresne and Fos, my
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                             5



setting of illegal insider trading provides evidence from a wider set of firms, events, and information
longevity. A second difference is that activist hedge funds control when their private information
is revealed to the public, whereas the typical inside trader in my sample has no control over the
release of the information.
  Kacperczyk and Pagnotta (2017) study similar data on illegal insider trading as this paper, but
use a different research design. In particular, Kacperczyk and Pagnotta (2017) do not control for
event-day fixed effects and provide fewer tests of sampling bias and strategic timing of trades. Thus,
they find small negative correlations between insider trading and measures of stock illiquidity as
in Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2015). Instead, Kacperczyk and Pagnotta (2017) focus more on the
predictive power of options. I do not study options in this paper to avoid endogenity problems.
Ahern (2017) suggests that sophisticated inside traders strategically avoid options because they
make it easier for regulators to convict inside traders. In particular, in some of its cases, the SEC
notes that buying short-maturity out-of-the-money options is strong evidence of insider trading.



                                    I. Research Design

  In an ideal research setting, informed trading is directly observable and occurs randomly across
firms and time. In this setting, if illiquidity is higher on firm-days with informed trading than
firm-days without informed trading, we could conclude that informed trading causes illiquidity to
increase. In reality, informed trading is not directly observable and it is not randomly assigned to
firms or days. Below, I discuss how I address these two limitations.



A. Non-Random Selection of Firms and Dates

  The firms in which informed traders invest are not randomly assigned in the real world. First,
informed trading requires private valuable information. The existence of valuable information
varies across firms in non-random ways. For instance, information that a firm is a takeover target
is valuable, but firms are not randomly assigned to be takeover targets. Second, the spread of
information is not random. For instance, some firms might rely more heavily on outside contractors
who are more likely to spread private information.
6                  DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



    Because informed trading is not randomly assigned to firms, an omitted variable could cause
both illiquidity and informed trading. For example, high-tech firms might have a high likelihood
of informed trading because they are more likely to be takeover targets. At the same time, high-
tech firms might also be more illiquid for reasons unrelated to informed trading, such as a lack
of institutional investors. Thus, omitted variables could generate a spurious relationship between
illiquidity and informed trading.
    To control for omitted variables, I use event fixed effects, where an event is a specific piece of
information, such as a takeover or earnings announcement. The event window includes the period
from 120 days to two days before the public announcement of the information. Any characteristic
that does not change over the 119 days in the event window is absorbed in the fixed effects. Such
characteristics include the type of information and time-invariant characteristics of the firm, such
as industry, firm policies, location, etc.
    Second, in the real world, the timing of informed trading is not random. For example, private
information about an upcoming earnings announcement might spread faster as the announcement
date approaches, leading to an increase in informed trading. At the same time, illiquidity might
increase as investors respond to earnings announcements of peer firms. Therefore, both illiquidity
and informed trading could increase as the announcement date approaches, creating a spurious
relationship.
    To control for non-random timing of informed trading, I use event-day fixed effects and time-
varying macro and firm-level variables. The event-day fixed effects are dummy variables for each
event day from −120 to −2. These event-day fixed effects normalize each event’s time series pattern
by the average time series pattern across all events. I also include the event firms’ daily trading
volumes and absolute stock returns as well as the absolute values of the Fama French factors.1 These
variables control for time-varying factors that could be correlated with both informed trading and
illiquidity. Altogether, event fixed effects, event-day fixed effects, and time-varying factors absorb
a wide range of potential omitted variables.
    The final concern with non-random assignment is the strategic timing of informed trading. Collin-
Dufresne and Fos (2016) show that if private information is long-lived, informed investors will choose

1All of the results in this paper are robust to using turnover instead of ln(1+volume). Using turnover decreases the
R2 s in the regressions and increases the significance of the main variables.
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                                7



to trade when liquidity is high to limit the price impact of their trades. This will cause a negative
relationship between illiquidity and informed trading.
  To control for the strategic timing of insider trading, I create two variables to measure the
urgency of trading. When urgency is high, informed investors have less freedom to strategically
time their trades and the timing of trades is closer to random. The first measure, Daily Urgency,
is a daily measure of the time remaining before the private information is publicly announced. In
particular,
                                           1
                    Daily Urgencyτ = −            for event dates τ = −120, . . . , −2.
                                           τ
Daily Urgency increases as the public announcement date gets closer to the current date. Because
Daily Urgency is identical across all events, it is perfectly correlated with the event-day fixed effects,
though an interaction with daily illiquidity is not. Unlike fixed effects, the impact of Daily Urgency
can be interpreted with an economic meaning.
  Using insider trading as a proxy of informed trading, I estimate the following econometric model,


 Insider tradingιτ = α + β · Illiquidityιτ + φ · Daily Urgencyτ + ψ · Illiquidityιτ × Daily Urgencyτ

                      + γ1 · |retιτ | + γ2 · ln(1 + volumeιτ )

                      + γ3 · |M KTτ | + γ4 · |SM Bτ | + γ5 · |HM Lτ |                                 (1)

                      + κι + ειτ ,     ∀ι ∈ I and τ = −120, . . . , −2,


where κι are event fixed effects; |retιτ | is the absolute value of event-firm ι’s stock return on event-
date τ ; ln(1 + volumeιτ ) is the logged trading volume of event-firm ι on day τ ; and M KT , SM B,
and HM L are Fama-French daily risk factors. A positive estimate of ψ indicates that illiquidity
is positively related to informed trading in situations where trading is more likely to be randomly
timed.
  A drawback to Daily Urgency is that it does not account for the lead time from the day of the
original information leak to the day of the public announcement. For example, Daily Urgency at
τ = −4 is the same whether the original leak happened at τ = −5 or τ = −20. However, when the
original leak occurs with a long lead time, strategic traders may have already timed their trades to
reduce their price impact.
8                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



    To overcome this limitation, I also use a stricter measure of urgency, Event Urgency, that is the
inverse of the lead time between the original leak and the public announcement. If we let τ ι be the
event-date of the original leak in event ι, then

                                                              1
                                        Event Urgencyι = −       .
                                                              τι

Because Event Urgency is constant across all event-dates for a given event, it is perfectly correlated
with the event fixed effects. However, the interaction with daily illiquidity is not. Therefore, I
estimate the following econometric model,



                    Insider tradingιτ = α + β · Illiquidityιτ + κι + δτ                              (2)

                                         + φ · Illiquidityιτ × Event Urgencyι

                                         + γ1 |retιτ | + γ2 ln(1 + volumeιτ )

                                         + γ3 |M KTτ | + γ4 |SM Bτ | + γ5 |HM Lτ |

                                         + ειτ ,    ∀ι ∈ I and τ = −120, . . . , −2,


where δτ are event-day fixed effects. As above, the coefficient φ in Equation 2 measures the
difference-in-difference marginal effect of illiquidity on insider trading when the real world setting
is closer to the ideal randomized setting.


B. Non-random Selection of Observations

    The second major deviation from the ideal setting is that I cannot directly observe informed
trading. Instead, I must rely on illegal insider trading cases filed by regulators. While these data
provide exceptional detail on individual trading behavior, sampling bias is a concern. If regulators
use illiquidity to identify illegal insider trading, I could misinterpret my results to mean informed
trading causes illiquidity when the true relation is that illiquidity causes regulators to detect insider
trading.
    To address this concern, it is important to understand how illegal insider trading is detected by
regulators. If regulators use methods that are less related to illiquidity, then sampling bias is less
                   DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                                           9



of a concern. For brevity, I provide a short summary of the regulatory process below. For a longer
description, see the Internet Appendix of Ahern (2017).
   Illegal insider trading is detected by a number of different entities, including the SEC, the DOJ,
the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI). Each entity relies on various detection methods including computerized monitoring of trading
behavior, tips submitted by the public, and traditional investigation methods. FINRA has the
primary responsibility for monitoring abnormal market behaviors. It uses a computer program
called SONAR that monitors news feeds, SEC filings, and market data to identify suspicious trades.2
If SONAR flags an event as suspicious, human investigators at FINRA collect additional information
from trading records. If the investigations produce sufficient evidence, FINRA refers the case to
the SEC.
   In addition to referrals from FINRA, the SEC initiates its own investigations and commonly
receives information from other sources, including the DOJ, the FBI, and tips submitted directly
from individuals. If the SEC’s investigation identifies evidence of insider trading in a particular
event by a particular individual, it expands its investigation to other trades by the same individual
in different events and to other traders in the same event. The SEC identifies other potential
traders through phone and email records, in-person interrogations, and in some cases, wire taps.
Therefore, the detection of a single episode of insider trading can lead regulators to identify other
insider trading events and other inside traders. Even if FINRA’s algorithm detects one event based
on illiquidity, the SEC’s subsequent investigations might detect other events that FINRA missed.
Therefore, many cases in the data are likely to be detected by methods other than illiquidity.
   To provide empirical analysis of potential sampling bias, I use four proxies to control for the
likelihood that insider trading is detected by market data. The first two proxies rely on the
argument that illegal inside traders in larger networks are more likely to have been detected through
traditional investigations than through abnormal market data. To calculate the size of insider
trading networks, I first count the number of inside traders involved in an event. I then calculate
the total number of people in the traders’ complete network, including people who traded in other
events. I use dummy variables for above-median network size and number of traders.

2SONAR’s algorithm is not publicly available so I do not know if it uses illiquidity as a determinant of illegal trading.
My tests control for trading volume and absolute stock returns, which are likely included in SONAR’s algorithm.
10                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



     The other two proxies rely on the argument that different regulators use different detection
methods. If FINRA is involved in an investigation, the trades are more likely to have been detected
by abnormal market data. In contrast, if the FBI is involved in the investigation, the trades are
more likely to have been detected by traditional investigation techniques rather than abnormal
market data. I record dummy variables for events that are investigated by FINRA and the FBI,
using data from SEC press releases that acknowledge the assistance of other organizations in their
investigations.
     Using the detection proxies, I estimate the following triple interaction regression:


                  Insider tradingιτ = α + β · Illiquidityιτ + κι + δτ                             (3)

                                      + φ · Illiquidityιτ × Event Urgencyι

                                      + π · Illiquidityιτ × Detectionι

                                      + ω · Illiquidityιτ × Event Urgencyι × Detectionι

                                      + γ1 |retιτ | + γ2 ln(1 + volumeιτ )

                                      + γ3 |M KTτ | + γ4 |SM Bτ | + γ5 |HM Lτ |

                                      + ειτ ,    ∀ι ∈ I and τ = −120, . . . , −2.


The coefficient ω measures whether the central results of Equation 2 are significantly different
when the insider trading case is more likely detected by abnormal market data or traditional
investigations. If ω is zero, it implies that the main results are not driven by sampling bias.
     Finally, an additional concern is that though the presence of an illegal insider trading case
indicates the presence of informed trading, the absence of a case does not imply the absence of
informed trading. This means that I do not observe a sample of alternative events that have no
informed trading to use as a counterfactual. Randomly choosing events as a counterfactual sample
would not help because the events could involve illegal insider trading that was undetected by
regulators. Thus, I could not separate the hypothesis that illiquidity is unrelated to informed
trading from the hypothesis that insider trading is equally common in the control sample as in the
main sample.
                  DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                                       11



  The lack of a counterfactual sample is alleviated by the event fixed effects. The event fixed
effects isolate the difference between days with insider trading and days without insider trading
within the event-firm’s time series. Once regulators identify insider trading in an event, they are
likely to search for additional insider trading on all of the days preceding the event. Therefore, it
is reasonable to assume that within an event’s time series, the days which the regulators do not
identify illegal insider trading actually have a substantially smaller likelihood of informed trading.



                                                   II. Data

A. Illegal Insider Trading

  Data on illegal insider trading comes from the data used in Ahern (2017). These data are
collected from legal filings by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Department of
Justice in connection with civil and criminal complaints of illegal insider trading. The data are
from cases filed between 2009 and 2013, but include insider trading dates from 1996 to 2013. The
data set includes the nature of the inside information, the date on which the original source leaked
the inside information, the dates on which the information was shared with others, with whom the
information was shared, and the days on which insiders traded. For a full description of the data,
see Ahern (2017).
  The advantage of using illegal insider trading data is that they provide direct observations of
informed trading. Moreover, though the data come from filings that are allegations brought by
the SEC and DOJ, they are most likely to be accurate. Most cases are not challenged by the
defendants. In the cases that are challenged, the defense is usually based on a technicality of the
legal definition of insider trading, not a dispute about the information or trading.
  A second advantage is that the data include the dates and the number of shares that the insiders
traded. In a minority of cases, the filings only provide a range of trading dates, not specific trading
dates. In these cases, I assign an equal fraction of the total number of shares to each of the days
in the range. This limitation will weaken the ability of measures of informed trading to correctly
identify days with increased informed trading.3
3I attempted to get the specific trading dates from the SEC for the cases that didn’t provide specific dates, but the
SEC denied my Freedom of Information Act requests.
12                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



B. Measures of Informed Trading

     I use two measures of informed trading. The first measure, Trade dummy, is a dummy vari-
able that equals one if any insider trading occurred on a particular date. The second measure is
ln(1+Number of shares traded), which measures the total number of shares traded by all inside
traders on a particular date. Though this variable is measured in levels, the fixed effects in the
regressions convert them into deviations from the event’s average.



C. Measures of Liquidity

     In the main set of tests, I investigate the performance of seven popular measures of illiquidity
based on intraday data. In robustness tests, I consider different calculations of these seven measures
and alternative illiquidity measures.
     To calculate intraday measures of illiquidity, I use the NYSE Monthly Trades and Quotes (TAQ)
database. Holden and Jacobsen (2014) show that compared to the more accurate Daily TAQ
database, the monthly database produces biased estimates of illiquidity measures. Therefore, I
follow Holden and Jacobsen’s three recommendations designed to reduce errors in the monthly
TAQ database: 1) set withdrawn quotes to missing, rather than omitting the quotes altogether, 2)
estimate time stamps within the second using interpolated times based on the ordering of trades
and quotes in the database, and 3) omit quotes and trades that occur when quotes are crossed or
locked (where the national best bid is equal to or greater than the national best offer). In particular,
I follow the programming code provided in the Internet Appendix of Holden and Jacobsen (2014)
to generate National Best Bid and Offer (NBBO) quotes and matched trades. To identify a trade
as a buy or sell, I follow the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm commonly used in the literature.



                                         C.1. Bid-Ask Spread

                                            At −Bt
     The percent quoted bid-ask spread is    Mt ,    where At is the National Best Ask quoted at time t,
Bt is the National Best Bid quoted at time t, and Mt is the midpoint of At and Bt . Following Holden
and Jacobsen (2014), I aggregate the spread to the daily level by taking the weighted average of
the intraday quoted spreads, where the weights on each observed intraday spread is the amount of
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                                   13



time the spread is in force. In robustness checks, I also use the dollar quoted spread, which is the
time-weighted dollar spread, At − Bt .



                                         C.2. Effective Spread

  The quoted bid-ask spread implicitly assumes that trades occur at the ask or bid price. The
effective spread accounts for trades that occur within the quoted spread. The effective spread
subtracts the midpoint of the NBBO quotes from the trading price to estimate the difference
between the proxy for the true price (the midpoint) and what the trader actually pays. This
difference is multiplied by two to give a full spread.
                                                                               2Dk (Pk −Mk )
  In particular, the percent effective spread is calculated per trade, k, as        Mk       .   Dk is a trade
indicator that equals +1 if the trade is a buy and −1 if it is a sell. Pk is the trade price of trade
k, and Mk is the midpoint of the NBBO quotes prevailing when trade k occurs. Following Holden
and Jacobsen (2014), I aggregate the effective spread to the daily level by taking the dollar-volume
weighted average of the effective spread across all trades per day. In robustness checks, I also use
the dollar effective spread, which is not normalized by Mk .



                                          C.3. Price Impact

  The price impact is an estimate of the permanent change in a stock price following a trade. It is
calculated as the change in the current quoted midpoint to the quoted midpoint five minutes in the
                                                                 2Dk (Mk+5 −Mk )
future. In particular, the percent price impact per trade k is         Mk        .   Mk+5 is the midpoint
of the NBBO quotes prevailing five minutes after trade k. Again following Holden and Jacobsen
(2014), I aggregate the price impact to the daily level by taking the dollar-volume weighted price
impact across all trades per day. As above, I also calculate a dollar price impact that does not
normalize by Mk .



                                         C.4. Realized Spread

  The realized spread is the effective spread minus the price impact. The market maker receives
the effective spread, which accounts for trades within the bid and offer prices. However, if the trade
14                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



moves the stock price, the market maker’s gain is reduced as the trading price moves closer to the
true price. In other words, the realized spread is the effective spread net of price impact.
                                                                 2Dk (Pk −Mk+5 )
     The percent realized spread is calculated per trade k as          Mk        .   Again following Holden
and Jacobsen (2014), I aggregate the realized spread to the daily level by taking the dollar-volume
weighted realized spread across all trades per day. As above, I also calculate a dollar realized spread
that does not normalize by Mk .


                                    C.5. Absolute Order Imbalance

                                                                                                Buys−Sells
     Following Holden and Jacobsen (2014), I calculate absolute order imbalance as              Buys+Sells   ,
where Buys and Sells are the number of buys and sells per day, and buys and sells are identified
using the algorithm of Lee and Ready (1991). Absolute order imbalance has been used as a proxy
for the probability of informed trading (PIN) measure of Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman
(1996). Aktas, de Bodt, Declerck, and Oppens (2007) shows that if the probability of information
arrival is constant, PIN is equivalent to the absolute order imbalance.


                                          C.6. Kyle’s Lambda

     I estimate Kyle’s (1985) lambda as the coefficient λ in the following regression,


                                           ∆pk = λ · Sk + uk ,

                                                         √
where ∆pk is the change in the transaction price, Sk = Dk DollarV olumek is the signed dollar
volume of the trade, and uk is an unobserved error term. Observations include all price changes per
day and I require at least 10 price changes to estimate λ. Alternative estimators of Kyle’s lambda
are discussed below.


                              C.7. MRR Bid-Ask Spread Decomposition

     Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans (1997) (MRR) presents a structural model to decompose
the bid-ask spread into transaction costs and adverse selection costs of informed trading. Following
MRR, I estimate five parameters using five moment conditions. The parameter of interest is θ,
which measures the degree of information asymmetry between the market maker and investors. A
                  DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                         15



higher value of θ is predicted to lead to a larger change in beliefs about the true stock price for a
given change in order flow.



D. Summary Statistics

  Table I presents summary statistics of the sample by event. The table also provides average
characteristics separately for events with low urgency and high urgency, where high urgency is
defined as event urgency greater than the median event urgency of nine days. There are 410
events in the sample over the period 1996 to 2013. The average time from the original leak of
the information to the public announcement of the event is 22.9 days. In low urgency events, the
average is 43 days, and in high urgency events, the average is four days.
  I assign an event to be positive if the inside traders took long positions before the public an-
nouncement. In the entire sample, 75% of events are positive events. Positive events are significantly
more common when urgency is low (82%) compared to when urgency is high (67%).
  Panel B provides the fraction of events by the nature of the news. The most common type of
event is a merger or acquisition, at 52% of the sample. Earnings news is the next most common
type of event, with 28% of the sample. The remaining types of events are much less common:
drug regulation news (9%), sale of securities (7.5%), and operations (2.4%). Financial distress,
fund liquidation, and events with various news each account for less than one percent of the total.
Mergers are significantly more likely to be low urgency events, while earnings news are significantly
more likely to be high urgency events.
  Panel C shows that the median target firm is large, with market equity equal to about $1 billion,
though the sample includes a wide range of firm sizes. Firms with urgent events tend to be larger
firms, with an average market equity of $16.6 billion, compared to an average market equity of
$3.5 billion for low urgency firms. The other characteristics of firms reported in the table, Tobin’s
Q, R&D, and intangible assets, are not significantly different in high urgency events than in low
urgency events.
  Panel D provides the industry breakdown of the firm-events in the sample. The most common
industries are chemical manufacturing and computers and electronics manufacturing. Ahern (2017)
shows that the sample is biased towards high-tech industries relative to the industry distribution
16                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



of all public listings and also targets in acquisitions. However, neither chemicals or computers and
electronics manufacturing firms exhibits a prevalence for high or low urgency events.
     Finally, Panel E provides background characteristics of the inside traders in the sample. The
average trader age is 46 years, and the average trader wealth (proxied by home values) is $1.2
million. Traders in high urgency events tend to be slightly older and wealthier. In addition, traders
in urgent events tend to have more insider trading connections (network degree) and also tend to
be members of larger networks (network size). Unreported results show that across all days with
insider trading, hedge fund managers are more likely to trade in urgent events, whereas low-level
employees are more likely to trade in non-urgent events. These patterns are consistent with the
findings in Ahern (2017) that showed that hedge fund managers tend to be wealthier, older, have
larger insider trading networks, and receive information later compared to the average inside trader.
     Table II presents summary statistics using roughly 48,000 observations of daily data from τ =
−120 to τ = −2 over the 410 events in the sample. These statistics can be used to interpret
the coefficients in the regressions presented below. All illiquidity measures and stock returns are
winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Insider trading occurred in 4.6% of all days in the
sample. The quoted spread is 0.31%, on average and 0.13% at the median. The effective spread is
0.31% on average, and 0.12% at the median. The realized spread is 0.16% and the median is 0.05%.
The average price impact is 0.15% and the median is 0.06%. The spreads are slightly higher than
those reported in the random sample of Holden and Jacobsen (2014), though the price impact is
less. Absolute order imbalance is 11.1%, slightly less than reported in Holden and Jacobsen (2014).
Kyle’s λ is 8.5 on average, with a median of 6.3. At the median, this implies that a $10,000 order
will lead to a price change of 0.0063. At the median stock price of $19.39 in the sample, this is
equivalent to 3.25 basis points. MRR θ is 0.223% at the average, and 0.080% at the median.
     Panel D reports the number of traders per day that hold a particular occupational title. Buy
side analysts and managers are the most common type of trader, followed by small business owners,
low-level employees (such as IT technicians and secretaries) and specialized occupations (such as
medical doctors and engineers).
     Finally, Panel E reports summary statistics of the event firms’ daily stock returns, volume, and
market-wide factors. The median absolute value of daily returns is 1.5%. The average log volume
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                           17



of shares traded is −0.623, which equates to 536,332 shares. The median is slightly less at 543,893
shares.



   III. The Relationship between Insider Trading and Illiquidity

  This section of the paper first presents time-series patterns of returns, volume, measures of
illiquidity, and insider trading, then it presents estimates of the empirical models described above.


A. Time-Series Evidence of Illiquidity and Insider Trading

  Figure 1 presents the time series of insider trading activity in event time from τ = −40 to
τ = −1. The solid line represents the fraction of positive events in the sample in which insider
trading occurs, per event day. The dashed line represents the same concept for negative events.
The figure shows that insider trading occurs in 5% of events as far back as 40 days before the
announcement. As the public announcement date draws closer, the fraction of events with insider
trading increases steadily to around 30% in the few days before the announcement. For negative
events, insider trading is less common overall, but increases substantially in the last 15 days before
the announcement. Thus, insider trading activity ramps up close to the public announcement date,
but positive events have wide variation in the timing of trades.
  Figure 2 presents cumulative abnormal returns of event firms in the period before the public
announcement. Abnormal returns are calculated as the difference between a firm’s daily return
and the firm’s average return in the period τ = −120 to τ = −41. This figure shows that insider
trading is moving prices to their full-information value, as positive events have large runups of
roughly 8% over the period τ = −40 to τ = −1, while negative events have declines of about
2.5%. The asymmetry reflects that negative events in the sample tend to be less extreme earnings
events, compared to the large positive gains in merger events. Short-sell constraints might also
contribute to the asymmetry. For this study, the most relevant fact is that stock prices are moving
considerably before the public announcement. Likewise, Figure 3 shows that abnormal volume is
increasing substantially during the period before the public announcement. Therefore, there is clear
evidence that insiders are trading, stock prices are moving, and volume is increasing in advance of
the public announcement of an event.
18                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



     Figure 4 presents the time series of abnormal illiquidity for the seven illiquidity variables. Ab-
normal illiquidity is calculated as the daily illiquidity measure minus the firm’s average illiquidity
measure during the period from τ = −120 to τ i − 1, the day before the information was originally
leaked. Grey areas indicate the 95th percentile confidence interval.
     The patterns in these figures are in stark contrast to the steep runup in insider trading, volume,
and prices. Instead of increasing, the measures of abnormal illiquidity are nearly flat, or slightly
decreasing. For example, quoted spread and effective spread are significantly less than average for
a number of days in the period τ = −10 to τ = −1 and never significantly positive. Likewise, order
imbalance and Kyle’s λ become significantly more negative as the event gets closer. These figures
suggest that a firm’s illiquidity decreases slightly at the same time that insider trading in the firm
increases greatly.




B. Benchmark Regressions

     Table III presents benchmark regression estimates of informed trading on return and volume
measures without including measures of illiquidity. Observations include trading days from τ =
−120 to τ = −2. All regressions in the paper cluster standard errors at the event level.
     Column 1 presents a regression of absolute returns, trading volume, and absolute values of
market-wide asset pricing factors on a dummy variable for insider trading. This specification does
not include event fixed effects or event-day fixed effects. The results show that when the absolute
return is higher and trading volume is lower, insider trading is more likely. None of the market-wide
factors are significantly related to informed trading in this test or any of the other tests in the table.
This shows that insider trading is based on idiosyncratic information, not systematic risk.
     Next, column 2 includes event fixed effects to control for time-invariant factors over the 120
days before the announcement. After controlling for event fixed effects, absolute returns become
insignificant and volume becomes positively significant. This suggests that returns and volume are
correlated with the cross-sectional event fixed effects.
     Column 3 includes event-day fixed effects to control for any explanatory variables that are com-
mon across events on a particular event day. The relationship between volume and insider trading
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                             19



decreases but remains significantly positive. Returns and market factors remain unrelated to in-
formed trading. These same sets of results are found in columns 4–6 where the dependent variable
is the size of insider trading volume.
  The results in Table III show that controlling for cross-sectional and time-series variation, trading
volume is positively related to the intensity of informed trading, whereas absolute returns and
market factors are not. The positive relationship between trading volume and insider trading is
consistent with the idea that insider trading increases trading volume above its historical firm-
average and cross-sectional event-day average.




C. Naı̈ve Tests

  Table IV presents the relationship between insider trading and illiquidity without controlling
for the strategic timing of trades. In all of the these and the remaining tests, I include all of
the explanatory variables in the regressions in Table III, though for brevity, I do not report their
coefficient estimates. The dependent variable in panel A of Table IV is an indicator for insider
trading. In panel B, it is the volume of insider trading.
  In Panel A, almost none of the measures of illiquidity have a statistical relationship with insider
trading, whether fixed effects are included or not, consistent with the flat time-series of illiquidity
shown in Figure 4. In Panel B, when no fixed effects are included in the regressions, the three
spreads, price impact, and MRR θ are significantly related to insider trading. However, once
event fixed effects are included, these relationships become insignificant. This suggests that time-
invariant cross-sectional heterogeneity across event firms explains some of the variation in illiquidity
and informed trading.
  Consistent with Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2015), Kyle’s λ is negatively related to informed trading
after controlling for event fixed effects. However, once I control for event-day fixed effects, none of
the measures of illiquidity are significantly related to insider trading except a weak relationship of
the realized spread. The fact that Kyle’s λ becomes insignificant after including event-day fixed
effects implies that a common daily factor explains variation in abnormal liquidity and insider
trading across events.
20                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



     In summary, the results presented in this section show that measures of illiquidity are unrelated
to informed trading after accounting for unobserved cross-sectional variation across events and un-
observed time-series variation across event-dates. This is consistent with inside traders strategically
timing their trades to avoid price impact.




D. Tests that Control for Strategic Timing

     Table V presents estimates of Equation 1 in which the measures of illiquidity are interacted with
Daily Urgency. As stated above, Daily Urgency is perfectly correlated with event-day fixed effects,
so I only include event fixed effects. Panel A presents results for the incidence of insider trading;
Panel B presents results for the volume of insider trading.
     In all specifications, the main effect of Daily Urgency is positive and statistically significant.
This reflects that as the event day draws closer, insider trading is more prevalent. The interaction
between Illiquidity and Daily Urgency is positive and significant for all measures of illiquidity except
MRR θ. At the same time, the main effects of the illiquidity measures tend to be negative and
significant.
     These findings imply that when urgency is low, illiquidity is negatively related to insider trading,
but when urgency is high, illiquidity is positively related to insider trading. Thus, when the
timing of trading is closer to random, as in the ideal research setting, illiquidity signals an increase
in informed trading, as they are intended to do. However, when insiders can time their trades,
illiquidity signals a decrease in informed trading.
     The magnitudes of the coefficients are economically meaningful. A one-standard deviation in-
crease in the quoted spread, using a base-level of daily urgency of zero is associated with a negative
change in the likelihood of insider trading of −0.006. When urgency is one standard deviation
higher, a standard deviation increase in the quoted spread is associated with a positive change in
the likelihood of insider trading of +0.006. Therefore, the difference-in-difference estimate of the
marginal effect of an increase of the quoted spread when urgency is low compared to when urgency
is high is 0.012. Compared to the average of 0.046, this estimate represents an increase of 26%
from the average. The magnitude of the difference-in-difference of the effective spread, the realized
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                             21



spread, and Kyle’s λ are also 0.012. Price impact has a smaller effect at 0.009 and order imbalance
is 0.007.
  A similar pattern is found in Panel B, where the difference-in-difference estimate of the marginal
effect is 0.127 for the quoted spread, 0.126 for the effective spread, 0.121 for the realized spread,
0.089 for price impact, 0.074 for order imbalance, and 0.072 for Kyle’s λ, compared to the average of
0.316, or roughly 22% to 38% of the average of the informed trading volume. These results indicate
that the shorter is the remaining time before the public announcement of an event, the stronger is
the positive relationship between measures of illiquidity and the presence of insider trading.
  Table VI provides estimates of Equation 2 using Event Urgency to provide a stricter test of
the relationship between illiquidity and informed trading. Without controlling for event-day fixed
effects, only order imbalance, Kyle’s λ, and MRR θ are positive and significant across Panels A and
B. When, controlling for both event and event-day fixed effects, quoted spread, effective spread,
order imbalance, Kyle’s λ, and MRR θ are all positive and significantly related to informed trading
in Panels A and B. These results provide strong evidence that when measures of illiquidity are
higher, the likelihood of insider trading is higher, as long as insiders cannot strategically time their
trades to mitigate price impact.
  The economic magnitude of these results are between 40% and 60% smaller than the magnitudes
of the prior tests. For example, for a one-standard deviation increase in the quoted spread, the
difference-in-difference of the likelihood of insider trading is 0.007, or about 15% of the average
probability of insider trading. Kyle’s λ has a similar magnitude, but order imbalance is smaller. In
the tests of trading volume, quoted spread and Kyle’s λ have the largest economic magnitude of
about 15% of the average, whereas order imbalance and MRR θ have smaller economic magnitudes
of about 7% of the average.




E. Tests that Control for Sampling Bias

  Table VII presents the estimates of Equation 3 that control for sampling bias based on regulators’
detection methods. Panel A includes the network size dummy, panel B includes the number of
traders dummy, panel C includes the FBI dummy, and panel D includes the FINRA dummy.
22                 DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



     In panels A and B, order imbalance and Kyle’s λ are still statistically significant when trading is
urgent, as before. In addition, the interaction terms are not statistically significant, indicating that
the results are not different for events with large networks and many traders versus small networks
and few traders. In panel C, nearly all of the illiquidity measures are positively correlated with
urgent insider trading, but none of the interactions with the FBI dummy are statistically significant.
This means that the results do not differ whether the FBI participated in the investigation or not.
     Finally, panel D shows that only order imbalance is significant, as in the main results, and its
interaction terms with the FINRA dummy is not significant. This means that order imbalance has
the same predictive power regardless of FINRA’s participation in the investigation. In contrast,
all of the quote-based measures (spreads and price impact) are significantly related to FINRA’s
involvement and Kyle’s λ and MRR θ lose their significance when events are not investigated by
FINRA. These result suggest that FINRA’s detection algorithm is correlated with these measures,
but not with order imbalance.
     Taken together, these results show that order imbalance is robust in all of the tests and Kyle’s λ
is robust in most of the tests that control for urgency and sampling bias. These results also suggest
that the SONAR algorithm uses inputs related to spreads to detect insider trading.


F. Strategic Timing by Occupation

     To provide more detail on which insiders trade in urgent situations and which strategically time
their trades, I study the relationship between insider trading and Kyle’s λ by inside traders’ occu-
pations. Ahern (2017) shows that inside information tends to flow from relatively unsophisticated
corporate insiders who makes small trades, including executives, mid-level managers, and low-level
employees, through a sequence of social connections to sophisticated buy side managers and analysts
who make large trades.
     Figure 5 presents the magnitudes of difference-in-difference tests for nine classifications of occupa-
tions of insider traders. The vertical axis of each subfigure measures ln(1+insider trading volume).
The horizontal axis represents a one-standard deviation increase in Kyle’s λ from Low to High.4
The solid lines represent the economic magnitude of the relationship between Kyle’s λ and insider

4The relationships are similar using other measures of illiquidity.
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                        23



trading volume for urgent events. The dashed lines represent the same relationship when events are
not urgent. A positive slope indicates that Kyle’s λ increases when insider trading increases. The
relationships are separated into occupations by including interactions with occupational indicators
per day in unreported regressions.
  Focusing on urgent events, where traders have less freedom to strategically time their trades,
we see a strong positive relationship between Kyle’s λ and informed trading of buy side managers
and analysts. This shows that buy side traders drive the positive relationship in the full sample
between illiquidity and informed trading. In contrast, the flat slope for corporate executives and
managers suggests that their trades do not influence Kyle’s λ, even when trading is urgent.
  Focusing on non-urgent events reveals which traders are most likely to strategically time their
trades. This is indicated by a negative slope in the dashed line. Buy side analysts and corporate
managers are the most strategic traders in non-urgent events. In contrast, low level employees and
small business owners trade equally whether liquidity is high or low.
  These results show that the relationship between illiquidity and insider trading depends on both
urgency of trading and the sophistication of the inside traders.



                     IV. Alternative Measures of Illiquidity

  In this section, I discuss alternative calculations of Kyle’s λ, alternative parameters of MRR,
alternative illiquidity measures, and dollar-based spreads.



A. Kyle’s λ

  In the main tests, I calculate Kyle’s λ using a regression model with price changes as the de-
pendent variable, with no intercept, and using transactions as observations. In subsequent tests, I
denote this measures as λ1,k . Two alternative specification are,



                                      rk = α + λ2,k · Sk + uk ,                                 (4)

                                      rk = λ3,k · Sk + uk ,                                     (5)
24                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



where rk is the stock return at trade k, Sk is the signed dollar volume of the trade, and uk is an
unobserved error term. Both of these specifications use the stock return instead of price changes
as the dependent variable. The second alternative includes an intercept term.
     Next, following the model of Glosten and Harris (1988) and as calculated in Brennan and Sub-
rahmanyam (1995), Kyle’s λ can be calculated in the following regression,


                                   ∆pk = λ4,k qk + ψ[Dk − Dk−1 ] + uk ,                               (6)


where ∆pk is the price change, qk is the signed order flow of the number of shares traded, and Dk
is a trade direction indicator. This estimate does not account for the dollar volume of a trade, and
it includes a separate term ψ to measure the fixed costs associated with a trade.
     The four calculations of Kyle’s λ can also be calculated using 5-minute windows as observations,
rather than using transactions as observations. In the calculations that use five-minute windows,
qk and Dk are aggregated to the five-minute window level and ∆pk is the change in price from the
start to the end of the window. I denote these as λn,5 for n = 1, 2, 3, 4.
     Table VIII presents results using these eight different versions of Kyle’s λ. The tests are identical
to the tests in Tables V and VI. Column 1 of Table VIII replicates the results using λ1,k , the same
version used in the main tests. Controlling for daily urgency, λ1,k , λ2,k , and all of the five-minute λs
are positively related to informed trading, though the magnitude and statistical significance of the
five-minute λs are weak. Controlling for the urgency of the event to reduce strategic timing bias,
only λ1,k and λ4,k remain statistically significant. In particular, when there is no urgency in the
event, these λs are negatively related to informed trading, and positively related when urgency is
higher. The economic magnitude of the difference-in-difference of λ1,k is about 15% of the average
likelihood of insider trading and the average insider trading volume. The magnitude of the other
statistically significant version, λ4,k is about 5% of the average likelihood and volume.
     These results show that the relationship between Kyle’s λ and insider trading depends critically
on the way that λ is calculated. In particular, the relationship between λ and insider trading is
stronger using price changes, rather than returns, and using transaction-level observations, rather
than five-minute windows.
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                           25



B. MRR


  The bid-ask spread decomposition of Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans (1997) provides five
parameter estimates in the following three equations,


                       pt − pt−1 = (φ + θ)xt − (φ + ρθ)xt−1 + αt + ξt − ξt−1                      (7)

                            | xt | = 1 − λ + ν                                                    (8)

                          xt xt−1 = x2t ρ + ι.                                                    (9)


From MRR’s model, θ is an asymmetric information parameter, φ measures transaction costs, ρ
is the autocorrelation of order flow, λ is the probability a trade occurs between the quotes, α is a
constant drift assumed to be zero in expectation, and ξ, ν, and ι are error terms.
  In the main tests, I use θ as an indicator of informed trading, as formulated in the theoretical
framework of MRR. In Table IX, I include each of the estimated parameters of MRR in the same
regression specifications in Tables V and VI as a placebo test. The results of the adverse selection
parameter, θ, is repeated here for comparison. It is positive and significant when event urgency is
high. In contrast, the three parameters, α, λ, and φ are insignificant in each of the various tests,
as expected.
  However, ρ is also significant in nearly all specifications. In particular, when an event is not
urgent, ρ is positively related to insider trading, but it is negatively related to insider trading as
an event becomes more urgent. Moreover, the marginal effect of a one-standard deviation change
in ρ is double the effect of θ in tests of informed trading volume. In addition, in unreported tests,
MRR ρ is significant in all of the sampling bias tests, whereas θ is not.
  These results follow from the framework in MRR. In particular, Equation 15 on page 1057 of
MRR describes the revision in ask prices as follows,


                             pat − pat−1 = θ(1 − ρ)xt−1 + ǫt + ξta − ξt−1
                                                                      a
                                                                          ,


where ǫt is a mean zero random variable that captures changes in beliefs due to new public informa-
tion and ξta is a rounding error from price discreteness. This equation states that θ has a positive
impact on prices and ρ has a negative impact on prices for a given order xt−1 . The intuition behind
26                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



ρ’s negative impact is that if ρ > 0, then a buy order is most likely followed by another buy order.
Thus, another a new buy order conveys less information and prices do not increase as much as if
ρ < 0.
     While MRR define θ, not ρ, to reflect informed trading, in the relationship between trading
and price impact, θ and −ρ have the same marginal effect. The advantage of using ρ is that it
is directly estimated from the data, whereas θ is extracted as a structural parameter from other
estimated parameters. Therefore, smaller measurement error might lead to ρ having a stronger
marginal effect than θ.


C. High Level Measures of Illiquidity

     I also consider three additional measures of illiquidity based on primary summary statistics.
Following Kacperczyk and Pagnotta (2017), I calculated Price Range as the maximum national
best offer minus the minimum best bid per day. Realized Variance is the realized variance of all
five-minute window returns per day. Finally, I calculate a daily measure of Amihud Illiquidity,
following Amihud (2002). This is the daily absolute value of the stock return divided by the dollar
volume of trading in the stock.
     Table X presents the results using these measures of illiquidity. All three measures are positively
related to informed trading controlling for daily urgency. However, controlling for event urgency,
price range and realized volatility are no longer significantly related. Amihud Illiquidity is signifi-
cantly related once event-day fixed effects are included. The marginal effect of Amihud Illiquidity
is about a third less than Kyle’s λ and the quoted spread. In unreported tests, Amihud Illiquidity
is significant in three of the four sampling bias tests. These are important results because Amihud
Illiquidity does not require intraday trading day observations for estimation, but yet it still provides
a relatively strong indicator of informed trading when trading is urgent.


D. Dollar Spreads

     Table XI presents tests using dollar-based measures of the quoted spread, effective spread, re-
alized spread, and price impact. With the exception of the dollar quoted spread, none of these
measures is significantly related to informed trading. The marginal difference-in-difference impact
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                              27



of the dollar quoted spread is slightly less than the percent quoted spread used in the main tests.
These results show that on average, percent spreads provide a stronger signal of informed trading
than dollar spreads.




               V. Horse Race Between Measures of Illiquidity

   Including Amihud Illiquidity and MRR ρ, the above results show that nine measures of illiquidity
have varying statistical power to identify informed trading. In this section, I directly compare the
measures’ statistical significance and economic magnitudes to determine which measure has the
most explanatory power.
   First, since all of the measures have some degree of power to predict insider trading, they are likely
correlated with each other. Table XII presents pair-wise correlations between the nine measures.
Statistical significance is indicated by p-values in parentheses. The majority of the correlations are
large and statistically significant. In particular, quoted spread, effective spread, realized spread, and
price impact are highly correlated with each other, with correlations above 60%. Order imbalance
is most closely correlated with quoted spread. Kyle’s λ is also highly correlated with quoted spread,
effective spread, and MRR θ, and negatively correlated with MRR ρ. MRR θ and ρ exhibit the
least average correlation across the other measures, except they are negatively correlated with each
other. Finally, Amihud Illiquidity has relatively low correlations with the spread measures and
almost no correlation with the MRR measures.
   In Table XIII, I run the same set of regressions as before using event urgency, but now I include
the measures simultaneously in the same specification. Because the spread measures and price
impact are so highly correlated, I run four different specifications where I only include one of the
four measures at a time. The coefficients in Table XIII reflect the marginal effect of each variable
on insider trading, while partialing out variation that is correlated with the other measures of
illiquidity.
   To assess the independent strength of each measure of illiquidity, I compare the statistical sig-
nificance and economic significance. Statistically, order imbalance and MRR ρ have the strongest
28                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



predictive power for insider trading. However, statistical significance is affected by measurement er-
ror in the independent variables. A variable that is precisely measured, could have strong statistical
significance even if its economic significance is low.
     To compare economic magnitudes, I compare the difference-in-difference marginal effect of a
one-standard deviation increase in each measure of illiquidity. MRR ρ has the largest economic
significance, followed by the quoted spread, effective spread, order imbalance, price impact, Kyle’s
λ, Amihud Illiquidity, MRR θ, and realized spread. Therefore, MRR ρ has the strongest indepen-
dent predictive power for identifying insider trading, both economically and statistically. Of the
statistically significant measures, order imbalance has the next strongest power, followed by price
impact.
     These results do not necessarily imply that other measures are ineffective. In regressions that
include the quoted spread or Kyle’s λ separately, these variables are also statistically significant
and have economic magnitudes similar to MRR ρ. However, these results show that MRR ρ has a
stronger independent signal of informed trading than the other variables.




                                    VI. Robustness Tests

     In unreported tests, I also consider a number of different mitigating factors in the relationship
between illiquidity and insider trading. Conditioning on firm size, event year, and type of event have
no significant impact on the results. Second, the relationship between insider trading and illiquidity
is independent of whether traders received tips from family members, business associates, or friends.
Finally, I find no effect when I include a control for whether the event is positive or negative.




                                        VII. Conclusion

     Foundational theories in finance predict that informed trading impacts stock prices and trans-
action costs. In turn, researchers have designed many empirical proxies based on observable price
and quote data to capture the presence of informed trading. However, testing the efficacy of these
proxies has been inhibited by the inability to observe the behavior of informed traders.
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                           29



  This paper helps to overcome some of the limitations of prior work by using direct observations
of insider trading as a laboratory to test whether standard measures of illiquidity detect insider
trading. A key contribution of this paper is the research design that reduces confounding effects
from cross-sectional and time-series variation unrelated to illiquidity. This allows me to isolate the
connection between private information and illiquidity, while controlling for omitted factors.
  The results show that controlling for sampling bias and strategic timing, only absolute order
imbalance and the autocorrelation of order flow are positively and significantly related to informed
trading. These results provide some of the cleanest evidence to date to support the theoretical
predictions of models of adverse selection in financial markets. However, these results only hold
when information is short-lived. When information is long-lived, none of the illiquidity measures
correctly detect informed trading.
  This paper shows that though proxies for informed trading are ubiquitous in finance research,
they are unlikely to be valid in many situations. The results suggest that future theoretical research
on informed trading should consider informed investors’ ability to strategically time their trades
to avoid price impact, as in Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2016). In addition, future research should
reconsider the assumption that market makers’ correctly infer informed trading from order flows.
Finally, I believe the results of this paper will be of interest to practitioners who bear the cost of
adverse selection and regulators whose task is to detect insider trading.
30                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



                                           REFERENCES


Ahern, Kenneth R., 2017, Information networks: Evidence from illegal insider trading tips, Journal
     of Financial Economics 125, 26–47.
Aktas, Nihat, Eric de Bodt, Fany Declerck, and Hervé Van Oppens, 2007, The PIN anomaly around
     M&A announcements, Journal of Financial Markets 10, 169–191.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time series effects, Journal
     of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
Anderson, Ronald C., David M. Reeb, and Wanli Zhao, 2012, Family-controlled firms and informed
     trading: Evidence from short sales, Journal of Finance 67, 351–385.
Brennan, Michael J., and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1995, Investment analysis and price formation
     in securities markets, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 361–381.
Chakravarty, Sugato, and John H. McConnell, 1999, Does insider trading really move stock prices?
     Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 34, 191–209.
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Vyacheslav Fos, 2015, Do prices reveal the presence of informed trad-
     ing? Journal of Finance 70, 1555–1582.
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Vyacheslav Fos, 2016, Insider trading, stochastic liquidity, and equi-
     librium prices, Econometrica 84, 1441–1475.
Cornell, Bradford, and Erik R. Sirri, 1992, The reaction of investors and stock prices to insider
     trading, Journal of Finance 47, 1031–1059.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed trading
     and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811–841.
Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, Maureen O’Hara, and Joseph B. Paperman, 1996, Liquidity,
     information, and infrequently traded stocks, Journal of Finance 51, 1405–1436.
Glosten, Lawrence, and Lawrence Harris, 1988, Estimating the components of the bid-ask spread,
     Journal of Financial Economics 21, 123–142.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
     market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100.
Goyenko, Ruslan Y., Craig W. Holden, and Charles A. Trzcinka, 2009, Do liquidity measures
     measure liquidity? Journal of Financial Economics 92, 153–181.
                  DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                              31



Hasbrouck, Joel, 2007, Empirical Market Microstructure: The Institutions, Economics, and Econo-
  metrics of Securities Trading (Oxford University Press).
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2009, Trading costs and returns for U.S. equities: Estimating effective costs from
  daily data, Journal of Finance 64, 1445–1477.
Holden, Craig W., and Stacey Jacobsen, 2014, Liquidity measurement problems in fast, competitive
  markets: Expensive and cheap solutions, Journal of Finance 69, 1747–1785.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Emiliano S. Pagnotta, 2017, Chasing private information, Unpublished
  Working Paper.
Kelley, Erik K., and Paul C. Tetlock, 2017, Retail short selling and stock prices, Review of Financial
  Studies 30, 801–834.
Kelly, Bryan, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2012, Testing asymmetric-information asset pricing mod-
  els, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1366–1413.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
Lee, Charles M. C., and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data, Journal
  of Finance 46, 733–746.
Madhavan, Ananth, Matthew Richardson, and Mark Roomans, 1997, Why do security prices
  change? A transaction-level analysis of NYSE stocks, The Review of Financial Studies 10,
  1035–1064.
Petchey, James, Marvin Wee, and Joey Yang, 2016, Pinning down an effective measure for proba-
  bility of informed trading, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 40, 456–475.
Van Ness, Bonnie F., Robert A. Van Ness, and Richard S. Warr, 2001, How well do adverse selection
  components measure adverse selection? Financial Management 30, 77–98.
32                                                        DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?




                                                   45%
                                                                            Positive events
     Fraction of events with insider trading




                                                   40%
                                                                            Negative events
                                                   35%

                                                   30%

                                                   25%

                                                   20%

                                                   15%

                                                   10%

                                                    5%

                                                    0%
                                                         -40       -35       -30        -25        -20       -15        -10        -5          -1
                                                                               Days relative to public announcement


                                               Figure 1. The Prevalence of Insider Trading Before an Event
                                               This figure presents the fraction of events per day in which insider trading occurred. There
                                               are 410 events in the sample over the period 1996 to 2013. The horizontal axis includes dates
                                               in event time from t = −40 to t = −1, where the public announcement is on day t = 0.
                                               Positive events are events in which inside traders took long positions. Negative events are
                                               events in which inside traders took short positions.
                                     DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?              33




                              8%                  Positive events
                                                  Negative events
 Cumulative abnormal return




                              6%


                              4%


                              2%


                              0%


                              -2%


                                    -40    -35      -30      -25      -20       -15         -10   -5   -1
                                                     Days relative to public announcement


Figure 2. Cumulative Abnormal Returns Before an Event
This figure presents the cumulative abnormal returns of 410 firm-events over the period 1996
to 2013. Abnormal returns are a firm’s daily return minus the firm’s average return over
the period t = −120 to t = −41. Cumulative abnormal returns are the cumulative sum of
abnormal returns. The horizontal axis includes dates in event time from t = −40 to t = −1,
where the public announcement is on day t = 0. Positive events are events in which inside
traders took long positions. Negative events are events in which inside traders took short
positions.
34                                            DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?




                                       3.5
                                                           Positive events
                                                           Negative events
      Cumulative abnormal ln(volume)




                                       3.0

                                       2.5

                                       2.0

                                       1.5

                                       1.0

                                       0.5

                                       0.0
                                             -40    -35      -30      -25      -20       -15         -10   -5   -1
                                                              Days relative to public announcement


     Figure 3. Cumulative Abnormal Trading Volume Before an Event
     This figure presents the cumulative abnormal trading volume of 410 firm-events over the
     period 1996 to 2013. Abnormal volume is a firm’s daily ln(1+volume) minus the firm’s
     average ln(1+volume) over the period t = −120 to t = −41. Cumulative volume is the
     cumulative sum of abnormal volume. The horizontal axis includes dates in event time from
     t = −40 to t = −1, where the public announcement is on day t = 0. Positive events are
     events in which inside traders took long positions. Negative events are events in which inside
     traders took short positions.
           DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                        35




4%
                                                4%
2%
                                                2%
0%
                                                0%
-2%                                            -2%
-4%                                            -4%
-6%                                            -6%
  -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10      -5 -1          -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10       -5 -1

           (a) Quoted spread                               (b) Effective spread




4%                                              4%
2%
                                                2%
0%
                                                0%
-2%
                                               -2%
-4%
-6%                                            -4%
   -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10     -5 -1          -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10       -5 -1

           (c) Realized spread                              (d) Price impact

 Figure 4. Event-time Series of Abnormal Illiquidity.
 These figures present the time-series from t = −40 to t = −1, relative to the public
 announcement of the event at t = 0. Abnormal illiquidity is calculated as the daily
 illiquidity minus the average illiquidity of the firm over the period from t = −120 to
 the day before the original insider leak of the information. The gray bands indicate
 the 95th percent confidence interval.
36              DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?




      1.0%                                        0.5
      0.5%
      0.0%                                        0.0
     -0.5%                                        -0.5
     -1.0%
     -1.5%                                        -1.0
     -2.0%
                                                  -1.5
     -2.5%
         -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10    -5 -1        -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10   -5 -1

                (e) Order imbalance                             (f) Kyle’s λ




                             0.04
                             0.02
                             0.00
                            -0.02
                            -0.04
                            -0.06

                                -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10   -5 -1

                                          (g) MRR θ
                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?                             37




  1.5                             1.5                               1.5
                                                                                                  b


  1.0                             1.0                               1.0     b
                                                                            b

  0.5                             0.5      b                        0.5                           b
                                           b                   bb


  0.0     b                   b   0.0                               0.0


 -0.5                             -0.5                              -0.5
        Low              High            Low               High            Low               High

              (a) Benchmark                    (b) Executive               (c) Buy side analyst



  1.5                             1.5                               1.5


  1.0                         b   1.0                               1.0
                                                                            b
          b
          b                   b
  0.5                             0.5                               0.5
                                           b
                                                               b            b
                                                                                                  b
  0.0                             0.0      b
                                                                    0.0
                                                               b


 -0.5                             -0.5                              -0.5
        Low              High            Low               High            Low               High

        (d) Buy side manager                   (e) Sell side                    (f) Corporate
                                                                                manager



  1.5     b                       1.5                               1.5

                                                                                                  b
  1.0                             1.0                               1.0     b



                              b                                             b                     b
  0.5                             0.5                               0.5
                                           b                   bb
          b                   b
  0.0                             0.0                               0.0

                                           b
 -0.5                             -0.5                              -0.5
        Low              High            Low               High            Low               High

              (g) Low level              (h) Small biz. owner                   (i) Specialized
              employee

Figure 5. Kyle’s λ, Occupation, and Event Urgency
These figures represent the marginal effects on ln(1+volume of insider trading) of
a one standard deviation increase in Kyle’s λ (from Low to High on the horizontal
axis), when an event is urgent (solid line) compared to when an event is not urgency
(dashed line), depending upon whether an insider has the occupation listed in each
subfigure. An event is urgent if the time between the original leak of the information
and the public announcement is less than the median time of 9 days. The results
are based on a regression model with a triple interaction between Event urgency,
Kyle’s λ, and insider trader occupation.
                                                                                                                            38
Table I.
Summary Statistics by Event
Observations are at the firm-event level for 410 events over the period 1996 to 2013. Urgency differentiates subsamples
based on the lead time from the original leak to the public announcement of the event. Observations in the High
Urgency subsample are those with a lead time greater than the median of nine days. The statistics in Panel D reflect
the industry affiliation of the firm that is the subject of the inside information. Average trader network degree is the
average number of connections an inside trader has to other insiders across all insiders trading in an event. Average




                                                                                                                            DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
trader network size is the average of the traders’ network sizes who trade in an event. Average tip source is the average
over a dummy variable indicating the source of an insider tip, family, business, or friends, with one tipper possibly
having multiple roles. The last column presents the p-value of a t-test of the equality of the means of the low and
high urgency subsamples. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

                                                                All Events         Urgency
                                                              Mean     Median    Low      High    Difference   p-value
 Panel A: Event timing
 Information leak to event lag (days)                          22.88     9.00    42.59     3.73    38.86∗∗∗    < 0.001
 Positive event (%)                                            74.51   100.00    82.18    66.99    15.19∗∗∗    < 0.001
 Panel B: Event type (% of total)
 Mergers & Acquisitions                                        51.71   100.00    64.36    39.42 24.93∗∗∗       < 0.001
 Earnings                                                      28.05     0.00    19.31    36.54 −17.23∗∗∗      < 0.001
 Drug Regulation                                                9.02     0.00     7.43    10.58 −3.15            0.266
 Sale of Securities                                             7.56     0.00     6.44     8.65 −2.22            0.396
 Operations                                                     2.44     0.00     0.99     3.85 −2.86∗           0.059
 Financial Distress                                             0.49     0.00     0.99     0.00   0.99           0.158
 Fund Liquidation                                               0.24     0.00     0.00     0.48 −0.48            0.318
 Various                                                        0.49     0.00     0.50     0.48   0.01           0.984
 Panel C: Firm Characteristics
 Market equity ($billions)                                     10.09     1.01     3.45    16.58 −13.13∗∗∗      < 0.001
 Tobin’s Q                                                      2.54     1.87     2.46     2.61 −0.14            0.560
 R&D/Assets (%)                                                10.54     1.24    12.32     8.80   3.53           0.147
 Intangibles/Assets (%)                                        17.88     9.90    19.56    16.31   3.25           0.102
 Panel D: Industry (% of total)
 NAICS 21: Mining, Oil, and Gas                                 3.17     0.00     1.49     4.81   −3.32∗         0.053
                                                            All Events        Urgency
                                                          Mean     Median   Low     High    Difference   p-value
NAICS   22:   Utilities                                     0.49     0.00    0.99    0.00    0.99          0.158
NAICS   23:   Construction                                  0.49     0.00    0.50    0.48    0.01          0.984
NAICS   31:   Manufacturing (Food, Apparel, Leather)        9.76     0.00    5.45   13.94   −8.50∗∗∗       0.004
NAICS   32:   Manufacturing (Chemical)                     21.95     0.00   21.29   22.60   −1.31          0.750




                                                                                                                   DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
NAICS   33:   Manufacturing (Computers and Electronics)    22.20     0.00   23.76   20.67    3.09          0.453
NAICS   42:   Wholesale                                     4.39     0.00    4.95    3.85    1.10          0.587
NAICS   44:   Retail (Electronics, Food, Clothing)          2.93     0.00    1.49    4.33   −2.84∗         0.086
NAICS   45:   Retail (Sports, Books, and General)           1.46     0.00    0.50    2.40   −1.91          0.105
NAICS   48:   Transportation                                0.98     0.00    1.49    0.48    1.00          0.306
NAICS   51:   Publishing                                    9.51     0.00   11.88    7.21    4.67          0.109
NAICS   52:   Finance and Insurance                         6.59     0.00    5.94    7.21   −1.27          0.605
NAICS   53:   Real Estate                                   1.95     0.00    3.47    0.48    2.98∗∗        0.031
NAICS   54:   Professional, Scientific Services             4.88     0.00    6.93    2.88    4.05∗         0.059
NAICS   56:   Administrative and Support Services           1.95     0.00    1.49    2.40   −0.92          0.501
NAICS   61:   Educational Services                          0.24     0.00    0.50    0.00    0.50          0.319
NAICS   62:   Health Care                                   1.95     0.00    2.97    0.96    2.01          0.145
NAICS   72:   Accomodation and Food Service                 0.98     0.00    0.99    0.96    0.03          0.977
NAICS   99:   Unknown                                       0.24     0.00    0.00    0.48   −0.48          0.318
Panel E: Trader Characteristics
Average   trader network degree                             1.48     1.00     1.25   1.78 −0.53∗∗          0.038
Average   trader network size                               8.37     2.00     7.05 10.03 −2.98∗            0.099
Average   tip source: family (%)                           32.05     0.00    34.58 28.92    5.66           0.421
Average   tip source: business (%)                         54.67    15.00    55.26 53.94    1.33           0.894
Average   tip source: friends (%)                          58.96    60.00    56.43 62.08 −5.65             0.518
Average   distance between tippee and tipper (miles)      678.06    40.54   736.30 610.70 125.61           0.470
Average   trader age                                       46.13    45.25    45.27 47.20 −1.94∗            0.087
Average   trader wealth ($100,000s)                        12.33     5.98    10.53 14.96 −4.42∗∗           0.047




                                                                                                                   39
40                DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?



        Table II.
        Summary Statistics by Trading Day
        Observations are daily from t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the public announcement date
        (t = 0), across 410 firm-events. Trade dummy is a dummy variable equal to one if there is
        any insider trading on a given day. ln(1+Number of shares traded) is based on the number
        of shares traded by all inside traders on a given day. Daily Urgency is the inverse of the
        number of days from a given day to t = 0. Event Urgency is the inverse of the number of
        days between the day of the original leak of the information to t = 0. The statistics for
        the occupations listed in Panel D reflect the number of inside traders on a given day who
        hold the occupation. Ln(1+Volume) is the trading volume of the event-firm’s stock per day.
        M KT , HM L, and SM B are the daily Fama-French factor returns.

                                        Mean Std. Dev.       25th    Median     75th   Observations
     Panel A: Informed trading measures
     Trade dummy                   0.046           0.208     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     ln(1+Number of shares traded) 0.316           1.591     0.000    0.000    0.000      47, 748
     Panel B: Trading window measures
     Daily Urgency                      0.037      0.064     0.011    0.017    0.032      48, 021
     Event Urgency                      0.182      0.255     0.031    0.091    0.200      42, 904
     Panel C: Illiquidity measures
     Quoted spread (%)                  0.314      0.521     0.072    0.132 0.300         44, 660
     Effective spread (%)               0.307      0.526     0.067    0.121 0.285         46, 701
     Realized spread (%)                0.156      0.369     0.012    0.048 0.140         46, 701
     Price impact (%)                   0.148      0.287     0.022    0.064 0.155         46, 701
     Order imbalance                    0.111      0.115     0.032    0.074 0.146         42, 819
     Kyle’s λ                           8.500      7.850     3.680    6.280 10.280        44, 042
     MRR θ                              0.223      0.514     0.012    0.080 0.235         46, 429
     Panel D: Trader Occupations
     Executive                          0.006      0.076     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     Buy side analyst                   0.015      0.157     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     Buy side manager                   0.013      0.138     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     Sell side                          0.004      0.068     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     Corporate manager                  0.006      0.077     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     Low level employee                 0.011      0.120     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     Small business owner               0.018      0.158     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     Specialized occupation             0.011      0.123     0.000    0.000    0.000      48, 021
     Panel E: Stock Returns
     |Return|                          2.311       2.605    0.644 1.490        2.978      48, 035
     Ln(1+Volume)                     −0.623       2.009   −1.861 −0.609       0.686      48, 035
     |MKT|                             0.957       1.094    0.270 0.614        1.244      48, 035
     |SMB|                             0.440       0.414    0.160 0.320        0.600      48, 035
     |HML|                             0.429       0.510    0.110 0.270        0.530      48, 035
Table III.
Benchmark Regressions
This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in columns 1–3 is a dummy equal to one
if any insider trading occurred on a given day, and in columns 4-6 is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders on
a given day. Observations are from a panel of 410 firm-events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the
announcement date of t = 0. Return is the firm’s daily stock return, M KT , SM B, and HM L are the Fama-French
daily factor returns. Event fixed effects are fixed effects for each of the 410 events. Event-day fixed effects are fixed




                                                                                                                            DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
effects for each of the trading days, t = −120, . . . , −2. Adjusted R2 is the within-R2 . p-values from standard errors
clustered at the event level are presented in parentheses. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by
∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .



        Dependent variable:            Informed trading dummy              Ln(1+volume of informed trading)
                                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
        |Return|                   0.002∗∗∗ < 0.001         < 0.001         0.022∗∗∗ < 0.000           0.006
                                  (0.003)     (0.501)        (0.611)     (< 0.001)     (0.948)        (0.264)
        ln(1+volume)             −0.010∗∗∗     0.015∗∗∗       0.008∗∗     −0.059∗∗∗     0.117∗∗∗       0.060∗∗
                                (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)        (0.011)     (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)        (0.013)
        |MKT|                      0.001     < 0.001          0.001         0.014     −0.006         < 0.001
                                  (0.601)     (0.900)        (0.766)       (0.411)     (0.704)        (0.982)
        |SMB|                    −0.002      −0.002         −0.001        −0.024      −0.035         −0.029
                                  (0.667)     (0.652)        (0.788)       (0.372)     (0.176)        (0.224)
        |HML|                      0.001       0.001          0.001         0.002     −0.017         −0.014
                                  (0.754)     (0.774)        (0.802)       (0.952)     (0.626)        (0.637)
        Constant                   0.033∗∗∗    0.056∗∗∗       0.005         0.224∗∗∗    0.415∗∗∗       0.055
                                (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)        (0.377)     (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)        (0.173)
        Event fixed effects          No         Yes             Yes           No         Yes             Yes
        Event-day fixed effects      No          No             Yes           No          No             Yes
        Observations               48,035      48,035         48,035        47,762      47,762         47,762
        Adjusted R2                0.010       0.003          0.148         0.007       0.003          0.144




                                                                                                                            41
                                                                                                                              42
Table IV.
The Naı̈ve Relationship Between Illiquidity and Insider Trading
This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy equal to one if any
insider trading occurred on a given day, and in Panel B is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders on a given
day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the announcement
date of t = 0. Each regression includes the independent variables in Table III. These coefficients are not reported.
Each regression specification includes a measure of illiquidity, listed at the top of the column. For each panel and




                                                                                                                              DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
each column, I estimate three different regressions, differing by the fixed effects included in the regression (event fixed
effects, event-day fixed effects, or both). p-values from standard errors clustered at the event level are presented in
parentheses. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

                           Quoted       Effective     Realized       Price         Order         Kyle’s        MRR
  Illiquidity measure:
                           spread        spread        spread       impact       imbalance         λ            θ
                             (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)
  Panel A. Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy
  No fixed effects
  Illiquidity              0.019         0.015         0.020        0.010          0.012         0.001       −0.013∗∗∗
                          (0.156)       (0.182)       (0.146)      (0.300)        (0.677)       (0.306)       (0.004)
  Event fixed effects
  Illiquidity            −0.003          0.004         0.009      −0.004         −0.014        −0.001∗∗      −0.007
                         (0.826)        (0.690)       (0.331)      (0.540)       (0.235)       (0.041)        (0.146)
  Event and event-day fixed effects
  Illiquidity            0.007           0.012         0.013∗       0.001        −0.001          0.000       −0.001
                        (0.562)         (0.192)       (0.090)      (0.892)       (0.943)        (0.407)       (0.774)
Panel B. Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
No fixed effects
Illiquidity             0.193∗∗      0.180∗∗    0.202∗∗    0.169∗∗    0.101     0.003     −0.094∗∗∗
                       (0.030)      (0.028)    (0.032)    (0.028)    (0.575)   (0.378)     (0.001)
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity           −0.014         0.055      0.059      0.007     −0.142    −0.007∗∗   −0.048




                                                                                                      DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
                      (0.913)       (0.544)    (0.424)    (0.880)    (0.142)   (0.019)     (0.143)
Event and event-day fixed effects
Illiquidity            0.064         0.112      0.091      0.043     −0.035    −0.003     −0.003
                      (0.532)       (0.136)    (0.139)    (0.321)    (0.687)   (0.265)     (0.932)




                                                                                                      43
                                                                                                                           44
Table V.
Daily Urgency and the Relationship Between Illiquidity and Insider Trading
This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy equal to one
if any insider trading occurred on a given day, and in Panel B is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders on
a given day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the
announcement date of t = 0. Daily Urgency is the inverse of the number of days from a given day to t = 0. Each
regression includes the independent variables in Table III and event fixed effects. These coefficients are not reported.




                                                                                                                           DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Each regression specification includes a measure of illiquidity, listed at the top of the column. For each panel and
each column, I estimate one regression. p-values from standard errors clustered at the event level are presented in
parentheses. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

                              Quoted      Effective     Realized       Price        Order         Kyle’s        MRR
Illiquidity measure:
                              spread       spread        spread       impact      imbalance         λ            θ
                                (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)
Panel A. Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                  −0.011       −0.003       −0.006       −0.017∗       −0.038∗       −0.001∗∗∗    −0.002
                             (0.349)       (0.697)     (0.446)      (0.068)       (0.072)       (0.005)      (0.771)
Daily Urgency                  0.887∗∗∗    0.899∗∗∗    0.929∗∗∗    0.938∗∗∗         0.935∗∗∗      0.830∗∗∗    1.014∗∗∗
                            (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)        (< 0.001)     (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)
Illiquidity×Daily Urgency      0.373∗∗     0.353∗∗       0.496∗∗      0.458∗∗       1.015∗        0.024∗∗∗   −0.053
                              (0.024)     (0.022)       (0.019)      (0.036)       (0.060)       (0.006)     (0.598)
Panel B. Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                  −0.108       −0.040       −0.101       −0.139∗       −0.398∗∗      −0.010∗∗∗      0.015
                             (0.270)       (0.564)     (0.138)      (0.052)       (0.016)       (0.006)       (0.666)
Daily Urgency                  6.776∗∗∗    6.859∗∗∗    7.203∗∗∗    7.281∗∗∗         7.205∗∗∗      6.920∗∗∗    8.172∗∗∗
                            (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)        (< 0.001)     (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)
Illiquidity×Daily Urgency      3.824∗∗∗    3.737∗∗∗      5.147∗∗∗     4.843∗∗       9.955∗∗       0.144∗∗    −0.905
                              (0.005)     (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.012)       (0.022)       (0.021)     (0.209)
Table VI.
Event Urgency and the Relationship Between Illiquidity and Insider Trading
This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy equal to one
if any insider trading occurred on a given day, and in Panel B is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders on
a given day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the
announcement date of t = 0. Event Urgency is the inverse of the number of days between the day of the original leak
of the information to t = 0. Each regression includes the independent variables in Table III. These coefficients are not




                                                                                                                             DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
reported. Each regression specification includes a measure of illiquidity, listed at the top of the column. For each panel
and each column, I estimate two different regressions, differing by the fixed effects included in the regression (event
fixed effects and event-day fixed effects). p-values from standard errors clustered at the event level are presented in
parentheses. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

                              Quoted       Effective     Realized       Price        Order          Kyle’s        MRR
Illiquidity measure:
                              spread        spread        spread       impact      imbalance          λ            θ
                                (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
Panel A. Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                  −0.007         0.003         0.009      −0.006         −0.021        −0.001∗∗     −0.013
                             (0.708)       (0.822)       (0.441)     (0.507)        (0.186)       (0.020)      (0.116)
Illiquidity×Event urgency      0.027        0.008       −0.001         0.011         0.042          0.002∗∗∗     0.020∗
                              (0.310)      (0.711)      (0.970)       (0.479)       (0.126)        (0.004)      (0.074)

Event and event-day fixed effects
Illiquidity                 −0.003          0.006         0.011      −0.005         −0.015        −0.001∗      −0.008
                             (0.846)       (0.622)       (0.269)     (0.502)        (0.305)       (0.058)      (0.291)
Illiquidity×Event urgency      0.053∗∗      0.039∗∗       0.014        0.037∗∗       0.095∗∗∗       0.003∗∗∗     0.024∗∗
                              (0.039)      (0.045)       (0.492)      (0.024)       (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.046)
Panel B. Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                  −0.042         0.053         0.057        0.008        −0.208        −0.010∗∗∗    −0.083
                             (0.799)       (0.662)       (0.564)      (0.908)       (0.107)       (0.008)      (0.107)
Illiquidity×Event urgency      0.195        0.030         0.035      −0.004          0.388∗         0.019∗∗∗     0.132∗
                              (0.391)      (0.862)       (0.818)     (0.972)        (0.074)        (0.002)      (0.063)




                                                                                                                             45
                                                                                                             46
                             Quoted    Effective   Realized    Price       Order       Kyle’s       MRR
Illiquidity measure:
                             spread     spread      spread    impact     imbalance       λ           θ
                               (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)
Event and event-day fixed effects
Illiquidity                 −0.008      0.073       0.073      0.011     −0.155       −0.007∗∗    −0.045
                             (0.949)   (0.457)     (0.368)    (0.843)    (0.183)      (0.023)     (0.319)




                                                                                                             DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Illiquidity×Event urgency     0.394∗    0.262∗      0.140      0.201       0.795∗∗∗    0.024∗∗∗    0.168∗∗
                             (0.067)   (0.095)     (0.372)    (0.111)   (< 0.001)     (0.002)     (0.043)
Table VII.
The Relationship Between Illiquidity and Insider Trading Controlling for Sampling Bias
This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if any insider
trading occurred on a given day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2,
relative to the announcement date of t = 0. Event Urgency is the inverse of the number of days between the day
of the original leak of the information to t = 0. Each regression includes the independent variables in Table III and
event and event-day fixed effects. These coefficients are not reported. Each regression specification includes a measure




                                                                                                                           DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
of illiquidity, listed at the top of the column. Each panel is differentiated by the inclusion of an interaction dummy
variable related to the likelihood that insider trading was detected by regulators from abnormal price and volume. The
dummy variables are Large network (Panel A) equal to one for events in which the traders belong to an above-median
size trading network; Many traders (Panel B) equal to one for events in which the number of traders is above the
median; FBI (Panel C) equal to one for events in which the FBI is credited for its assistance in the investigation; and
FINRA (Panel D) equal to one for events in which FINRA is credited for its assistance in the invetsigation. Except
for FINRA all interaction dummies indicated a higher likelihood that insider trading was detected by non-market
patterns. p-values from standard errors clustered at the event level are presented in parentheses. Significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

                                      Quoted     Effective   Realized     Price      Order       Kyle’s      MRR
  Illiquidity measure:
                                      spread      spread      spread     impact    imbalance       λ          θ
                                        (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
  Panel A. Traders belong to large vs. small network
  Illiquidity                         0.006       0.013       0.014      0.001       0.001       0.000      0.001
                                     (0.745)     (0.335)     (0.193)    (0.950)     (0.966)     (0.569)    (0.885)
  Illiquidity×Event urgency           0.041       0.028       0.012      0.025       0.065∗      0.002∗∗    0.015
                                     (0.196)     (0.223)     (0.598)    (0.166)     (0.056)     (0.039)    (0.187)
  Illiquidity×Large network         −0.036      −0.034       −0.015     −0.024     −0.046      −0.002      −0.020
                                     (0.128)     (0.113)      (0.537)    (0.273)    (0.171)    (0.137)     (0.208)
  Illiquidity×Urgency×Large nwk.      0.041       0.049      −0.001      0.068       0.106       0.001      0.022
                                     (0.441)     (0.220)      (0.983)   (0.156)     (0.152)     (0.602)    (0.478)
  Panel B. Number of traders in event is large vs. small
  Illiquidity                         0.006       0.013       0.014      0.001       0.001       0.000      0.001
                                     (0.745)     (0.335)     (0.193)    (0.950)     (0.966)     (0.569)    (0.885)
  Illiquidity×Event urgency           0.041       0.028       0.012      0.025       0.065∗     0.002∗∗     0.015




                                                                                                                           47
                                                                                                                  48
                                  Quoted     Effective   Realized      Price      Order      Kyle’s     MRR
Illiquidity measure:
                                  spread      spread      spread      impact    imbalance      λ         θ
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)
                                  (0.196)    (0.223)     (0.598)     (0.166)    (0.056)     (0.039)   (0.187)
Illiquidity×Many traders         −0.036      −0.034      −0.015      −0.024     −0.046      −0.002    −0.020
                                  (0.128)     (0.113)     (0.537)     (0.273)    (0.171)    (0.137)   (0.208)




                                                                                                                  DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Illiquidity×Urgency×Many           0.041      0.049      −0.001       0.068      0.106       0.001     0.022
                                  (0.441)    (0.220)      (0.983)    (0.156)    (0.152)     (0.602)   (0.478)
Panel C. Investigations included FBI participation or not
Illiquidity                      −0.001       0.007       0.011      −0.004     −0.017      −0.001∗   −0.005
                                  (0.974)    (0.584)     (0.259)      (0.564)    (0.243)    (0.072)   (0.469)
Illiquidity×Event urgency          0.053∗∗    0.038∗      0.014       0.037∗∗   0.103∗∗∗  0.003∗∗∗     0.021∗
                                  (0.039)    (0.051)     (0.477)     (0.026) (< 0.001) (< 0.001)      (0.071)
Illiquidity×FBI                  −0.058      −0.059      −0.018      −0.035      0.049       0.000    −0.040∗∗∗
                                  (0.310)     (0.562)     (0.863)     (0.727)   (0.517)     (0.779)   (0.003)
Illiquidity×Urgency×FBI          −0.002       0.013      −0.030       0.021     −0.152      −0.004     0.061
                                  (0.983)    (0.943)      (0.862)    (0.875)     (0.305)    (0.629)   (0.493)
Panel D. Investigations included FINRA participation or not
Illiquidity                        0.037∗     0.049∗∗∗    0.040∗∗∗    0.004     −0.036∗∗     0.000    −0.006
                                  (0.097)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.708)     (0.038)    (0.769)   (0.695)
Illiquidity×Event urgency        −0.006      −0.020      −0.025       0.018     0.130∗∗∗     0.002     0.019
                                  (0.865)     (0.421)     (0.321)    (0.371) (< 0.001)      (0.174)   (0.309)
Illiquidity×FINRA                −0.077∗∗∗ −0.082∗∗∗ −0.057∗∗∗ −0.021            0.038      −0.002    −0.005
                                  (0.008) (< 0.001)   (0.003)   (0.191)         (0.181)     (0.109)   (0.797)
Illiquidity×Urgency×FINRA          0.215∗∗   0.276∗∗∗     0.133∗∗     0.107∗∗   −0.093       0.004     0.064
                                  (0.026) (< 0.001)      (0.047)     (0.049)     (0.244)    (0.458)   (0.359)
      Table VIII.
      Alternative Calculations of Kyle’s λ
      This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy equal to one
      if any insider trading occurred on a given day, and in Panel B is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders on
      a given day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the
      announcement date of t = 0. Each regression specification includes a different measure of Kyle’s λ, listed at the top
      of the column. See the text for specific definitions. p-values from standard errors clustered at the event level are




                                                                                                                                 DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
      presented in parentheses. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

                                                Trade level                                    5-minute window
Illiquidity measure:            λ1,k         λ2,k         λ3,k        λ4,k         λ1,5         λ2,5         λ3,5         λ4,5
                                (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
Panel A. Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                  −0.001∗∗∗    < 0.001     < 0.001      −0.009∗     < 0.001∗     < 0.001      < 0.001∗     < 0.001
                             (0.005)       (0.313)     (0.742)     (0.059)      (0.083)      (0.108)      (0.080)      (0.205)
Daily Urgency                  0.830∗∗∗    0.963∗∗∗    1.025∗∗∗    1.033∗∗∗    0.999∗∗∗    1.001∗∗∗    1.000∗∗∗    1.004∗∗∗
                            (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)
Illiquidity×Daily Urgency      0.024∗∗∗     0.004∗∗   < 0.001       0.039        0.015∗       0.014∗       0.014∗       0.014∗
                              (0.006)      (0.043)     (0.261)     (0.697)      (0.051)      (0.052)      (0.053)      (0.084)

Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                  −0.001∗∗     < 0.001     < 0.001      −0.012∗∗∗   < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001
                             (0.020)       (0.929)     (0.406)     (0.009)      (0.891)      (0.998)      (0.823)      (0.834)
Illiquidity×Event urgency      0.002∗∗∗   < 0.001     < 0.001       0.021∗∗∗   < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001
                              (0.004)      (0.751)     (0.440)     (0.004)      (0.608)      (0.665)      (0.570)      (0.390)

Event and event-day fixed effects
Illiquidity                 −0.001∗       < 0.001     < 0.001      −0.011∗∗∗   < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001
                             (0.058)       (0.853)     (0.322)     (0.005)      (0.817)      (0.724)      (0.871)      (0.976)
Illiquidity×Event urgency      0.003∗∗∗   < 0.001     < 0.001       0.023∗∗∗     0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001
                              (0.003)      (0.325)     (0.240)     (0.002)      (0.513)      (0.544)      (0.494)      (0.287)




                                                                                                                                 49
                                                                                                                              50
                                                Trade level                                  5-minute window
Illiquidity measure:            λ1,k         λ2,k         λ3,k      λ4,k         λ1,5        λ2,5        λ3,5       λ4,5
                                (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
Panel B. Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
Event fixed effects




                                                                                                                              DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Illiquidity                  −0.010∗∗∗    −0.001      < 0.001    −0.032       −0.005∗∗    −0.005∗∗    −0.005∗∗    −0.001
                             (0.006)      (0.238)      (0.676)   (0.328)      (0.029)      (0.037)    (0.028)     (0.740)
Daily Urgency                  6.920∗∗∗    7.549∗∗∗    8.132∗∗∗    8.312∗∗∗    7.787∗∗∗    7.809∗∗∗    7.798∗∗∗    8.065∗∗∗
                            (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)
Illiquidity×Daily Urgency      0.144∗∗      0.037∗∗   < 0.001    −0.402         0.159∗∗     0.150∗∗     0.155∗∗    0.068
                              (0.021)      (0.018)     (0.409)   (0.592)       (0.020)     (0.021)     (0.021)    (0.247)

Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                  −0.010∗∗∗    < 0.001     < 0.001    −0.078∗∗     < 0.001     < 0.001     < 0.001      0.001
                             (0.008)       (0.783)     (0.656)   (0.011)       (0.941)     (0.970)     (0.867)    (0.735)
Illiquidity×Event urgency      0.019∗∗∗   < 0.001     < 0.001      0.135∗∗∗     0.002       0.002       0.002      0.001
                              (0.002)      (0.754)     (0.668)    (0.004)      (0.729)     (0.764)     (0.688)    (0.636)

Event and event-day fixed effects
Illiquidity                 −0.007∗∗      < 0.001     < 0.001    −0.071∗∗∗      0.001       0.001     < 0.001      0.001
                             (0.023)       (0.706)     (0.501)   (0.005)       (0.803)     (0.735)     (0.865)    (0.577)
Illiquidity×Event urgency      0.024∗∗∗     0.002     < 0.001      0.155∗∗∗     0.005       0.004       0.005      0.003
                              (0.002)      (0.307)     (0.349)    (0.002)      (0.578)     (0.597)     (0.555)    (0.390)
Table IX.
MRR Spread Decomposition Parameters
This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy equal to one if any
insider trading occurred on a given day, and in Panel B is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders on a given
day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the announcement
date of t = 0. Each regression specification includes a different parameter from Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans
(1997), listed at the top of the column. See the text for specific definitions. p-values from standard errors clustered at




                                                                                                                              DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
the event level are presented in parentheses. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

             Parameter:                         α             λ            φ             ρ             θ
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)
             Panel A. Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy
             Event fixed effects
             Parameter                       0.015       < 0.001         0.007        0.044∗      −0.002
                                            (0.343)       (0.634)       (0.164)      (0.067)       (0.771)
             Daily Urgency                   1.003∗∗∗    0.955∗∗∗    1.040∗∗∗    0.857∗∗∗    1.014∗∗∗
                                          (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)
             Parameter×Daily Urgency       −0.096          0.002       −0.049         0.316       −0.053
                                           (0.818)        (0.732)      (0.510)       (0.426)       (0.598)

             Event fixed effects
             Parameter                       0.028       < 0.001         0.005        0.101∗∗∗    −0.013
                                            (0.200)       (0.621)       (0.565)      (0.002)       (0.116)
             Parameter×Event urgency       −0.046          0.001       −0.009       −0.199∗∗∗       0.020∗
                                           (0.142)        (0.459)      (0.417)     (< 0.001)       (0.074)

             Event and event-day fixed effects
             Parameter                      0.024        < 0.001         0.008        0.075∗∗∗    −0.008
                                           (0.233)        (0.513)       (0.269)      (0.008)       (0.291)
             Parameter×Event urgency       −0.042          0.001       −0.006        −0.168∗∗∗      0.024∗∗
                                           (0.194)        (0.386)      (0.609)       (0.007)       (0.046)




                                                                                                                              51
                                                                                           52
Parameter:                       α          λ           φ             ρ            θ
                                (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
Panel B. Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
Event fixed effects
Parameter                      0.080    −0.001        0.057∗        0.250       0.015
                              (0.483)    (0.788)     (0.075)       (0.207)     (0.666)




                                                                                           DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Daily Urgency                 7.981∗∗∗    8.949∗∗∗    8.595∗∗∗      5.185∗∗∗    8.172∗∗∗
                           (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)       (0.002)   (< 0.001)
Parameter×Daily Urgency        0.235    −0.032      −0.818          6.115∗     −0.905
                              (0.934)    (0.436)    (0.122)        (0.089)      (0.209)

Event fixed effects
Parameter                      0.214    −0.004        0.021         0.828∗∗∗   −0.083
                              (0.184)    (0.341)     (0.726)       (0.002)      (0.107)
Parameter×Event urgency      −0.336       0.006     −0.051        −1.600∗∗∗     0.132∗
                             (0.145)     (0.251)    (0.500)      (< 0.001)     (0.063)

Event and event-day fixed effects
Parameter                      0.184    −0.004        0.045         0.647∗∗∗   −0.045
                              (0.210)    (0.245)     (0.354)       (0.005)      (0.319)
Parameter×Event urgency      −0.304       0.009     −0.022        −1.366∗∗∗     0.168∗∗
                             (0.205)     (0.223)    (0.769)       (0.007)      (0.043)
Table X.
Alternative Illiquidity Measures
This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy equal to one if any
insider trading occurred on a given day, and in Panel B is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders on a given
day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the announcement
date of t = 0. Each regression specification includes a different illiquidity measure, listed at the top of the column. See
the text for specific definitions. p-values from standard errors clustered at the event level are presented in parentheses.




                                                                                                                              DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

                   Illiquidity measure:         Price Range Realized Variance Amihud Illiquidity
                                                     (1)               (2)                  (3)
                   Panel A. Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy
                   Event fixed effects
                   Illiquidity                   < 0.001           −0.017               −0.021
                                                  (0.753)          (0.222)              (0.285)
                   Daily Urgency                   0.844∗∗∗          0.900∗∗∗             0.972∗∗∗
                                                (< 0.001)         (< 0.001)            (< 0.001)
                   Illiquidity×Daily Urgency       0.022∗∗∗          0.847∗∗∗             1.003∗
                                                  (0.007)           (0.002)              (0.096)

                   Event fixed effects
                   Illiquidity                     0.001             0.015                0.001
                                                  (0.356)           (0.517)              (0.950)
                   Illiquidity×Event urgency     −0.001            −0.028                 0.041
                                                  (0.479)          (0.381)               (0.264)

                   Event and event-day fixed effects
                   Illiquidity                    0.001              0.029              < 0.001
                                                 (0.132)            (0.132)              (0.997)
                   Illiquidity×Event urgency     −0.001            −0.049                 0.090∗∗∗
                                                  (0.517)          (0.200)               (0.006)




                                                                                                                              53
                                                                               54
Illiquidity measure:        Price Range Realized Variance Amihud Illiquidity
                                (1)            (2)                (3)
Panel B. Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                  −0.003         −0.237∗∗           −0.242
                              (0.378)       (0.048)            (0.144)




                                                                               DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Daily Urgency                  6.345∗∗∗       6.770∗∗∗          7.637∗∗∗
                            (< 0.001)      (< 0.001)         (< 0.001)
Illiquidity×Daily Urgency      0.221∗∗∗       9.836∗∗∗         10.012∗∗
                              (0.002)      (< 0.001)           (0.047)

Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                    0.005          0.144            −0.005
                              (0.395)        (0.475)           (0.978)
Illiquidity×Event urgency    −0.006         −0.188              0.291
                              (0.517)       (0.473)            (0.367)

Event and event-day fixed effects
Illiquidity                    0.007          0.252            −0.011
                              (0.150)        (0.133)           (0.943)
Illiquidity×Event urgency    −0.007         −0.358              0.648∗∗
                              (0.518)       (0.235)            (0.025)
 Table XI.
 Dollar Spreads and Informed Trading
 This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in Panel A is a dummy equal to one if any
 insider trading occurred on a given day, and in Panel B is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders on a given
 day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the announcement
 date of t = 0. Each regression specification includes a different illiquidity measure, listed at the top of the column. See
 the text for specific definitions. p-values from standard errors clustered at the event level are presented in parentheses.




                                                                                                                               DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
 Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .

Illiquidity measure:         Dollar bid-ask spread Dollar effective spread Dollar realized spread Dollar price impact
                                      (1)                       (2)                      (3)                     (4)
Panel A. Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                        −0.001                  < 0.001                   < 0.001                 < 0.001
                                   (0.573)                  (0.830)                   (0.946)                 (0.782)
Daily Urgency                       0.942∗∗∗                 0.969∗∗∗                  0.993∗∗∗                0.990∗∗∗
                                 (< 0.001)                (< 0.001)                 (< 0.001)               (< 0.001)
Illiquidity×Daily Urgency            0.016                    0.010                    0.006                   0.007
                                    (0.380)                  (0.558)                  (0.709)                 (0.688)

Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                        −0.002                  < 0.001                   < 0.001                 −0.001
                                   (0.235)                  (0.898)                   (0.906)                (0.551)
Illiquidity×Event urgency            0.004                 < 0.001                   < 0.001                   0.001
                                    (0.132)                 (0.842)                   (0.728)                 (0.669)

Event and event-day fixed effects
Illiquidity                       −0.001                      0.001                    0.001                 < 0.001
                                  (0.390)                    (0.530)                  (0.428)                 (0.779)
Illiquidity×Event urgency            0.006∗                   0.001                  < 0.001                   0.001
                                    (0.082)                  (0.620)                  (0.934)                 (0.416)




                                                                                                                               55
                                                                                                                       56
Illiquidity measures:       Dollar bid-ask spread Dollar effective spread Dollar realized spread Dollar price impact
                                    (1)                     (2)                    (3)                   (4)
Panel B. Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                      −0.004                   0.006                  0.002                 0.003
                                 (0.700)                 (0.420)                (0.636)               (0.568)




                                                                                                                       DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Daily Urgency                      7.959∗∗∗               8.084∗∗∗               8.076∗∗∗              8.028∗∗∗
                                (< 0.001)              (< 0.001)              (< 0.001)             (< 0.001)
Illiquidity×Daily Urgency        −0.004                 −0.029                 −0.058                −0.025
                                 (0.977)                 (0.832)               (0.660)               (0.855)

Event fixed effects
Illiquidity                      −0.020                 −0.002                 −0.003                −0.001
                                 (0.104)                 (0.848)               (0.654)               (0.876)
Illiquidity×Event urgency          0.034∗               −0.003                   0.002               < 0.001
                                  (0.053)                (0.864)                (0.855)               (0.976)

Event and event-day fixed effects
Illiquidity                       −0.014                  0.006                  0.002                 0.001
                                  (0.195)                (0.484)                (0.772)               (0.814)
Illiquidity×Event urgency          0.048∗∗                0.011                  0.006                 0.005
                                  (0.042)                (0.568)                (0.611)               (0.667)
  Table XII.
  Pairwise Correlations of Illiquidity Measures
  This table presents pairwise correlations using daily data from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to
  t = −2, relative to the announcement date of t = 0. p-values are presented in parentheses.

                     Quoted      Effective     Realized      Price       Order        Kyle’s      MRR          MRR
                     spread       spread        spread      impact     imbalance        λ          θ            ρ




                                                                                                                        DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Effective spread      0.883
                   (< 0.001)
Realized spread       0.727       0.805
                   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)
Price impact          0.601       0.684         0.181
                   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)     (< 0.001)
Order imbalance       0.459       0.430         0.367        0.289
                   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)     (< 0.001)    (< 0.001)
Kyle’s λ              0.487       0.445         0.373        0.313       0.263
                   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)     (< 0.001)    (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)
MRR θ                 0.135       0.100         0.032        0.137       0.116        0.473
                   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)     (< 0.001)    (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)    (< 0.001)
MRR ρ               −0.039      −0.012        −0.015      < 0.001        0.039      −0.439      −0.260
                   (< 0.001)     (0.009)      (0.001)      (0.940)    (< 0.001)    (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)
Amihud                0.225       0.225         0.187        0.113       0.094        0.145     −0.001       −0.009
                   (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)     (< 0.001)    (< 0.001)   (< 0.001)    (< 0.001)     (0.903)     (0.053)




                                                                                                                        57
                                                                                                                                       58
           Table XIII.
           Multivariate Regressions
           This table presents OLS regression coefficients where the dependent variable in columns 1–4 is a dummy equal to one
           if any insider trading occurred on a given day, and in columns 5–8 is the logged volume of shares traded by insiders
           on a given day. Observations are from a panel of 410 events with trading days t = −120 to t = −2, relative to the
           announcement date of t = 0. p-values from standard errors clustered at the event level are presented in parentheses.
           Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ .




                                                                                                                                       DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
                                Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy         Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
                                   (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
Quoted spread                 < 0.001                                                0.026
                               (0.978)                                              (0.844)
Quoted spread×Urgency           0.034                                                0.240
                               (0.179)                                              (0.260)
Effective spread                              0.007                                              0.097
                                             (0.534)                                            (0.332)
Effective spread×Urgency                      0.026                                              0.150
                                             (0.167)                                            (0.324)
Realized spread                                            0.015                                              0.106
                                                          (0.150)                                            (0.209)
Realized spread×Urgency                                  −0.005                                              −0.003
                                                          (0.797)                                            (0.981)
Price impact                                                          −0.008                                               −0.002
                                                                      (0.382)                                              (0.972)
Price impact×Urgency                                                   0.039∗∗                                              0.209∗
                                                                      (0.017)                                              (0.090)
Order imbalance                −0.038∗∗     −0.032∗∗     −0.033∗∗     −0.032∗∗     −0.358∗∗     −0.321∗∗     −0.331∗∗      −0.318∗∗
                               (0.028)      (0.049)       (0.040)     (0.042)      (0.010)       (0.014)     (0.012)       (0.013)
Order imbalance×Urgency          0.112∗∗∗     0.105∗∗∗     0.110∗∗∗     0.113∗∗∗     0.966∗∗∗    0.918∗∗∗    0.944∗∗∗       0.967∗∗∗
                                (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)   (< 0.001)      (< 0.001)
Kyle’s λ                      < 0.001       −0.001       −0.001       < 0.001      −0.002       −0.005       −0.005        −0.004
                               (0.783)      (0.298)       (0.236)      (0.383)     (0.620)       (0.169)     (0.162)       (0.250)
Kyle’s λ×Urgency              < 0.001         0.001        0.002∗       0.002        0.004       0.012        0.016∗         0.014∗
                               (0.707)       (0.203)      (0.095)      (0.142)      (0.620)     (0.142)      (0.075)        (0.099)
MRR θ                          −0.006       −0.003       −0.003       −0.003       −0.046       −0.013       −0.008        −0.012
                           Dependent variable: Informed trading dummy         Dependent variable: Ln(1+informed trading volume)
                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
                           (0.326)      (0.629)      (0.692)      (0.660)      (0.278)     (0.757)     (0.836)      (0.760)
MRR θ×Urgency               0.020∗       0.011        0.012        0.011        0.150∗      0.071       0.073        0.069
                           (0.098)      (0.263)      (0.264)      (0.290)      (0.072)     (0.306)     (0.305)      (0.318)




                                                                                                                                  DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
MRR ρ                       0.092∗∗∗     0.078∗∗∗     0.078∗∗∗     0.080∗∗∗     0.777∗∗∗    0.675∗∗∗    0.679∗∗∗     0.689∗∗∗
                           (0.004)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.005)
MRR ρ×Urgency             −0.177∗∗     −0.143∗∗     −0.141∗∗     −0.153∗∗     −1.426∗∗     −1.167∗∗    −1.148∗∗    −1.236∗∗
                          (0.017)      (0.041)       (0.045)     (0.026)      (0.015)       (0.034)    (0.038)     (0.022)
Amihud                      0.007        0.009        0.006        0.012        0.034       0.039       0.038        0.074
                           (0.735)      (0.667)      (0.762)      (0.597)      (0.851)     (0.826)     (0.840)      (0.711)
Amihud×Urgency              0.039        0.033        0.050        0.042        0.238       0.194       0.304        0.260
                           (0.326)      (0.389)      (0.211)      (0.293)      (0.485)     (0.564)     (0.394)      (0.461)
|Return|                  < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001       0.007         0.006      0.007       0.006
                           (0.740)      (0.857)      (0.709)      (0.836)     (0.275)       (0.308)    (0.247)     (0.333)
ln(1+volume)                0.005        0.006        0.006        0.007       0.036         0.039      0.040       0.043
                           (0.217)      (0.156)      (0.162)      (0.129)     (0.287)       (0.233)    (0.224)     (0.188)
|MKT|                     −0.001       −0.001       −0.001       −0.001       −0.011       −0.012      −0.011      −0.011
                           (0.572)      (0.626)      (0.638)      (0.665)     (0.359)       (0.339)    (0.366)     (0.383)
|SMB|                     < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001      < 0.001      −0.026       −0.024      −0.023      −0.023
                           (0.952)      (0.999)      (0.970)      (0.982)     (0.337)       (0.358)    (0.382)     (0.372)
|HML|                       0.002        0.002        0.002        0.002      −0.015       −0.008      −0.007      −0.007
                           (0.686)      (0.601)      (0.593)      (0.589)     (0.640)       (0.805)    (0.815)     (0.817)
Constant                  −0.021       −0.017       −0.017       −0.015       −0.165       −0.149      −0.142      −0.134
                           (0.171)      (0.244)      (0.253)      (0.294)     (0.153)       (0.187)    (0.208)     (0.229)
Event fixed effects          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Event-day fixed effects      Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations                38,050       39,138       39,138       39,138      37,789        38,872     38,872      38,872
Adjusted R2                 0.166        0.167        0.167        0.167       0.160         0.163      0.163       0.163




                                                                                                                                  59
