                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 RISK, UNCERTAINTY
                                AND EXCHANGE RATES




                                 Robert J. Hodrick




                              Working Paper No. 2429




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2429
                                             November 1987




                     Risk, Uncertainty and Exchange Rates



                                  ABSTRACT


     This paper explores a new direction for empirical models of exchange

rate determination. The motivation arises from two well documented facts,

the failure of log-linear empirical exchange rate models of the 1970's and

the variability of risk premiums in the forward market. Rational maximizing

models of economic behavior imply that changes in the conditional variances

of exogenous processes, such as future monetary policies, future government

spending, and future rates of income growth, can have a significant effect on

risk premiums in the foreign exchange market and can induce conditional

volatility of spot exchange rates. I examine theoretically how changes in

these exogenous conditional variances affect the level of the current

exchange rate, and I attempt to quantify the extent that this channel

explains exchange rate volatility using autoregressive conditional

heteroscedastic models.



                                             Robert J. Hodrick
                                             Kellogg Graduate School of
                                                  Management
                                             Northwestern University
                                             Evanston, IL 60208

                                             (312)   491-8339
                                        1

I. Introduction

     Most of the existing empirical models of exchange rates were designed to

address questions about the influence of the first moments of exogenous

processes on exchange rates. The models are usually linear in natural

logarithms, and their solutions express logarithms of exchange rates as the

discounted expected values of the logarithms of the future driving processes

with constant rates of discount. Many of the models assume that risk

neutrality provides a good approximation of the preferences of actual

economic agents.

     Since only the first moments of exogenous processes matter for economic

behavior in these models, they are poorly equipped to answer questions such

as how does the exchange rate respond to an increase in the uncertainty

associated with the amount of government spending in the economy. They also

cannot address questions regarding how changes in the uncertainty of the

monetary policies of countries or changes in the uncertainty associated with

the rates of technological change of the countries affect exchange rates.

Explicit nonlinear models based on the maximizing behavior of risk-averse

agents are able to address these questions because they model how risk-averse

individuals respond to perceived changes in the uncertainty of their

environment. The goal of this paper is to address some of these questions

explicitly with both theory and some initial empirical work.

     There are several additional motivations for the first sections of this

paper. The first comes from the work of Meese and Rogoff (l983a, 1983b,

1986), who explore the out-of-sample predictive ability of the log-linear

models of the 1970's. These models were the first rational expectations

models that studied exchange rate determination in a framework of asset
                                        2

market equilibrium) A striking finding of their research is the general

failure of these models to beat the prediction that the exchange rate follows

a random walk, even when the models are given ex post values of the right-

hand-side variables.2 One aspect of the economy that is ignored in

constructing linear models is the nature of risk that agents must bear.

Meese and Rogoff (1983b) suggest that time-varying risk premiums could be an

important determinant of their findings although they express skepticism

about the likelihood of this being the complete explanation. Part of this

reasoning is attributable to the fact that Meese and Rogoff include nominal

interest rate differentials in their specifications which will capture some

of the influence of risk.

     A second motivation is the findings of Fama (1984) and Hodrick and

Srivastava (1986). Fama (1984) investigated regressions of the ex post rate

of change of an exchange rate (the rate of depreciation of one currency

relative to another) on the forward premium, which can be defined to be the

expected rate of depreciation plus a risk premium. He demonstrated that the

results can be interpreted as providing evidence that risk premiums in the

forward exchange market are more variable than expected rates of

depreciation. This interpretation is valid under the hypothesis of rational

expectations and under the assumptions that the sample statistics are

converging to the true moments of the population and that the asymptotic

standard errors are correct. Although the findings were somewhat troublesome

to Fama (1984), there is abundant current evidence across many asset markets

that expected returns and risk premiums do vary through time.3

     Time variation in risk premiums complicates discussions of the

appropriateness of the levels of stock and bond prices, since they are no
                                        3

 longer the present discounted values of streams of payments discounted at a

constant rate. It also suggests that the variables that cause time-varying

risk premiums in the forward foreign exchange market and other asset markets

are potentially important in the determination of spot exchange rates and the

levels of other asset prices.4

     A third motivation is the recent interesting partial equilibrium

exercise that Frankel and Meese (1987) conducted to examine how much a change

in the conditional variance of the future spot exchange rate affects the

level of the current exchange rate in the context of a simple portfolio

balance model. Their surprising back-of-the-envelope calculations indicate

that plausible changes in the conditional variance of the exchange rate can

have substantial effects on the level of the spot rate. Frankel and Meese

(1987) acknowledge that their exercise is partial equilibrium (since they

hold the expected future exchange rate constant), and they suggest that the

two-period mean-variance model is unlikely to be appropriate in an

environment in which conditional variances are moving. The problem is that

the model ignores the demands of investors to hedge against changes in the

investment opportunity set. Intertemporal general equilibrium models are

required to investigate this type of phenomenon.

     Finally, the fourth motivation comes from the recent theoretical

exercises that Abel (1986) and Giovannini (1987) have performed. They

examine how a change in the conditional variance of an exogenous aggregate

real dividend process affects the level of stock prices in general

equilibrium.5 Both authors demonstrate that the effect depends on the degree

of relative risk aversion or the rate of intertemporal substitution of a

representative agent, but their models predict opposite directions of the
                                       4

effect. Abel (1986) works in a simple version of the Lucas (1978) model,

which is a real barter model. Ciovannini (1987) works in a simple version of

Svensson's (1985b) model, which modified the timing of transactions in the

monetary model of Lucas (1982).

     The analysis is conducted in the next four sections. Section II

specifies the preferences and budget constraints of the countries, and

defines an equilibrium. In section.III, I provide closed form solutions for

some of the key variables of the model under assumptions on the time series

properties of the exogenous processes. Section IV contains the empirical

analysis associated with the model. Some concluding remarks are contained in

section V.



II. A Modified Svensson Model

     In this section I explore a version of the cash-in-advance model

presented in Svensson (1985a, l985b) and discussed in Stockman and Svensson

(1987). The model is a modification of the monetary model first presented in

Lucas (1982). I add a discussion of exogenous fiscal policy, and I examine

time-varying conditional variances of the exogenous processes as in Abel

(1986) and Giovannini (1987). These extensions allow consideration of the

issues outlined in the introduction regarding the influence of uncertainty on

the risk premium in the foreign exchange market and on the level of the

exchange rate and its volatility.



II.A. Countries and Endowments

     There are two countries, denoted country one and country two. There are

two goods in the world that are the endowments of the two countries. The
                                         5

endowments are exogenous and nonstorable, and the realizations of the

endowments are denoted      and Y2, for the goods of country one and two,

respectively.6 The timing of the model follows Svensson (1985a) in assuming

that goods markets are open in the beginning of each period and asset markets

are open at the end of each period.

     The endowments are elements of the exogenous state of the world at time

t that is denoted x. The precise complete definition of the state of the

world will be given below. It will also be demonstrated that the state

follows a first-order Markov process with transition density given by

F(xt+1Ix).


II.B. Government Sectors

     The government of each country buys some of that country's goods in the

competitive market for each good. The exogenous amount purchased each period

is denoted G., for i — 1, 2. The precise time series processes for real

endowments and real government spendings are specified below.

     Each government is subject to a budget constraint that requires balance

between purchases of goods and taxes collected net of securities issued and

redeemed. For simplicity, I consider only real head taxes, which are denoted

     for i =   1, 2. Taxes are paid to the government at the asset market
each period. The governments can also issue state contingent claims to

nominal money where B(x) is the amount of currency i that the government

of country i promises at time t-l to pay at time t contingent on the state of

the world being x. The assumption that governments only issue state

contingent claims on their own money stocks is not substantive. The money

stocks are also exogenous and are given by      i   1, 2, for the outstanding
                                                6

quantities of monies at the end of period t-l. The money of country one will

be called the "dollar, and the money of country two will be called the

"pound.

        The governments' flow budget constraints are therefore


(1)         cit =       +
                            n.(x+1, x)B.+i(xt+i)dx+1
                    +         -                     i — 1, 2.


In (1) the function n(x+i, x) is the endogenous nominal pricing kernel

associated with money i. It provides values in terms of money i at time t in

state x of promises to state-contingent amounts of money i at time t+l given

state          The dollar price of good one is                  and the pound price of good

two is 2t

      The governments are also subject to cash-in-advance constraints in their

purchases in the goods markets, although since they have access to the

printing press, they are not limited in their nominal spending by their

previous accumulation of money. If              is defined to be the amount of money

that the government of country i acquired in the asset market at time t-l,

then the cash-in-advance constraints are


                            + (M.÷1 -                  i —   1,   2.
(2)
                                        M.t),

The time series of government spending, taxation, and money creation are

assumed to be exogenous, and the government is assumed to issue debt in a

fashion consistent with its budget constraint. The exogenous gross rate of

monetary growth of country i in period t is it Mt+i/M, i                      1, 2.
                                          7

 II.C. Preferences and Budget Constraints

      The preferences of agents in each country are assumed to be homothetic,

which allows aggregation into a representative consumer, and the preferences

of the two representative agents are assumed to be identical. It is also

assumed that the representative agents have identical initial wealth levels

and that they are taxed equally by the two countries as in Sargent (1987).

These assumptions facilitate the discussion of an equilibrium, since they

lead to the perfectly pooled equilibrium of Lucas (1982).

      The objective function of the representative consumer of either country

is to maximize expected lifetime utility as in



(3)                                         < 1,
          E0{ PU(Ci, C2)},

by choice of consumption of the good of country one, C1, and consumption of

the good of country two, C2.8 In (3), E0(.) is the expectation operator

conditional on initial information in period zero. It is assumed that the

period utility function, U(.,.), is sufficiently concave that the Inada

conditions are satisfied and an internal equilibrium is guaranteed.9

      Information relevant to the decisions for the period, that is the value

of the elements of x, is assumed to be obtained at the beginning of the

period. At that time the representative consumer faces two cash-in-advance

constraints that dictate the quantities of each good that can be consumed.

In the period t-1 asset market the representative agent of each country

acquires M? of currency i.     In period t the purchasing power of the dollar

in term of good one is 111t           and the purchasing power of the pound in

terms of good one is 112t     (S/Pi), where        is the exchange rate of dollars

per pound. The cash-in-advance constraints are presented in real terms as
                                          8


(4a)
           C1   MtIIlt,

(4b)


and the relative price of good two in terms of good one, which can be thought

of as the real terms of trade of country one, is et    StP2t/Pi. Although
this expression defines a terms of trade, it should be remembered that it is

not possible to trade goods for goods within a period. It is also not

possible to trade money for money at the beginning of the period, which means

that the exchange rate is truly an asset price. Stockman and Svensson (1987)

argue that the spot rate defined here as St is really a forward rate since

delivery is not immediate. While this is true, it is also the case that the

spot rate discussed in the typical empirical study of exchange rates is for

delivery in one or two business days, depending on the currencies.

       The budget constraint of the consumer during a period requires that his

purchases of assets in the asset market be less than or equal to his wealth

at that time. Agents are assumed to be able to trade titles to the endowment

processes of the two countries. The number of titles or shares to the two

endowments purchased by the agent at the time t asset market is denoted Z÷1

with dollar prices of the shares denoted Q, for i — 1, 2. The total number

of shares is normalized to unity for each of the two shares to endowments.

The consumers also can purchase state-contingent monies, where B?(x) is the

amount of money i that the consumer purchased at the time t-l asset market

for delivery at the time t asset market conditional on the state being x.

The resources available to the agent in the asset market are any unspent

monies from the two consumption goods markets, the payoffs on the shares to

the endowments that they own plus the ability to resell the shares, and the
                                                              9

state-contingent payoffs of monies that they own, but minus the tax

liabilities. The budget constraint in period t                             is

(5)        iiM÷1 + II2M+i          +
                                          litJn1(xt+l,                xt)Bt+1(x+1)dxt+i

       +
           112tJn2(xt+i,
                                                              +
                                                                      ltlt+l + 2t2t+l
        (ll1tM -      Cit) + (rI2M            - 8c2)      +
                                                              uitBt(x)          +
                                                                                    n2tBt(xt)
       +
           'lt    +
                      Yi)Zi   +
                                  2t      +
                                              eY2)z2              -
                                                                       (l/2)(ri +
In    (5) the real price in terms of good one of a share of the endowment in

country i is               QJ/P, i = 1,          2.


       By adding the real value of current consumption and the real tax

liabilities to both sides of (5), the right-hand side of the modified (5) is

defined to be real wealth, which is denoted


(6) W llltMt + 112tMt                 +
                                          111t(xt)            +
                                                                      ll2B(x)
                  +        + Yi)Zi        +
                                               2t     +
                                                          eY2)z2.
II.D. Solution of the Agent's Problem

       In order to study an equilibrium of this economy, consider the value

function of the agent's problem. The consumer has current real wealth and

real stocks of money, and he is facing uncertainty about the future that can

be characterized by the probability distribution of future states of the

world. Hence, the value function of the agent's problem is


                                               = max
(7)
           V(W,             II2tMt,    x)                 {   u(ci,        C2t) +


              JV(W÷i,       llt÷lMt÷l, 112+iM÷i, x÷1)F(x÷1lx)dx+1},
                                           10

where the maximization is over current choices of consumption goods and new

holdings of monies and other assets and is subject to the constraints in (4)

and (5). The assumption of rational expectations is employed in (7) because

the conditional expectation of the agent is taken with respect to the true

transition probability of the future state.

       If A. is the multiplier for the period-t budget constraint given by (5),

lt is the multiplier for the period-t dollar-good cash-in-advance constraint

given by (4a), and         is the multiplier for the period-t pound-good cash-in-

advance constraint given by (4b), the first order conditions for the agent's

problem may be written as


(8a)                 +

               =
(8b)               (At +
(8c)       Atlilt t[(At÷1 +     vit+ilt+l],
(8d)       AII2 Et[(A+i + U12t+l)112t+lJ,
(8e)       Atlt tlt÷l +
(8f)       AW2 =               +


(8g)                                                      V
           Aflini(xt+i, x) —    +1111t+iF(xt+1kt),
                                                          V
(8h)       All2n2(x+1, x) =     t+1112t+iF(x+1k),
In (8a,b) the partial derivative of the period utility function with respect

to its ith argument is denoted U. In addition to (8a-h), each cash-in-

advance constraint in (4) holds with equality when its associated multiplier

is strictly greater than zero, and if the multiplier equals zero, the

constraint is not binding. All of the expectations in (8c-f) are conditional

expectations with respect to the density function of x1 given x.
                                           11

        The interpretation of (8a-h) is straightforward. Equation (8a) relates

 the marginal utility of consumption of good one to the marginal value of real

wealth in units of good one plus the marginal value of the real dollar money

balances of the agent. Similarly, (8b) relates the marginal utility of good

two to the marginal value of wealth plus the marginal value of the real pound

money balances held by the agent where both multipliers are multiplied by the

relative price of good two in terms of good one because they are in units of

good one. An important aspect of these two expressions is that the current

marginal utility of consumption is not equated to the marginal value of

wealth unless the cash-in-advance constraint associated with that good is not
           10
binding.

        Equations (8c-h) are the Euler equations for the investment decisions of

the agent. Equations (8c-d) are the Euler equations associated with the

decisions to increase money balances in period t. The decision to hold an

additional unit of nominal money involves a tradeoff of the product of the

current real value of the money in terms of good one and the current marginal

value of wealth against the expected utility value of the money in the next

period's goods market which is its real purchasing power in terms of good one

times the marginal value of wealth plus the marginal value of money at that

time.

        Equations (8e-f) are the Euler equations associated with the purchases

of shares in the endowments, Investment at time t in a title to future

output requires a utility sacrifice given by the product of the current real

price of the asset and the current marginal value of wealth. Since all

assets, other than monies, pay off and can be resold only in the next

period's asset market, which is after consumption in that period, the utility
                                          12

gain to purchasing an asset is the expectation of the product of the real

resources available from holding the asset with the marginal value of wealth

at time t + 1.

     Equations (8g-h) involve the purchase of state-contingent monies for

delivery in the next asset market. If a unit of money i for delivery in a

particular state x1 is purchased today at a nominal price of n(x+1, xe),

the agent sacrifices real value given by the current purchasing power of that

money times the marginal value of wealth. The value received in return is

the real value of the unit of money conditional on the realization of the

particular state times the marginal value of wealth in that state times the

probability of that state being realized. These equations must hold for all

possible future states.



II.E. Definition of an EQuilibrium

     Given the setup of the model at this point, it is useful to set out the

definition of an equilibrium.

          An equilibrium is defined to be a set of initial conditions

     CM.0 > 0, B.0(x0), i      1, 2) and stochastic processes for the exogenous

     variables
                       G.t, r., M÷1t    M.+1, 1.        1, 2)o, the endogenous
                                                             i — 1,   2)o the
     choice variables (C., M?1, B÷i(x÷1)
     prices of goods and assets                          1, 2)o, which are
                                        et,    "it' 1

     functions of the current state of the economy, and the pricing functions

                          1, 2, such that the following conditions are
     n.(x+1, xe), i
     satisfied:

     (i) The two government budget constraints in (1) are balanced for all

          t      0, and the cash-in-advance constraints (2) are satisfied with
                                               13

            equality.

       (ii) Given the pricing functions for contingent money purchases, the

            real share prices, and the stochastic processes for {r.    II.    Y.
                                                                  it    it'    it'
            i   1, 2) and the initial conditions, the choices of the households

            for consumption goods, money holdings, contingent claim purchases,

            and share purchases solve the agent's constrained maximization

            problem.

       (iii) There is market clearing in the competitive markets for goods,

            shares and contingent claims on monies for all periods t    0, where

            market clearing is given by the following:

(9a)        2C.
              it
                 + C.
                    it
                       — Y. ,
                          it
                                           i—       1,   2,


(9b)              =    (1/2),              i        1, 2,


(9c)        M.t÷l —   M+i       + 2M?+1,   i —      1,   2,



(9d)        B.+i(x+i) — 2B?÷1(xt+1),       i        1, 2, v


       One equilibrium that can be studied in this model is the perfectly

pooled equilibrium of Lucas (1982), in which agents equally share the

endowments, net of government consumption, of the two countries.



III. Closed-Form Equilibrium Solutions

       In developing explicit solutions to the model I have chosen to work with

particular time series properties for the exogenous variables. The processes

on endowments and gross rates of growth of money supplies are assumed to be

conditionally log normal. If lower case letters indicate natural logarithms

of upper case counterparts, then the processes for real endowments and gross
                                                         14

rates of growth of money supplies are assumed to be


(lOa)                    + (1       -
                                                + Elt+l,        0       lpl : 1,
(lOb) 2t+l         1'2Y2t +   (1    -
                                        p2)y2 ÷ c21,
                                                                0
                                                                        1p2I
                                                                                  1,



(lOc) w11 '3'lt + (1                -
                                        p3)w1
                                                +
                                                    c31,        0       11,31
                                                                                  l
(lOd) ''2t+l       p4w2 + (1        -
                                                + 4t÷l'         0        P41 1.

In (lOa,b) the y, I — 1, 2, are the unconditional values of the logarithms

of the endowments of the two countries, and in (lOc,d) the .,                            i — 1,   2, are

the logarithms of the two unconditional gross rates of nominal monetary

growth. Each             i         1, 4, is assumed to be normally distributed with

conditional mean equal to zero and conditional variance given by                                  i =   1,
4.     The series are assumed to be conditionally uncorrelated for simplicity.

        I have also chosen to make simplifying assumptions about the

distributions of the shares of government spending. In order to simplify

later presentations, let the fraction of good i that the government buys be

         (G/Yt). I assume that the                       can be described by the following

processes:

(ha)        e1÷1   = 5lt +         (1   -
                                            5l      +
                                                        C5÷1        0
                                                                           1P51
                                                                                  < 1,

(lib)
            e2÷1     6e2 ÷         (1 -
                                            p6)e2
                                                    +
                                                        £6t÷l       0     1p61
                                                                                  < 1,


where £St÷l is distributed uniformly on the interval [-h5, h5], and

is distributed uniformly on the interval {h6, h6J.

        I also assume that the parameters characterizing the conditional

variances of the six exogenous processes follow simple autoregressions such

that
                                              15

 (12)       E(h.t÷i) —        + (1   -
                                         4.)h.,       i       1, 6,


where h is the unconditional variance of the process for i                 1, 4, and

 (l/3)(h.)3 is the unconditional variance for the government spending

processes, i —    5,   6.

        The state of the economy can now be defined to be the
                                                                       x
wit' cit' r, i — 1, 2, h., j — 1, 6), and with the assumption that the
taxation policies are Markov processes, the x vector is a Markov process as

was assumed in the beginning of the model.
                                                                                       '4
        Since I am interested in obtaining closed-form solutions to the model, I

choose the period utility function to be



                                    i)]C7 +
(13)                            -                         -
            U(Ci, C2) — [1/(1                     [1/(1       6)]C6.
In (13) I have used the constant relative risk aversion utility function that

Abel (1986) and Giovannini (1987) use. In dynamic applications under

uncertainty these utility functions have the unfortunate attribute of

specifying the agent's aversion to risk with the same parameter that

characterizes the agent's preferences for intertemporal substitution.

        In a certainty environment, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution

that describes the percentage change in the ratio of consumption in period

t+1 to consumption in period t in response to a percentage change in the real

return on saving is the reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk

aversion, -y.   An increase in the real return has both income and substitution

effects on current consumption. The income effect tends to increase current

consumption since any saving now has a higher return, and the substitution

effect tends to decrease current consumption since future consumption is now

less expensive. When -y < 1, the substitution effect dominates the income
                                                    16

effect, and current consumption falls with an increase in the real return.

When -y      1, the utility function is logarithmic, and the income effect and

the substitution effect cancel making current consumption constant. When -y >

1, the income effect outweighs the substitution effect and current

consumption rises. These responses are useful in determining how asset

prices must respond in general equilibrium in response to a shock to the

economy, because we know that the current endowment must be consumed.

        In this case the equilibrium marginal utilities of consumption are


(14a)                       -                and
             u1     [(Y1
(14b         U2t    1(Y2t
                    [
                                C   )
                                 2t"j
                                        21
From the definition of the shares of government spending in the economy, it

follows that U1 2(l -                          and U2 — 26(1       -



        I   also follow Giovannini (1987) and investigate explicitly only the case

in which the parameters of the model result in an equilibrium in which the
                                                   11
money multipliers are always positive.                   In this case the cash-in-advance

cbnstraints in (4) hold as equalities. One problem with this equilibrium is

that it implies unitary velocities of circulation of the monies. This may be

less of a problem than ordinarily thought since we do not observe the length

of the period. The observable relation is between a time averaged flow of

income and the point in time stocks of monies. Svensson (1985) and Flood

(1987) also note that the thought experiment of changing the rate of growth

of the money supply will typically change the length of the period over which

the optimization is conducted. This will also result in a variable velocity

when measurements are taken over constant time intervals although clearly

such changes in the period are not considered here.
                                             17

        With the assumption that the governments' cash-in-advance constraints

hold as equalities, the goods-market clearing conditions and the money-market

clearing conditions can be used to find expressions for the real purchasing

powers of the two monies which are given by the following:

(15a)
             111t       Yit/Mi÷i,

(l5b)               —
                        eY2/M2÷1.
In   (l5b) the dependence of 112t on the relative price 8 indicates that this

is not a final expression since the relative price is an endogenous variable.

       The solution for the marginal utility of wealth is readily obtainable

from (8a) and (8c), using the expressions in (14a) and (15a).



         At(Y1/Mit÷1) E[27(l -           e1÷l)    +1(Y1t÷i/Mlt+2)] or

(16)     A      27E[(l -

The complete solution requires substitution from the specification of the

time series processes on the exogenous variables.

       A similar set of substitutions from (8b), (8d), (14b) and (l5b) allows

for a solution to the terms of trade as


         Ate(Y2/M2ti) —
                                 E[2(l   -
                                                                    or



(17) e       — 2E[(l         -




Equations (15a,b), (16) and (17) can now be combined to solve for the
exchange rate, given the assumed exogenous processes of the model, since the

exchange rate is simply St — 112t'Thlt
                                                                  18

III.A. Solution for the Exchange Rate

        The solution for the exchange rate is easily presented by taking the

natural logarithm of exchange rate and substituting from the appropriate

expressions using the absence of correlation between the exogenous processes:


(18) S        asO
                    +
                        aim1+i              -
                                                 a2m2÷i
                                                             -
                                                                 a3....1          +
                                                                                      a42    -
                                                                                                 a5y1   +

                 +a s7  c
                            lt
                                     -as8       2t
                                                     -as9 h
                                                          it
                                                             +aslO h2t -asilh3t +as12h4t

In (18) Elt         ln(E[(l -            lt÷l          ]) and 2t 1n(E[(1 - e2+1) 5]), which
are given by the following:


(19a) lt ln{[(l -                     it h5)-              + (1           -
                                                                              lt   +
                                                                                        hst)1]/(l
                                                                                                    -




(19b)        =
                 ln{[(l 2t h6)1 +-          -
                                                                 (1       -
                                                                              2t + h6t)]/(l         -

                                                                                                        5)2h6}.

In (19a)
                    5e1              ÷ (1 -
                                                 p5)1,     and in (19b) 2t '62t + (1                        -
                                                                                                                p6)e2.
In (18) all of the a parameters are defined to be positive when there is

positive persistence of endowment processes and intertemporal substitution is

high (-y < 1 and & <             1).     Their values are

                                         asl =as2 =a s3—a s4=1,
                                                     a5 — (1          -


                                                             (1 -
                                                     a6
                                                                 —
                                                           a7
                                                                 —
                                                           a8
                                                  a9
                                                       =   (l/2)(l            -
                                                                                   )2

                                                 a10 =     (l/2)(1            -
                                                                                  5)2
                                                and a11 —
                                                                 a12
                                                                              =   (1/2).
     As in the monetary approach to the determination of the exchange rate,

an increase in the money stock of country one or its rate of growth
                                             19

depreciates the dollar relative to the pound. The results for the level of a

country's endowment is similar to the predictions of the monetary approach

only when the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is high. Then, higher

(lower) levels of output in country one (two) lead to an appreciation of the

dollar relative to the pound. The results are reversed if intertemporal

substitution is low (-y > 1 and & >    1).
     Additional insights in this approach center on the influence of the

government spending variables and the conditional variances. Notice from

(18) and (19a) that an increase in the expected share of country-one output

that the government will take in the next period appreciates the dollar

relative to the pound. Similarly, if less of country two's output is

expected to be available next period, the pound appreciates relative to the

dollar. These effects arise because of the influence of future government

spending on the expected marginal utility of the respective goods. If less

of country one's endowment is expected to be available for consumption next

period, the relative price of the country-two good in terms of the country-

one good, et,   must   rise. Since the purchasing powers of the dollar in terms

of the country-one good and the pound in terms of the country-two good are

determined strictly by the outstanding quantities of monies and the currently

available endowments, the entire change in the relative price of the two

goods is accomplished through the exchange rate.

    An increase in the conditional variance of the country-one money growth

rate or the country-one endowment process causes an appreciation of the

dollar relative to the pound. Both effects arise because increases in either

conditional variance increase the expected purchasing power of the dollar.

Similarly, an increase in either the conditional variance of the pound
                                            20

monetary growth rate or the endowment of country two appreciates the pound

relative to the dollar.

        An increase in the conditional variance of the share of government

spending in good one (two) causes an increase in                which also

appreciates (depreciates) the dollar relative to the pound. These effects

arise because an increase in the variance of the share of government spending

increases the expected marginal utility of that good since agents are risk

averse. These effects are derived formally in the Appendix.



III.B. Solutions for Nominal Interest Rates

        Let      be the risk-free nominal interest rate of country one on a

continuously compounded basis. Hence, exp(-i1) is the amount of dollars

that one must sacrifice at the time t asset market for a dollar delivered

unconditionally at the time t+l asset market. Let i2 be the similarly

defined pound nominal interest rate. From the definitions of the nominal

interest rates, the nominal pricing kernels and (8g,h) we know that


(20a)                                                                and
              exp(-i1) Jn1(x÷1 x)dxt÷1

(20b)         exp(i2) $n2(xt+1 x)dxt÷i

By taking natural logarithms of both sides of (20a,b) and exploiting the

assumed time series processes of the exogenous variables, we have the

following closed form solutions:


(2la) i1 =      a10   +        -
                                   a.12ln(E[(l lt÷2' + ai3(yit -        y1)

                    + a.i4(wi -       + a.15h1t + a.16h3, and
                                                          21


(21b) i2 a.20 +          a2i2         -
                                          a122ln(E[(l                  2t÷21 + a.23(y2 -                   y2)
                     +                -        +                   +
                         a.24(w2                    a.25h2                 a.26h4.
In (21a,b) under the assumptions of the model, all of the a coefficients

cannot be signed because they depend on the degrees of intertemporal

substitution, which are given by                        and 8* When intertemporal

substitution for good one is high and with positive persistence of real

endowments, all of the a.1 coefficients are positive, and their values are

           a.,0     -ln$ +       -    (l/2)(l       -
                                                        l)(l       -
                                                                           -y)2h1
                                                                                     -
                                                                                         (l/2)(l   -


                                            a.ill       a.
                                                         il2           1,


                                     a.13       p1(l -     -y)(l            -

                                                               2
                                                a.14 —

                          a.15
                                 =    (l/2)(l       -
                                                          - p)(l                -
                                                                                    ..)2   and

                             -l6 (l/2)[(1 -               3) (1        -        +

        Higher   than average rates of monetary growth increase nominal interest

rates because they increase the expected rate of inflation.

        If intertemporal substitution is strong (-y <                               1) and with positive
persistence of real endowments, higher than average endowments cause high

nominal interest rates. The effect of the higher than usual endowment is to

increase the purchasing power of money and to create expected inflation as

the future purchasing power of money is expected to fall. This effect

outweighs the real interest rate effect which would be to decrease nominal

interest rates. Alternatively, if intertemporal substitution is low (-y >                                        1),
a higher than average current endowment causes a fall in the nominal interest

rate.

        When intertemporal substitution for good two is high (6 <                                      1) and with
                                                    22

positive persistence in the good two endowment process, all of the a.2

coefficients are positive, and their values are

                     -ln +      -    (l/2)(l 2)(l
                                                -         -
                                                                  5)2h2
                                                                            -
                                                                                (l/2)(l   -



                                                              1,

                                    a.23    p2(l -    6)(l         -
                                                                       p2),
                                                          2
                                                a24
                        a25          (l/2)(l -
                                                2 p)(l-                -
                                                                            5)2   and


                             a.26
                                       (l/2)[(l -
                                                  4) (1       -         +



III.C.   Risk Premiums in the Forward Foreign Exchange Market

       Although no explicit forward foreign exchange market was introduced in

the assets that agents trade in the asset market, arbitrage allows the

pricing of forward contracts for delivery of money in the asset market next

period. In order to prevent an arbitrage opportunity, it is known that the

return from investing a dollar in a risk-free nominal dollar return has to be

identical to the return from converting the dollar into pounds, investing the

pounds in a risk-free nominal pound return, and making a forward contract to

sell the pounds obtained in the investment in the forward market. This

statement of interest rate parity requires that


(22)       exp(i1) =     (l/S)exp(i2)F,
where F is the contract price of dollars per pound in the time t                                 forward
market for delivery and payment            at   time t+l.

       The logarithmic expression of the risk premium in the forward market

that has been studied extensively in empirical analyses is E(st÷1) -

which from (22) is equivalent to
                         -                                                  expectation
E(s÷i -     s)   -                      By taking the time t                                  of (18)
                                                 23

updated one period and subtracting (18) and the difference of (21a) and (21b)

we have

(23)       Et(st+i -   E)      aihi -       r2h2t +    a3F13      - a4h4
  -
       {E(1+1)
                 -
                     ln[Et(1
                               -
                                   e1÷2)]} + {E(E2+1)             - 1n[E(1   -
                                                                                 2t+2)]}
where the a parameters are defined to be positive when intertemporal

substitution is high for both goods and the values of the parameters are

given by
                                        -
                                            (l/2)p(l    -




                                   a2       (l/2)p(1 -      8),
                                    a3 — (1/2)(1      + p3)2, and

                                    a4 — (1/2)(1      ÷ p4)2.

If risk premiums are highly variable as indicated in the analysis of Fama

(1984) and Hodrick and Srivastava (1986) and if the model is true, the

variability is produced by time variation in the conditional variances of the

exogenous monetary growth rates and of the endowment processes. The variance

of the share of the endowment that the government will take also affects the

risk premium since E(E1t÷i), the time t expectation of the the logarithm of

the expected value at time t+1 of (1 -          e1+2) is not          in general equal to

the logarithm of the expected value at time t of (1 -
                                                                    1t÷2
       This section has established that as the conditional variances of the

exogenous processes move through time they will cause movements in both the

risk premium in the foreign exchange market and in the level of the spot

exchange rate. The next section investigates whether these effects are

present in the data.
                                         24

IV. An    Empirical Investigation

     The model developed above has a number of strong testable implications.

In the remainder of the paper I test a limited number of these new ideas.

The most interesting new aspect of the model is that it indicates how the

conditional variances of exogenous processes can be thought of as exogenous

processes that influence the economy. Changes in the uncertainty in the

economy interact with the risk aversion of economic agents to cause movements

in asset prices such as interest rates and exchange rates. Since the

conditional variance of a process is not directly observable, empirical work

in this area must take a stand on measurements of conditional variances.

     In this section I examine a recent econometric method that has been

proposed for models of the conditional variances of economic processes. The

only way that I have modelled these effects is with univariate autoregressive

conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) or its generalized counterpart
           12
(GARCH)

     A time series is said to have ARCH increments if the conditional

variance of the innovation in the process relative to its past history

depends on squared values of previous innovations. A GARCH process

generalizes this dependence on past innovations to allow dependence on past

values of the conditional variance. A typical time series x is modelled

here as an ARIMA process. The innovation in x conditional on its past

history is       which has the property that E(Etlxtl, x2, ...)   = 0.   In a

GARCH model the conditional variance of £t,   Vi(t)    h, and it is modelled

as
                                                 25




 (24)                w +            +
            ht



where w > 0,      . 0, . 0            for all i. The unconditional variance of c      is
 2
        {l -    a(l)   -
                           (l)j1,   where a(L)            and (L) E?            and

cx(l) +   (1)    <   1 is required.

        Several interesting aspects of GARCH models are noteworthy. First,

although the innovations in a series are serially uncorrelated, they are not

independent because of the dependence across time of the conditional second

moments. Second, large innovations in the process will cause an increase in

the conditional variance, but forecasts of the future conditional variances

will damp down toward the unconditional value. Such a property is desirable

in exchange rate modelling since, as Frenkel and Levich (1977) noted, foreign

exchange markets are characterized by tranquil and turbulent periods. A

third property that is desirable for asset prices in general and exchange

rates in particular is that the fourth unconditional moment of            will exceed

3g4. Hence, the unconditional distribution of             will be leptokurtic

relative to the normal distribution.

        One feature of GARCH models that is not attractive is the assumption

that the conditional variance can be modelled as a function of the current

information set of the econometrician (except for parameters that must be

estimated). This assumption is the simple extension of the usual time series

assumption that the model of the conditional mean of the time series is known

to the econometrician. Just as it is possible that agents have much better

models of the conditional mean of a series than can be obtained by

restricting the information set to that of the econometrician, it is also
                                       26

quite possible that the true conditional variance that agents use in

forecasting and in forming portfolios of assets is quite different from the

GARCH specification that is the best given the limited availability of data.

The GARCH model imposes strong testable restrictions on the data, and it does

provide an estimate of conditional variances.13 With this caveat in mind, I

turn to the examination of the data.



IV.A. Estimation of Univariate Models with Monthly Data

     An empirical investigation of the model must take a stand on the series

to be used to coincide with the theoretical constructs and on the meaning of

a period of time. Given the availability of data, I chose the month as the

interval for a period, and I examined monthly data for four countries, the

United States, the United Kingdom, Japan and West Germany, for the flexible

exchange rate era that began with the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in

March 1973. The monthly data for each country are the money supply, as

measured by Ml, the industrial production index, the consumer price index,

and the exchange rate of the country's currency relative to the U.S.
          14
dollar.

     The first step in the identification and estimation of univariate time

series models with potentially GARCH innovations was to determine the

appropriate degree of differencing for each of the series. The

autocorrelations and partial autocorrelations of the levels and first

differences of the natural logarithms of the series were examined and in all

cases it appeared that first differencing was appropriate to induce

stationarity since the autocorrelations of the levels of the series failed to

damp significantly.
                                           27

        This reasoning was supported by examination of Dickey-Fuller tests of

 the null hypotheses that the level of the series contains a unit root and

 that there is a unit root in the first differences of the series. If only

 one unit root is present in the series, the first hypothesis should not be

 rejected while the second should be rejected. The results of the tests are

presented in Table 1 which considers two different alternative hypotheses.

        The test statistics are constructed by performing ordinary least squares

regressions on the following equation either in the presence of a trend or

without a trend:



 (25)               a0 ÷ a1t + a2z1 +                +



and      is the first difference operator. If a series z contains a unit root,

a test of the null hypothesis that the coefficient a2 in (25) is zero will

not be rejected. The r(z) and the r(z) statistics are the "t-statistics"

for the null hypothesis that a2 is zero either without a trend in the

regression or with a trend, respectively.15 Notice that there is only

marginal evidence against the hypothesis of a unit root in any of the series

and only in the case of the price levels. There is very strong evidence

against the hypothesis that the first differences of the series contain a

second unit root, These tests are the r(z) and r(z) statistics.

        Based on the autocorrelations of the natural logarithms of the series

and their first differences and on the Dickey-Fuller tests, I worked with the

first differences of the series and estimated simple models. Residual

diagnostics were examined to determine if autocorrelation remained in the

residuals of the transformed series, and additional models were estimated
                                       28

where necessary. The autocorrelations and partial autocorrelations of the

squared residuals of the series were then examined to identify a possible

GARCH model. This procedure follows the suggestions of Bollerslev (1986),

who demonstrates that the autocorrelations and partial autocorrelations of

the squared residuals may be used to determine the order of GARCH. The

resulting estimated models are presented in Table 2A with residual

diagnostics presented in Table 2B for the levels of the residuals divided by

the square roots of the respective conditional variances and the squared

residuals divided by the conditional variances. Of the 120 reported

autocorrelation coefficients, the first four lags for the levels and squares

of the residuals for 15 series, only four coefficients are significantly

different from zero using the asymptotic l/JT test. For a few o,f the series

the Q-statistics for 10 and 20 autocorrelations do indicate that higher order

autocorrelations may be significantly different from zero, but these effects

appear in most cases to be due to seasonality)6

     The results for the United States indicate that the rates of growth of

the money supply and the index of industrial production are well modelled by

AR(1) processes with ARCH(l) innovations. The likelihood ratio (LR) test for

no first-order ARCH in the residuals is a chi-square statistic with one

degree of freedom. The LR statistic for industrial production has a value of

16.578, which has a marginal level of significance (MLS) smaller than .0001,

and the LR statistic for the money supply is 7.174, with an MLS of .007. The

U.S. rate of inflation is an AR(2) with ARCH(1) innovations. The LR test and

its MLS in this case are 7.108 and .008.

     For the United Kingdom, the results indicate a random walk with ARCH(l)

innovations for the rate of growth of industrial production and an AR(l) for
                                        29

the rate of growth of the money supply. For industrial production, the LR

test for no first-order ARCH and its MLS are 26.106 and less than .0001.

There is essentially no support for ARCH in the rate of growth of the U.K.

money supply. The LR test has a value of .078, which is associated with an

NLS of .78. The U.K. rate of inflation was modelled as an AR(l) with ARCH(l)

innovations, although higher order autocorrelations do appear to be

statistically different from zero. The LR test for no ARCH in the inflation

rate has a value of 23.964, and its associated MLS is smaller than .0001.

The pound-dollar exchange rate was identified to be a random walk, and the LR

test in this case had a value of essentially zero.

     For Germany, the results indicate an MA(l) with ARCH(l) innovations for

the rate of growth of industrial production, and an MA(3) with ARCH(1)

innovations for the rate of growth of the money supply. The LR tests and

their associated MLS's are 20.268 and less than .0001 for the industrial

production index and 6.468 with an MLS of .001 for the money supply. The

German rate of inflation appeared to be an AR(l), and the LR test indicated

no first-order ARCH since its value was .926 with an MLS of .336. The

deutsche mark-dollar exchange rate was a random walk, and there was some

evidence in support of ARCH innovations since the LR test had a value of

2.774 with an MLS of .096.

     For Japan, the rate of growth of the money supply was modelled as an

AR(2). The LR test for first-order ARCH had a value of .014. The rate of

growth of industrial production was estimated to be an MA(3) with ARCH(l)

innovations. The value of the LR test in this case was 4.506, which is

associated with an MLS of .034. The Japanese rate of inflation was found to

be an AR(3) with ARCH(l) innovations. The LR test and its MLS in this case
                                       30

are 36.854 and smaller than .0001. The yen-dollar exchange rate was a random

walk with some evidence in support of ARCH(l) innovations since the value of

the LR test was 3.256 with an MLS of .071.

     Maximum likelihood estimation of the models maintains an assumption that

the innovations in the series are conditionally normal. This assumption is

testable since the distribution of the estimated innovations divided by their

estimated standard deviations should be a unit normal. Table 28 reports two

test statistics labelled 81 and B2. The statistic 81 is a test of skewness,

and it is the ratio of the third sample moment around the sample mean to the

second sample moment raised to the (3/2) power. The statistic B2 is a test

of kurtosis, and it is the ratio of the fourth sample moment to the squared

second sample moment.

     The assumption of normality of the several of the series appears to be

quite questionable given the large values of the tests of skewness and

kurtosis reported in Table 28. The German and U.K. industrial production

series appear to be particularly bad in this respect. The exchange rate

series are also poorly behaved showing both signs of excess kurtosis and of

negative skewness for the yen and the pound.

     Two results about the time series processes of the exchange rates are

striking in Table 2A. The first is that each currencies rate of depreciation

relative to the dollar appears to be serially uncorrelated relative to its

past history. This is a common finding. Perhaps the most interesting result

of Table 2A is the lack of strong evidence of ARCH in the monthly logarithmic

changes in exchange rates. This is in strong contrast to the intuition

described earlier and to the findings of conditional heteroscedasticity in

studies of risk premiums with monthly data as in Hodrick and Srivastava
                                             31

(1984) and Domowitz and Hakkjo (1985). Perhaps it is an indication that the

ARCH process is not a good economic model of the conditional

heteroscedasticity apparently present in the data in other studies.

        The finding of no or limited ARCH in the exchange rate data sampled at a

monthly interval is also surprising in light of the strong evidence of ARCH

in the data sampled at a weekly interval reported in Engle and Bollerslev

(1986) and Diebold and Nerlove (1986) and in daily data reported in Baillie

and Bollerslev (1987). The next section investigates a time series model of

exchange rates with weekly sampling of the data to demonstrate that GARCH is

present at that sampling interval.



IV.B. An Exchange Rate Model with Weekly Data

        Table 3A provides an investigation of data for seven currencies versus

the U.S. dollar that are sampled on each Wednesday from June 13, 1973 to

January 23, 1985. The only data that were employed in the model consist of

the spot and one month forward exchange rates. The estimated time series

model of the rate of depreciation of a currency relative to the U.S. dollar

is the following:


(26a)        5t+l -   s — b0 ÷ bi(f -        + (1     -
                                                          p1L
                                                                -
                                                                    p2L2Y+1
(26b)                   —
                            N(O,h÷1)
                                 2                -        2
(26c)             h+1 — c +          +   +

In   (26a) the forward premium is used in the model of the conditional mean of

the rate of depreciation and in (26c) the squared forward premium is used in

the model of the conditional variance of the rate of depreciation.17

        The presence of the forward premium in the conditional mean of the rate
                                         32

of depreciation has a long history in international finance, and the presence

of several negative estimated coefficients on the forward premium, the b1's,

is consistent with the results of Fama (1984) and others. Whether this is

valid evidence of variation in risk premiums that is greater than variation

in expected rates of depreciation is a matter of considerable debate)8 Five

of the currencies also show slight evidence of residual serial correlation

that can be exploited in forecasting the conditional mean of the series.

     The comparatively new aspect of Table 3A is the presence of the squared

forward premium in the conditional variance. The tests of conditional

heteroscedasticity conducted by Cumby and Obstfeld (1984) and Hodrick and

Srivastava (1984) indicated that such a variable ought to be present, and it

enters significantly in four of the seven currencies.

     Table 3B reports a large number of LR tests of the model. These tests

are not all independent, and consequently, some care ought to be taken in

considering the results of the tests. Usually, the results are so strong

that reducing the marginal level of significance required to reject the null

hypothesis under consideration because of the large number of tests would

have no influence on inference. I report the LR tests with their associated

marginal levels of significance in parenthesis.

     There is exceedingly strong evidence of GARCH as evidenced by the test

of e = 0   and =   0 in row 3. The LR statistics range from 34.092 (<.0001)

for the British pound to 230.242 (<.0001) for the Italian lira)9 The

evidence for the importance of the squared forward premium in the conditional

variance is not as striking, but it seems safe to reject the hypothesis of no

effect given the LR test statistics of 19.788 (<.0001) for the Deutsche mark,

11.768 (.001) for the Swiss franc, 5.518 (.019) for the French franc, and
                                        33

 8.830 (.003) for the Japanese yen.

      The null hypothesis in row 5 of Table 3B considers the evidence against

 the hypothesis of no time variation in the conditional mean of the rate of

depreciation (b1 = p1    p2   0). The LR tests are chi-square statistics with

three degrees of freedom in this case, and it appears safe to reject the

hypothesis for the Deutsche mark, 18.808 (<.0001), the Swiss franc, 7.946

(.019), the French franc, 17.402 (.001), the Japanese yen, 13.064 (.005), and

the British pound, 10.912 (.004).



IV.C. Tests of the Theory

     The previous sections established the presence of movements in the

conditional variances of some of the exogenous processes of the model, and it

remains to examine whether changes in these conditional variances are

associated with changes in the exchange rate as is predicted by the theory.

An initial investigation for the possibility of these effects is conducted in

this section.

     The best way to test the theory would be to conduct maximum likelihood

estimation of the equations for the exchange rate and other asset prices

subject to the restrictions of the theory while simultaneously estimating the

laws of motion for the driving processes. These laws of motion would include

the specifications of the conditional variances and covariances of the

exogenous processes. Such an estimation strategy is certainly feasible, but

it is quite complicated. Instead, I conduct a preliminary investigation of

the data, under a set of restrictive assumptions, in order to determine how

well some simple ideas work empirically. The goal of this section is

therefore to conduct such a limited empirical investigation in order to
                                       34

determine whether more adventuresome estimation ought or needs to be

undertaken.

     I employ the following two-stage strategy. I first estimate the

conditional variances with the ARCH procedure discussed above, and second, I

estimate an exchange rate equation with ordinary least squares (OLS) using

the presumed exogenous data on monies and industrial productions and their

estimated conditional variances from the first stage.

     Pagan (1984, Theorem 12) examines the consistency and the asymptotic

distribution of such a strategy. He demonstrates that if the first stage

estimation produces consistent estimates of the conditional variances used by

agents, the two-stage procedure will produce consistent estimates of the true

parameters of interest. The ARCH estimates will be consistent estimates of

the true conditional variances under the assumptions that the true process is

a univariate ARCH model, and agents are rational and use the same model. If

agents actually use a larger information set than the econometrician in

forecasting the conditional means or the conditional variances of the

exogenous series, the ARCH estimates are unlikely to be consistent estimates

of the true conditional variances. Unfortunately, in the more likely case

that the conditional variances estimated in the ARCH framework are not truth,

the procedure employed here will be inconsistent.

     Pagan also demonstrates that if the estimated conditional variances are

consistent, the OLS estimates of the standard errors of the parameter

estimates in the second stage will understate the true standard errors.

Hence, failure to reject the hypothesis of zero influence of the explanatory

variables cannot be reversed by calculation of the appropriate standard

errors. In this respect the procedure that I have taken is a simple yet
                                           35

 appropriate first step in determining the validity of the model, subject to

 the caveat that the ARCH estimates may not be consistent estimates of the

 truth.

         Since there is strong evidence that the levels of the natural logarithms

 of exchange rates contain a unit root, I first differenced equation (18), and

 examined the following specification with ordinary least squares:

 (27)           —    ÷        +
                                  2h2 + P3h3 + fih4 +
                     + 6'2t ÷     71t ÷ 82t     + 9'lt + lO2t +
where      is the first difference operator. The specification of (27) requires

an explanation of the error term. Under a tight interpretation of the

theory, the error term in (27) is the first difference in the expected shares

of government spending in the two economies. These variable were assumed to

be exogenous and independent of the right-hand-side variables included in

(27). Hence, ordinary least squares is appropriate.

        Such a tight interpretation of the theory is no doubt inappropriate

since the assumed time series processes of the exogenous variables that led

to the specification of (18) as the solution of the model were in most cases

not supported in the empirical investigation. This is particularly true of

the industrial production series that were treated in the theory section as

stationary in levels while in the empirical section they were found to

contain unit roots. The effect of solving the model with the estimated

rather than the assumed processes would be to add the first differences of

the rates of growth of industrial production to the list of explanatory

variables and to increase the lag length of the included variable in cases

where moving average processes or higher order AR processes were identified.

        The results in Table 4 indicate that the data do not provide much
                                       36

support for the theory. The right-hand-side variables are essentially

unrelated to changes in exchange rates. The studies of Meese and Rogoff

(l983a, 1983b, 1986) and other studies in the tradition of the monetary

approach to the determination of the exchange rate have conditioned our

response to the failure of money and industrial production to explain

exchange rates such that this finding is not particularly surprising.

Unfortunately, the conditional variances of the exogenous processes as

measured by the ARCH models, also are not capable of explaining changes in
                                                                                -J
exchange rates.

     In the next section I explore some ideas for exchange rate determination

that may be more fruitful than the current exercise.



V. Conclusions

     The purpose of this paper was to develop a model of exchange rate

determination that could provide some new directions for empirical work in

the area by focusing on the way changes in the uncertainties in the economic

environment interact with the risk aversion of economic agents to produce

changes in asset prices. While the initial empirical investigation of the

theory has not been very supportive of the model, there are some additional

avenues of investigation that ought to be tried before the model is

discarded. In this section I discuss some of the directions that could be

taken, and I offer some additional ideas about the development of theoretical

models that could allow them to achieve more consistency with the data.

     We know that changes in nominal exchange rates are highly correlated

with changes in real exchange rates, and that these changes in real exchange

rates are highly persistent.2° One of the roles of the government spending
                                        37

variables in the theory part of the paper was to provide policy variables

 that were potentially responsible for persistent changes in real exchange

rates. I have not attempted to test this implication of the theory, and

attempting to develop tests of this implication should be a challenging yet

exciting exercise.

     Another challenging area for new research is the development and

estimation of alternative models of the conditional variances of monies,

incomes and other variables that I have treated as exogenous, other than the

formulation of GARCH models. Although such models may be good summaries of

the serial dependence in a given data series, two problems are apparent.

First, the estimates may be quite poor estimates of the true conditional

variances. The resulting errors-in-variables problems that arise in the

estimation make it difficult to derive consistent estimators of the influence

of the true conditional variances. Second, as economists we would like to

know what causes the changes in the conditional variances. Since univariate

ARIMA models have proven useful in developing atheoretical forecast of

economic time series, we can expect similar success for GARC}1 models of

conditional second moments. Nevertheless, the Lucas (1976) critique serves

as a warning that we should look deeper into the economy than the

capabilities of such time series models if we are going to be concerned about

the policy implications of our models or about our ability to forecast when

there are changes in policy regimes.

     The theoretical model has implications for many asset prices other than

exchange rates, and it would be interesting to test the restrictions of the

model in several asset markets simultaneously. The determination of the

nominal interest rates and the risk premiums in forward market and in stock
                                       38

markets are all candidates that might be examined with alternative empirical

models of conditional variances. One serious problem in conducting these

investigations that ought to be kept in mind is the peso problem. In Hodrick

(1987) I examine many models of risk premiums in the forward and futures

foreign exchange markets. An alternative interpretation of the apparent

variability of risk premiums is the existence of peso problems. If these

plague the forward market, they also plague the spot foreign exchange markets

and the other asset markets of the world.

     A third area of research on the model that may be warranted is the

possible influence of time aggregation. Two problems are noteworthy in this

area. The first is what is the appropriate time interval to identify as a

period in a cash-in-advance model. The second area of concern is the

influence of additional sources of information about the relevant exogenous

variables. There are many sources of information in an economy about the

monthly innovations in monies, incomes, and other economic aggregates and

their future values that cause exchange rates to move and are not in the

model. How should the analysis be modified to handle such a situation?

     One potential flaw in the theoretical structure of the model that may

deserve investigation is the assumption that international asset markets are

complete. Understanding the determination of exchange rates may require the

development of models that relax this assumption in a sensible way. By

sensible, I do not mean arbitrarily closing asset markets or prohibiting

intertemporal trade just to government bonds, but I mean studying the

economics of the world economy to determine what assets are traded, in what

amounts, why countries periodically prohibit intertemporal trade, and how

many claims countries accumulate against each other.
                                        39

                                   Footnotes

      This research was funded by a grant from The Lynde and Harry Bradley

 Foundation to whom I express my gratitude for its support. I thank Ian

Domowitz, Robert Flood, Milton Harris, Ravi Krishnaswamy, Robert Korajczyk,

Deborah Lucas, Rodolfo Manuelli, Robert McDonald, Daniel Siegel, Lars

 Svensson, and the participants in seminars at the 1987 National Bureau of

Economic Research International Studies Summer Institute, Georgetown

University, the International Monetary Fund, Northwestern University, and

Ohio State University for helpful conversations and suggestions. Special

appreciation is extended to Mark Watson for his help in developing Table 1

and especially to Tim Bollerslev for his help in executing the GARCH program

and for his assistance in developing Table 3. I also want to thank Patricia

Reynolds for efficient and valuable research assistance.

1. Representative models that Meese and Rogoff (l983a, l983b, 1986) examine

are the flexible price monetary models of Bilson (1978), Frenkel (1976), and

Hodrick (1978), the sticky-price models of Dornbusch (1976) and Frankel

(1979), and the portfolio balance model of Hooper and Morton (1982).

2. Boughton (1986) examines the performance of portfolio balance models in an

out-of-sample forecasting experiment and concludes that they perform better

than the random walk in some cases.

3. Keim and Stambaugh (1986) document significant variation in a variety of

risk premiums including those on common stocks of firms of various sizes,

long-term bonds of various default risks, and nominal default-free bonds of

various maturities. Campbell (1987) finds that the state of the term

structure of interest rates has significant predictive ability for the

holding-period excess returns of two-month bills, six-month bills, five to
                                       40

ten year bonds, and the value-weighted New York Stock Exchange return, all

relative to the one-month bill. Longer term movements in returns on the

stock market are examined in Fama and French (1986) and Flood, Hodrick and

Kaplan (1986).

4. The extensive empirical literature on the efficiency of forward and

futures foreign exchange markets and the relation of the prices in these

markets to future spot exchange rates is critically reviewed in Hodrick

(1987)

5. Their analyses were motivated by the empirical work of Pindyck (1984),
                                                                              -
Poterba and Summers (1986), and French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1986). These
authors attempt to determine the influence of changes in the variance of

returns on the stock market on the required expected rate of return. Barsky

(1986) examined the issues in a two-period model.

6. The two endowments can be thought of as the "fruit" of the "trees" that

are located only in one country. The trees are the only capital stocks of

the countries, and the quantities of each type of tree are fixed and are

normalized to one. Sargent (1987) and Manuelli and Sargent (1987) explore

several versions of this model.

7. See Judd (1985) for an example of dynamic macroeconomic analysis with a

more realistic representation of distortionary taxes on the income of labor

and capital.

8. The specification assumes that agents receive no utility from the

government spending. Alternative assumptions would substantively affect the

equilibrium.

9. The Inada conditions require that the ratio of the marginal utility of

good one to the marginal utility of good two goes to zero when the
                                         41

 consumption of good one goes to infinity, holding the consumption of good two

 constant, and the same ratio goes to infinity when the consumption of good

 two goes to infinity, holding the consumption of good one constant. Some of

both goods is desired when their prices are positive.

 10. Townsend (1987) argues that disparities between the marginal utility of

consumption and the marginal utility of wealth induced in models with

explicit monetary technologies may help to resolve asset pricing anomalies.

Other formulations of cash-in-advance constraints have been explored by Lucas

 (1984) and Lucas and Stokey (1983, 1987).

11. Svensson (1985) studies the solution only for the case in which the

exogenous processes are independently and identically distributed, and he

derives the complete characterization of the equilibrium which in general

involves times when the value of the multiplier is zero.

12. Engle and Bollerslev (1986) and its associated comments provide a nice

introduction to the rapidly expanding econometric and empirical literature

associated with models of ARCH and GARCH errors. I am grateful to Tim

Bollerslev for sharing his computer program that was used in the

identification and estimation of the ARCH models reported in this section.

13. Engle (1982) notes that ARCH effects may arise from misspecification of

the model, either through omitted variables or structural change. He argues

that ARCH effects may be a better approximation to reality than the

assumption of conditional homoscedasticity, but he notes that trying to find

the correct model would be superior.

14. The data were obtained from a tape of the International Financial

Statistics of the International Monetary Fund and are described in detail in

the data appendix. I made no attempt to measure the share of government
                                       42

spending in the economies. Some monthly data are available for this series

for Germany and the United States, but not for Japan and the United Kingdom.

15. The statistics are not distributed as Student's t   distribution   in the

presence of a unit root. Dickey (1976) tabulated the distributions using

Monte Carlo methods and the tables are reported in Fuller (1976). The order

of the autoregression (3) was chosen a priori under the hypothesis that this

would remove most autocorrelation.

16. Several of the series are available only in seasonally adjusted data. If

a series contained significant autocorrelations at seasonal lags, the series

was first regressed on seasonal dummy variables and the reported results

refer to the residuals from these regressions. Details are in the Data

Appendix.

17. The data in Table 2 are from Data Resources Inc. and are described more

fully in the Data Appendix.

18. Froot and Frankel (1986) use measurements of forecasts of exchange rates

from several sources to address the issue of the degree of variation in

expected rates of depreciation and in risk premiums. Their conclusion is

that the variability in expected rates of depreciation is larger than the

variability of risk premiums.

19. It would be interesting to aggregate the weekly model into changes over a

month to determine the consistency of the finding of strong evidence of CARCH

innovations for weekly changes in exchange rates with weak evidence of CARCH

innovations in monthly changes in exchange rates.

20. See Huizinga (1987) for an analysis of the persistence of changes in real

exchange rates. The statistics in the paper indicate that very high order

autocorrelations of changes in exchange rates may be sufficiently negative to
                                       43

make the real exchange rate a stationary series, but without much more data,

it is difficult to rule out a random walk. In any case, the degree of

persistence is very long.
                                                                        44

                                                       Appendix

       In the first part of this appendix I verify the claim that an increase

in the conditional variance of government spending, when it is uniformly

distributed, increases Elt ln(E[(l -                                    e1+1)D. I                    reproduce (19a) as



(Al) lt ln{[(l -               lt hs)    -                 + (1              -
                                                                                 lt       +
                                                                                              h5t)1]/(l
                                                                                                                -




Let C()          (1 -   c))', which           is an increasing convex function over the

relevant range 0               1.            The derivative of lt with respect to h5 is

rnonotonically related to the derivative of E[G(i+i)] which is


(A2) (l){(l/2)[(l -                           - h5)+               (1 -
                                                                                 lt       +
                                                                                              h5)]        -
                                                                                                              E[G(1+1)]}
The interior of the braces in (A2) is


(A3)       (l/2)[G(P1 -        h5t) +          G(i + hst)]                        -
                                                                                      E[G(e1÷1)]

where lt+l is uniformly distributed on                                                -
                                                                                          h5,         +
                                                                                                              h5].   Hence, it

must be demonstrated that the average of a convex function evaluated at the

end points of the distribution is greater than the expected value of the

function. To simplify the proof, I drop time subscripts and let                                                        be

distributed unifromly on [a, bJ.

       Convexity of G() implies that C'() < [G(b)                                              -
                                                                                                   G()]/(b      -    )V     <   b.

Hence, C() < G(b)          -
                               (b    -
                                         )G'().                Integration of both sides gives


(A4)      (b -    a)E[G()]     <G(b)(b - a)                    -
                                                                   b{G(b)             -
                                                                                          G(a)] ÷ JG'()de and

(AS)      JG'()d bG(b) -                       aG(a)       -
                                                                   (b    -
                                                                                 a)E[C(e)}.

Substituting (A5) into (A4) and collecting terms provides the required result

in (A3) that E{G()J <               (l/2)[G(b)         -
                                                               G(a)].
                                         45

                                  Data Appendix

     All monthly data were obtained from two tapes of the International

Financial Statistics of the International Monetary Fund supplied to

Northwestern University by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and

Social Research. All of the data except the Japanese price index were taken

from tape number ICPSR 7629. The data series begin in March 1973 and end

either in January, February, or March 1987 depending on the series. There

are between 166 and 168 observations per series. The observations on the

Japanese price index were taken from a prevoius ICPSR tape because I

discovered a problem with the data on tape 7629.

     The industrial production index is series 66. .c, "Industrial Production,

Seasonally Adjusted;" these indexes are compiled from reported versions of

national indexes.

     The price index is series 64, "Consumer Prices;" these indexes are

compiled in the same way as are the industrial production indexes.

     The money aggregate is series 34, "Money;" this is the sum of currency

outside banks and private sector demand deposits, plus (where applicable)

private sector demand deposits with the postal checking system and the

Treasury. This is an end of month series.

     The exchange rate is series ae, "Market Rate/Par or Central Rate;" this

is the foreign currency unit value of the U.S. dollar which was quoted on the

last trading day of each month.

     Seasonal dummy variables were used with the four money supply series and

the price indexes other than the U.S. series.

     The data in Table 3 were obtained from Data Resources, Inc. The data

are bid prices for spot and one month forward exchange rates.
                                           46

                                   References

Abel, Andrew B., 1986, Stock prices under time-varying dividend risk: An

     exact solution in an infinite-horizon general equilibrium model, Mimeo.

     (The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA).

Baillie, Richard and Tim Bollerslev, 1987, The story of daily exchange rates:

     A conditional variance tale, Mimeo. (Northwestern University, Evanston,

     IL).

Barsky, Robert B., 1986, Why   don't   the prices of stocks and bonds move

     together? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2047.

Bilson, John F. 0., 1978, Rational expectations and the exchange rate, in:

     Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry C. Johnson, eds., The economics of exchange

     rates (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA) 75-96.

Bilson, John F. 0., 1979, The deutsche mark/dollar rate: A monetary analysis,

     in: Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Policies for employment,

     prices and exchange rates, Volume 11, Carnegie-Rochester Conference

     Series on Public Policy (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 59-101.

Bollerslev, Tim, 1986, Generalized autoregressive conditional

     heteroskedasticity, Journal of Econometrics 31, 307-328.

Boughton, James M., 1986, Tests of the performance of reduced-form exchange

     rate models, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Campbell, John Y., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of

     Financial Economics 18, 373-399.
                                        47

Cumby, Robert and Maurice Obstfeld, 1984, International interest-rate and

     price-level linkages under flexible exchange rates: A review of

     recent evidence, in: John F.0. Bilson and Richard Marston (eds.),

     Exchange rates: Theory and practice. (University of Chicago Press,

     Chicago).

Dickey, David A., 1976, Hypothesis testing for nonstationary time series,

     unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Iowa State University.

Diebold, Francis X. and Marc Nerlove, 1986, The dynamics of exchange rate

     volatility: A multivariate latent factor ARCH model, Board of Governors

     of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics,

     Special Studies Paper No. 205.

Domowitz, Ian and Craig S. Hakkio, 1985, Conditional variance and the risk

     premium in the foreign exchange market, Journal of International

     Economics 19, 47-66.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1976, Expectations and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of

     Political Economy 84, 1161-1176.

Engle, Robert F. and Tim Bollerslev, 1986, Modelling the persistence of

     conditional variances, Econometric Reviews 5, 1-50.

Fama, Eugene F., 1984, Forward and spot exchange rates, Journal of Monetary

     Economics 14, 319-38.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1986, Permanent and temporary

     components in stock prices, Mimeo. (University of Chicago, Chicago).

Flood, Robert P., 1987, International asset pricing in general equilibirum,

    Mimeo. (Northwestern University, Evanston, IL).
                                       48

Flood, Robert P., Robert J. Hodrick and Paul Kaplan, 1986, An evaluation of

     recent evidence on stock market bubbles, National Bureau of Economic

    Research Working Paper No. 1971.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1979, On the mark: A theory of floating exchange rates

    based on real interest differentials, American Economic Review 69, 610-

     623.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1986, The implications of mean-variance optimization for

     four questions in international macroeconomics, Journal of International

     Money and Finance 5, S53-S76.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Richard Meese, 1987, Are exchange rates excessively

     variable? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2249.

French, Kenneth R., C. William Schwert and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986,

     Expected stock returns and volatility, Mimeo. (University of Chicago,

     Chicago).

Frenkel, Jacob A., 1976, The monetary approach to the exchange rate:

     Doctrinal aspects and empirical evidence, Scandinavian Journal of

     Economics 78, 200-224.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Richard M. Levich, 1977, Transaction costs and interest

     arbitrage: Tranquil versus turbulent periods, Journal of Political

     Economy 86, 1209-1226.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Jeffrey A. Frankel, 1986, Interpreting tests of

     forward discount bias using survey data on exchange rate expectations,

     Mimeo. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA)

Fuller, Wayne A., 1976, Introduction to statistical time series, (John Wiley

     and Sons, New York).
                                         49

 Giovannini, Alberto, 1987, Uncertainty and liquidity, Mimeo. (Graduate School

      of Business, Columbia University, New York).

Hodrick, Robert J, 1978, An empirical analysis of the monetary approach to

      the determination of the exchange rate, in: Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry

     G. Johnson, eds., Studies in the Economics of Exchange Rates,

      (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA) 97-116.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1987, The empirical evidence on the efficiency of forward

     and futures foreign exchange markets (Harwood Academic Publishers, Chur,

     Switzerland).

Hodrick, Robert J. and Sanjay Srivastava, 1984, An investigation of risk and

     return in forward foreign exchange, Journal of International Money and

     Finance 3, 1-29.

1-lodrick, Robert J. and Sanjay Srivastava, 1986, The covariation of risk

     premiums and expected future spot exchange rates, Journal of

     International Money and Finance 5, S5-S22.

Hooper, Peter, and John E. Morton, 1982, Fluctuations in the dollar: A model

     of nominal and real exchange rate determination, Journal of

     International Money and Finance 1, 39-56.

1-luizinga, John, 1987, An empirical investigation of the long run behavior of

     real exchange rates, in: Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds.,

     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 27,

     forthcoming.

Judd, Kenneth L., 1985, Short-run analysis of fiscal policy in a simple

     perfect foresight model, Journal of Political Economy 93, 298-319.

Keim, Donald B. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the

     stock and bond markets, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.
                                       50

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., 1976, Econometric policy evaluation: A critique," in:

     Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor

     Markets, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume

     1, 19-46.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., 1978, Asset pricing in an exchange economy,

     Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., 1982, Interest rates and currency prices in a two-

     country world, Journal of Monetary Economics, 10, 335-360.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., 1984, Money in a theory of finance, in: Karl Brunner

     and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Essays on Macroeconomic Implications of

     Financial and Labor Markets and Political Processes, Carnegie-Rochester

     Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 21, 9-45.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey, 1983, Optimal fiscal and monetary

     policy in an economy without capital, Journal of Monetary Economics 12,

     55-93.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey, 1987, Money and interest in a

     cash-in-advance economy, Econometrica 55, 491-514.

Manuelli, Rodolfo E. and Thomas J. Sargent, 1987, Exercises in Dynamic

     Macroeconomic Theory, (Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA).

Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff, l983a, Empirical exchange rate models

     of the seventies: Do they fit out of sample? Journal of International

     Economics 14, 3-24.

Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff, l983b, The out-of-sample failure of

     empirical exchange-rate models: Sampling error or misspecification? in:

     Jacob A. Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics

     (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
                                        51

Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff, 1986, Was it real? The exchange rate-

     interest differential relation, 1973-1984, National Bureau of Economic

     Research Working Paper.

Pagan, Adrian, 1984, Econometric issues in the analysis of regressions with

     generated regressors, International Economic Review 25, 221-247.

Pearson, E. S. and Heartley, H. 0., 1966, Bionietrika tables for

     statisticians, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).

Pindyck, Robert, 1984, Risk, inflation and the stock market, American

     Economic Review 74, 335-351.

Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers, 1986, The persistence of volatility and

     stock market fluctuations, American Economic Review 76, 1142-1151.

Sargent, Thomas J., 1987, Dynamic Macroeconomic Theory (Harvard University

     Press, Cambridge, MA).

Stockman, Alan C. and Lars E. 0. Svensson, 1987, Capital flows, investment,

     and exchange rates, Journal of Monetary Economics 19, 171-202.

Svensson, Lars E. 0., 1985a, Currency prices, terms of trade, and interest

     rates: A general equilibrium asset-pricing cash-in-advance approach,

     Journal of International Economics 18, 17-42.

Svensson, Lars E. 0., 1985b, Money and asset prices in a cash-in-advance

     economy, Journal of Political Economy 93, 919-944.

Townsend, Robert M., 1987, Asset return anomalies in a monetary economy,

     Journal of Economic Theory 41, 219-247.
                                            TABLE 1

                           DICKEY-FULLER UNIT ROOT TESTS



                                                3


              z=a0+a1t+a2zi+a.  i+2tz
                                    t-i
                                        .+ t
                            i—i



Series        Nobs      r(z)          r(Z)           r(z)        r(iz)

JY            168      -0.337        -3.227          3955*       -4.082*
JP            168      .5.721*       .5.075*         .4373*      -5.948*
JM            167      -1.870        -2.772         -10.882*    -11.100*
JS            169      -0.255        -1.555          .5.030*     -5.184*
GY            168      -1.120        -2.464          .6.889*     -6.897*
GP            169      -3.125**       0.034          -4.361*     -5.476*
GtI           167      -1.276        -2.205         .11.031*    .11.072*
GS            169      -1.296        -1.232          .5.844*     .5.867*
UKY           168      -1.138        -2.280          -6.614*     -6.676*
UKP           169      -4.130*       -0.970          -4.370*     -6.351*
UKM           167      -1.667        -1.117          .7449*      -7.712*
UKS           169      -1.524        -1.562          -5.411*     ..5439*
USY           169      -0.893        -2.816          .4.615*     .4.618*
USP           168      -1.882        -0.050          -3.243**    .3719**
USM           169      -1.368         1.887         .10.360*     .9759*

Notes: The first one or two letters of each series denotes the country (J

      Japan, G = Germany, UK =     United   Kingdom, US         United States), and the last

      letter denotes the economic aggregate (Y —             industrial   production, P =

      consumer prices, M = money supply, S               spot exchange rate). The Dickey-

      Fuller statistics are the ratios of the estimated a2 to its standard error

      in the presence of a trend for r and without trend for r .                The critical
                                            1

      values for r are -3.41 (5%) and -3.96 (1%) and for r they are -2.86 (5%)

      and -3.43 (1%). Rejection of the null hypothesis of the presence of a unit

      root in the level of the natural logarithm of the series (z) or its first

      difference (Ez) is indicated by a *           at   the 1% marginal level of

      significance or by **   at   the 5% marginal level of significance.
                                            TABLE 2A

                                   UNIVARIATE MODELS

Series
     ARMA   No. of                                     MODEL
     ARCH   Obs.     CONS.1       COEF.1        COEF.2     COEF.3       CONS.2     COEF.4

JY           167      .0003       -.1867         .1890         .3133    .00013      .1817
 MA(3)                .0013        .0899         .0844         .0681    .00002      .1212
 ARCH(1)              .8175        .0378         .0251     <.0001      <.0001       .1338
JP          151      - .0013       .2296         .0291         .2157    .00002      .5642
 AR(3)                .0008        .0945         .0572         .0507    .000005     .1927
 ARCH(1)              .1042        .0151         .6110     <.0001      <.0001       .0034
JM          166      - .00003     - .4517       - .3580                 .00033
 AR(2)                .00072       .0760         .0825                  .00003
                      .9667       <.0001        <.0001                 <.0001
JS          168      - .0035                                            .00092      .1356
 RW                   .0026                                             .00011      .0786
 ARCH(1)              .1782                                            <.0001       .0845
GY          167       .00002      - .2354                               .00024      .2840
 MA(1)                .00061       .0817                                .00003      .1268
 ARCH(1)              .9738        .004                                <.0001       .0251
GP          168                    .5321                                .000005
 AR(1)                             .0683                                .0000004
                                  <.0001                               <.0001
GM          166       .0005       -.1998         .0631         .3864    .00007      .3932
 MA(3)                .0009        .0847         .0741         .0611    .00001      .1482
 ARCH(1)              .5785        .0188         .3944     <.0001      <.0001       .008
CS          168      - .0028                                            .00123
 RW                   .0026                                             .00011
                      .2815                                            <.0001
UKY         167       .0023                                             .00015      .6651
 RW                   .0010                                             .00002      .1648
 ARCH(1)              .0214                                            <.0001      <.0001
UKP         168      -.0013       .6350                                 .00002      .3651
 AR(1)                .0013       .0849                                 .000002     .0833
 ARCH(1)              .3173      <.0001                                <.0001      <.0001
UKM         166      - .00003     - .1881                               .00024
 AR(1)                .00083       .0767                                .00002
                      .9712        .0142                               <.0001
UKS         168       .0030                                             .00098
 RW                   .0026                                             .00009
                      .2486                                            <.0001
USY         168       .0036        .5055                                .00005      .3089
 AR(1)                .0013        .0674                                .000005     .1261
 ARCH(1)              .0056      <.0001                                <.0001       .0143
USP         167       .0057        .5510         .1653                  .000006     .3015
 AR(2)                .0006        .0870         .0830                  .000001     .2044
 ARCH(1)             <.0001      <.0001           .0464                <.0001       .1402
USM         168      -.0001        .2456                        .00003              .2705
 AR(1)             .0009           .0908                        .000004             .1354
 ARCH(1)           .9115           .0068                       <.0001               .0457
Notes: See also Table 1.        C0NS.1tt refers to the estimated constant in the
univariate ARMA model and "CONS.2" refers to the estimated constant in the

ARCH model. "COEF.l-3" are the estimated AR or MA coefficients, "COEF.4"

is the estimated ARCH coefficient. The first number listed in each cell

under the "MODEL" section is the coefficient estimate, and the second is

the associated standard error. The third is the MLS for H0: coefficient =

0;   "<0001" implies that the MLS is less than .0001. A blank cell implies

that the corresponding term does not enter into the series specification.
                                            TABLE 2B

                   RESIDUAL DIANOSTICS OF THE UNIVARIATE MODELS



SERIES       Bi       B2           p1         p2       p3        p4      Q(1O)    Q(20)

JY        -0.065    3.333     - .003         .047      .057   - .073   13.828     39.294
                                  .021      - .107     .077   - .049    7.353    15.090
jp         0.229    2.645     - .047          .019     .078     .004    9.537    21.817
                              - .044          .038                     18.275
                                                       .059     .049             30.338
JM         0.405    3.860         .038        .008     .066     .004   26.179    33.022
                                  .008      - .048   - .012   - .074    3.102    10.581
Js        -0.437    3.763         .067        .067     .138     .092    9.671    19.933
                                  .023        .055     .047     .132   13.010    21.872
CY        -1.016    6.993     - .080        - .059     .197   - .041   15.064    26.736
                                  .055      - .042     .014   - .026    2.755    10.141
GP         0.784    4.228     - .069        - .004     .142     .069   14,041    34.106
                               .063         - .086     .003     .008    3.511      9.850
CM         0.140    3.849      .014         - .032     .028   - .002   11.552    35.333
                              -.038         - .073     .058   - .079   10.273    17.079
CS        -0.171    4.027     - .006          .137     .004     .008    8,188    17.689
                                  .145      - .026   - .047   - .032    5.179    13.867
UKY       -0.513    6.944     - .046        - .098     .005     .047    5.938    17.981
                              -   .013        .108     .050   - .068    5.684      8.247
UKP        1.268    6.204     - .050        - .037     .230   - .010   26.881    44.392
                                  .010      - .020     .121   - .060   14,815    18.032
UKM        0.358    3.947         .007        .048     .067     .009   10.632    16.804
                                  .017      - .080     .043     .192   11.564    16.897
UKS       -0.619    4.541         .036        .108   - .034     .076    6.149    21.120
                              - .005        - .041   - .038     .284   14.951    18.312
USY        0.025    4.473     - .013          .050     .087     .082    5.444    14.778
                                  .039      - .113   - .027     .066    5.088    21.472
USP        0.275    4.970     - .033        - .078     .054     .074   12.603    40.723
                              - .006        - .052   - .003   - .055    4.270      5.795
USM        0.080    3.146         .004      - .105     .151   - .121   24.500    41.851
                                  .024      - .150     .054     .134   15.423    30.670

Notes: See also Table 2A. The statistic Bi
                                                 m3/(ui2)'3"2
                                                                       is
                                                                 a test of
     skewness, (where m. denotes the ith moment of the sampled population); and
     the statistic B2 =                  is a test of kurtosis for c/./h. Under the
                          m4/(m2)2
     null hypothesis of a normal distribution for the population, the 5%
     critical value for H0: no skewness, is 0.299, and the 5% critical value for
     H0: normal kurtosis, is 3.63, [see Pearson and Hartley (1966)]. The first
     four estimated autocorrelation coefficients are denoted p1 - p4 for
     (first line) and for /h (second line). The 5% critical value for H0: p1
       0 is .154. Q(lO) and Q(20) are the corresponding Ljung-Box statistics;
     5% critical values for H0: no autocorrelation at 10 or 20 lags are 18.307
     and 31.410, respectively.
                                           TABLE 3A
                     MODELS OF EXCHANGE RATES WITH WEEKLY OBSERVATIONS



                                                                              2 -1
                    s1 -   s = b0 + bi(f s) + (1
                                           -             -
                                                              p1L
                                                                     -
                                                                         p2L   )


                                                — N(O,h+i)
                                           2                             2
                              h+i=w+at+fiht+&(ft s)            -


          Deutsche    Swiss      French Japanese Canadian                    British    Italian
           mark       franc      franc          yen      dollar               pound       lira

b           0.113       0.165     0.029         0.023    -0.059              -0.224      -0.028
     0
           (0.082)     (0.095)   (0.068)       (0.062)   (0.017)             (0.060)     (0.038.)


b1         -0.518      -0.431     0.267         0.118    -0.394              -0.377       0.033
           (0.278)     (0.203)   (0.141)       (0.106)   (0,098)             (0.169)     (0.038)

            0.119      0.080      0.105         0.109                         0.086
p1
           (0.047)     (0.043)   (0.051)       (0.044)                       (0.047)

            0.083                 0.151         0.085
p2
           (0.041)               (0.047)       (0.042)

co         0.150       0.088      0.114         0.010        0.040            0.126      0.051
           (0.053)    (0.034)    (0.029)       (0.003)   (0.011)             (0.035)     (0.007)

a          0.176       0.162      0.257         0.056        0.269            0.112      0.420
           (0.042)    (0.033)    (0.048)       (0.007)   (0.033)             (0.029)     (0.053)

/3         0.646       0.763      0.679         0.935        0.605            0.806       0.652
           (0.077)    (0.037)    (0.040)       (0.006)   (0.054)             (0.047)     (0.026)

6        153.805    49.508       10.627         1.569        0.216
          (52.997) (13.236)      (4.679)       (0.486) (10.208)

L        -986.624 -1088.711 -967.155 -939.327 -421.169 -956.489                        -894.116

                                                         26.373              20.876     29.053
i          6.653      15.836     18.395        14.529

                                                         14.308              10.227     55.445
2         11.874       7.796     12.848         7.194

Bi         0.013       0.412     -0.129         0.459    -0.296              -0.331      -0.789

B2         3.886       4.910     4.421          6.604        5.260            5.701      7.928

Notes: See also Table 2. The data are sampled weekly on Wednesdays for June
     13, 1973 to January 23, 1985 for 607 observations. The logarithmic
     differences are multiplied by 100. The log likelihood function is L. Q1
     is the chi-square statistic for testing the significance of the firs
     fifteen autocorrelations of c . Q2 is the analogous statistic for
     The 5% critical values are 0.599 for Bl and 3.199 for B2.
                                                 TABLE 38

                     LIKELIHOOD RATIO TESTS OF MODELS IN TABLE 3A



Null Hypothesis                              Test Statistics


     Deutsche        Swiss        French         Japanese      Canadian     British           Italian
      mark           franc        franc            yen          dollar       pound              lira

1.   98.734          86.976       89.344         112.656        90.414           N.A.          N.A.
     (<.001)         (<.001)      (<.001)         (<.001)       (<.001)

2.   19.788          11.768        5.518              8.830      0.000           N.A.          N.A.
     (<.001)          (.001)       (.019)             (.003)     (.999)

3.   69.282          63.468       67.052          92.226        56.516          34.092        230.242
     (<.001)         (<.001)      (<.001)         (<.001)       (<.001)         (<.001)         (<.001)

4.   18.832          7.952        19.222          13.580         N.A.           16.862         N.A.
      (.001)          (.047)       (.001)             (.009)                     (.001)

5.   18.808          7.946        17.402          13.064         N.A.           10.912         N.A.
     (<.001)          (.019)       (.001)             (.005)                     (.004)

6.   12.222          3.138        17.060          11.536         N.A.           N.A.           N.A.
      (.002)         (.076)       (<.001)             (.003)

7.    2.808          3.700         3.942              2.176     18.784          10.862          3.738
      (.246)         (.157)        (.139)             (.337)    (<.001)          (.004)         (.154)

Notes: The null hypotheses are the following: 1. (a                             &       0); 2. (5         0)

     3. (a =    = 0);      4. (b0 =
                                        b1
                                             =
                                                 p1     p2 =   0);   5. (b1 =        —        = 0);
                                                                                p1       p2
     6. (p1 =
                p2
                     =   0);   7. (b0      b1 = 0)
                                        TABLE 4

                                OLS TESTS OF THE MODEL




            ts =            +     + $2h2      +
                                                  $3h3 +   $4h4     +

                   +            + '7lt + 82t +                  +
                                                                    lO"2t +

Variable        Coefficient        Deutsche          Japanese            British
                                     mark              yen                pound

                                    0.003              0.003            -0.002
Constant                            (0.003)           (0.003)            (0.002)
                                      .295              .311               .367
                                   -79.881           -10.347            -6.430
  ih
   y                   i           (66.951)
                                      .235
                                                     (60.989)
                                                        .866
                                                                        (56.422)
                                                                           .320
                                    6.188             21.728            -0.082

   y*                  $2           (9.564)          (50.771)            (3,788)
                                      .519              .669               .983
                                   238.440             1.026             -23.303
 hm                    $3         (167.465)         (160.353)
                                                        .995
                                                                        (147.799)
                                                                            .873
                                      .157
                                    -6.879
   "*                  $           (31.610)
                                      .828
                                    0.585              0.293               1.021
 m                     fi           (0.630)           (0.588)             (0.561)
                                      .355              .619                .071
                                    -0.464            -0.172              -0.448
 &n*
                       6            (0.409)
                                      .258
                                                      (0.229)
                                                        .453
                                                                          (0.251)
                                                                            .076
                                    -0.414             0.149              -0.626
 y                     $            (0.291)
                                      .157
                                                      (0.282)
                                                        .597
                                                                          (0.261)
                                                                            .012
                                    0.016             -0.238               0.234
 y*                    8            (0.147)           (0.226)             (0.156)
                                                                            .136
                                      .913              .294
                                    -0.592            -0.267              -0.517
 &                     $            (0.499)           (0.462)             (0.439)


 *                                    .238              .565                .241
                                    0.065             -0.009               0.131
                       $10          (0.267)           (0.140)             (0.162)
                                      .807              .946                .419

Notes: The dependent variable is the rate of depreciation of the dollar

       relative to the foreign currency. Variables without an asterisk are

       U.S. values, and variables with an asterisk are foreign variables. The
conditional variances are denoted with an h. F-statistics (with

marginal levels of significance in parenthesis) and the adjusted R2's

for the equations are the following: Deutsche mark, H0: all            0,

0.735 (.691), H0: 1               —    — 0, 0.820 (.514),         -.017;

Japanese yen, H0: all . — 0, 0.735 (.691), H:                     — 0, 0.080
                                                            !83
(.966), R2 =   -.042;   British pound, H0: all .   0, 1.296 (.243), H0: i
=   —
           0, 0.017 (.993), R2 = .016.
