                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INTERGENERATIONAL SPILLOVERS IN DISABILITY INSURANCE

                                           Gordon B. Dahl
                                           Anne C. Gielen

                                        Working Paper 24296
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24296


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2018




We thank Kate Antonovics, Prashant Bharadwaj, Julie Cullen, Roger Gordon, Rob Kok, Olivier Marie,
Karthik Muralidharan, Erik Plug, and Dinand Webbink for helpful advice, and seminar participants
at several universities and conferences for useful comments and suggestions. Financial support from
the Tinbergen Institute and NWO (Vidi grant 452-17-007) is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Gordon B. Dahl and Anne C. Gielen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Intergenerational Spillovers in Disability Insurance
Gordon B. Dahl and Anne C. Gielen
NBER Working Paper No. 24296
February 2018, Revised March 2019
JEL No. H53,I38,J62

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a 1993 Dutch policy reform and a regression discontinuity design, we find children of parents
whose disability insurance (DI) eligibility was reduced are 11% less likely to participate in DI themselves,
do not alter their use of other government programs, and earn 2% more as adults. The reduced transfers
and increased taxes of children account for 40% of the fiscal savings relative to parents in present
discounted value terms. Moreover, children of treated parents complete more schooling, have a lower
probability of serious criminal arrests and incarceration, and take fewer mental health drugs as adults.


Gordon B. Dahl
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
gdahl@ucsd.edu

Anne C. Gielen
Erasmus School of Economics
Erasmus University Rotterdam
PO Box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands
gielen@ese.eur.nl
1 Introduction
Does a parent's use of the social safety net have spillover eects on their children?

The answer to this question is important both for the welfare of the child and long-

run scal costs. Reforms curtailing the generosity of the social safety net could harm

children if the drop in parental benet receipt leads to reduced resources or a worse

home environment. On the other hand, if decreased parental participation provides

a positive role model or otherwise changes perceptions about assistance versus work,

this could lead to better child outcomes and reduced government expenses.         The

goal of this paper is to explore how a parent's use of disability insurance (DI), a

large component of the social safety net in most countries, aects a broad range of

children's later-life outcomes and the long-term government budget.

   Arguments about the presence, type, and size of intergenerational spillovers have

gured prominently in policy debates for decades. Yet convincing empirical evidence

is scarce because a parent's program participation is not random. Credible identica-

tion requires an exogenous shock which aects a parent's participation, but does not

directly impact their children. On top of this, one needs a dataset which links parents

to children, contains a detailed set of outcome variables, and follows families over a

long period of time. We overcome these challenges using a regression discontinuity

design (RD) coupled with rich administrative data.

   Our context is a 1993 reform in the Netherlands which simultaneously tightened

DI eligibility criteria and lowered payment generosity.   All new DI applicants were

subject to the reform. For those currently on DI, however, the application of the new

versus old rules depended on the participant's age. Current DI recipients less than

age 45 as of August 1, 1993 were re-examined by a medical doctor and subjected to

the new set of rules which made them weakly worse o. Some of these re-examined

individuals received lower payments because their degree of disability was reduced,

and others were disqualied from the program entirely.       In contrast, participants

over age 45 were grandfathered in under the old rules.     This creates an age cohort

discontinuity, with current recipients around the cuto being similar in all dimensions

except for exposure to the stricter DI rules.

   Using an RD design, Borghans, Gielen, and Luttmer (2014) nd that approxi-

mately 4% of DI participants exited DI due to the more stringent rules and that

annual benets fell by around 1,000 euros, or 10%. A similar analysis applied to our

sample of parents reveals slightly larger eects, with 5.4% of parents exiting DI and

annual benets dropping by 1,300 euros. Even though treated participants have been

on DI for 7.5 years on average, they exhibit substantial work capacity, with over 60%



                                           1
of lost DI benets being replaced with earnings.          In the short run, substitution to

other government programs makes up another 30% of lost DI benets, but this eect

tapers o over time.

   Taking advantage of the Dutch reform and intergenerational data spanning more

than 20 years, we estimate how the reduction in parental DI benets aects a wide ar-

ray of children's later-life outcomes (participation in DI, use of other social assistance

programs, earnings and taxes, human capital investments, arrests and imprisonment,

and adult mental health) and the government's budget (scal costs for each genera-

tion, including changes in DI payments, other social program receipt, and taxes paid).

The running variable in our RD design is the age of the parent and the dependent

variables are child outcomes. The DI reform aected parents on both the intensive

margin (payment amounts) and extensive margin (participation). While it would be

interesting to disentangle the separate eects attributable to each, this is not feasible

since the reform only provides one instrument.          We therefore focus on the reduced

form eects, which are the policy relevant parameters.           Later in the paper we also

present IV estimates which scale the eects by the parental drop in DI payments,

treating exit from the program as a reduction in payments to 0 (see the discussion in

Section 3.2).

   We oer four sets of results on intergenerational spillovers. Our rst is that there

is a strong link in DI usage between parents and children. Children whose parents are

subject to the harsher DI rules are 11% less likely to have ever participated in DI (-1.1

percentage points on a base of 10%). This is as of 2014, 21 years after the reform,

when children are 37 years old on average. Using cumulative income received from DI

as the dependent variable instead, children of treated parents receive roughly 1,600

euros less in DI payments, which is sizable compared to the mean of 10,100 euros.

   Second, we nd an increase in a child's taxable earnings but no eect on partic-

ipation in other social support programs.          Cumulative earnings up to 2014 rise by

approximately 7,200 euros, or around 2%, for children of parents subject to the less

generous DI rules. In contrast, we nd no change in cumulative unemployment in-

surance, general welfare assistance, or other miscellaneous safety net programs. The

estimated cumulative increase in taxes minus government transfers is approximately

3,500 euros per child. While roughly 45% of this amount can be attributed to cost sav-

ings from lower DI payments, the remaining is due to increased tax revenue resulting
                        1
from higher earnings.

   Third, we nd that child spillovers have rst order scal eects. Compared to the

   1 The importance of accounting for broader tax and transfer eects when evaluating public pro-
grams is made in a recent paper by Autor et al. (forthcoming).

                                               2
direct eect of the reform on parents up to age 65 (when they transition o DI), we

estimate that children account for 21% of the net scal savings in present discounted

value terms (assuming a 3% discount rate). Extrapolating beyond, when parents are

no longer eligible for DI but their children still are, we calculate that 40% of the

budgetary savings is due to children.

   Fourth, we nd evidence for spillovers to other domains, which helps provide a

fuller picture of the reform's eects and insights into possible mechanisms. We nd

intriguing evidence for anticipatory educational investments, consistent with children

planning for a future with less reliance on DI. When a parent is subjected to the

tighter DI rules, their child invests in a statistically and economically signicant 0.12

extra years of education relative to an overall mean of 11.5 years. The largest increase

occurs for the margin of upper secondary school completion, with a 2.2 percentage

point rise. A second change is in the area of crime. Children of parents exposed to

the reform are 15% less likely to have been arrested for a serious crime and their

probability of imprisonment drops by 18%. A third improvement is in the later-life

mental health of children who were young when their parents' DI benets were scaled

back. These children reduce their use of prescription drugs for mental health disorders

in adulthood by 11%. The costs and benets of these extra improvements in child

well-being are more dicult to quantify in euro terms, but are also relevant for the

public budget.

   We consider several explanations for our ndings. We begin by ruling out various

possibilities which others have postulated for intergenerational spillovers.    It is not

increased investments in children due to increases in family income or parental super-

vision. This is because the reform caused parental leisure to decrease and work hours

to increase, with total parental income changing little in the short run but declining

in the long run. It also is not information about how to apply, as all parents have

been through the DI screening process. Likewise, reduction in stigma associated with

parental entry into the DI program is ruled out, as the reform aects the exit margin.

   Instead, three explanations consistent with our battery of ndings are that children

learn about formal employment, have a better home environment, or experience a

scarring eect. The sizable increase in employment for treated parents could help their

children learn about the labor market as well as provide a positive role model. This

explanation is consistent with increased child investments in education and reduced

participation in illegal activities.   A related explanation is that children grow up

in a better home environment when their parent's DI use drops. This is consistent

with correlational studies which document that long-term unemployment is associated




                                            3
with increased rates of depression and stress within the home (e.g., Björklund, 1985;

Di Tella et al., 2001).     Finally, children whose parents are forced o DI or have

their benets reduced may infer they cannot rely on the government to take care of

them, similar to the scarring eect discussed in Malmendier and Nagel (2011) in a

dierent context. This type of scarring can explain why treated children invest more

in education and work more in the future, even though they face the same labor

market and social safety net as their untreated peers.

   Regardless of the underlying explanation, our results suggest the reform curtailing

parental DI benets had positive spillover eects on children, both from an individual

and societal perspective. Lowering DI benets for parents did not appear to create

a resource trap which harmed children and prevented them from being self-sucient,

even though parental income did not change in the short run and declined in the long

run. And from a government budget perspective, the resulting intergenerational scal

benets were large. It is important to recognize, however, that our setting captures

the eect of lowering DI use for parents with marginal disabilities and substantial

work capacity. This is arguably the most policy relevant group, but care should be

taken not to extrapolate to other populations.

   Despite the importance of intergenerational spillovers in policy discussions, there

is surprisingly little causal evidence.     As surveyed by Black and Devereux (2011),

there are many observational studies, but few with credible research designs.              The

best observational work uses panel data and family xed eects (e.g., Bratberg et al.,

2015). Only a handful of papers have used quasi-experimental methods, with most

of these exploiting variation across U.S. states and over time for identication. Antel

(1992) uses state-level welfare benets and net migration ows and nds evidence for

intergenerational links. Levine and Zimmerman (1996) uses variation in state benet

levels and local labor market conditions and concludes that most of the intergenera-

tional correlation in welfare use is not causal. Hartley et al. (2017) uses more recent

temporal variation across U.S. states in AFDC, TANF, and EITC benets and nds

a mother's use of welfare signicantly increases the probability her daughter will par-

ticipate as well. Using a random judge design, Dahl et al. (2014) nds that when a

parent is allowed on to DI on appeal in Norway, it increases the chance their child
                                       2
also participates as a young adult.

   Our paper makes several contributions to this sparse literature.            We leverage a

nationwide reform which generates convincing quasi-experimental variation combined

  2 Two  related papers use a bounds analysis. Pepper (2000) obtains large condence intervals,
while De Haan and Schreiner (2018) bounds average treatment eects to be substantially below the
quasi-experimental estimates which identify local treatment eects.

                                               4
with high quality administrative data. The rule changes we study are highly policy

relevant, as they allow us to quantify how children are aected when parents already

on DI become ineligible or have their payments reduced. This margin is likely to have

dierent eects compared to program entry, which is what other work has focused on.

An advantage of our study is that we can follow children to an age in adulthood when

DI participation is relatively common.           And more importantly, we consider eects

not only on children's DI participation, but rather a wide range of labor market,

government support, education, crime, and mental health outcomes. This allows us

to better understand mechanisms and the overall impact of intergenerational spillovers

on children's future well-being. Another novel contribution is the calculation of the

combined scal costs, including changes in a child's DI payments, taxes, and other

transfers. This matters substantively, as the increase in child tax revenues exceeds

the reductions in child DI payments. We also provide a comparison of the cumulative

cost savings from each generation, documenting the importance of both parent and

child responses for the government's long-term budget. Taken together, our results

highlight the strength and nature of parent-child interactions, and the importance of
                                                                                                3
considering spillover eects in policy debates about social assistance programs.

    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides back-

ground on DI in the Netherlands, the 1993 reform, and the data.                      Section 3 lays

out our RD design and discusses threats to identication. In Section 4, we present

the eect of the reform on parents. Section 5 presents our results on child spillovers

in program participation and work and Section 6 discusses the resulting scal im-

plications.   Section 7 documents spillovers in education, crime, and mental health.

Section 8 conducts some specication checks and compares IV results to OLS. We

then conclude.



2 Background and Data
2.1 Disability Insurance in the Netherlands
The modern Dutch DI program was created in 1967 by merging two existing programs

covering workplace-induced injuries and disabilities unrelated to employment.                       The

   3 More broadly, our study complements a related literature which looks at other shocks to parents
and children's outcomes. See Chen et al. (2015), Chetty et al. (2016), Dahl and Lochner (2012),
Katz et al. (2001), Milligan and Stabile (2011), Oreopoulos (2003), Oreopoulos et al. (2008), Rege et
al. (2011), and Stevens and Schaller (2011). There is also a related literature on disability insurance
programs and their labor supply eects. See Autor et al. (2016), Bound and Burkhauser (1999),
Chen and van der Klaauw (2008), Campolieti and Riddell (2012), de Jong et al. (2011), Deshpande
(2016), French and Song (2014), Gruber and Kubik (1997), Kostol and Mogstad (2014), Maestas et
al. (2013, 2018), Mullen and Staubli (2016), and von Wachter et al. (2011).

                                                  5
program was generous compared to other countries, as it covered all workers fully

after their rst day of employment, replaced up to 80% of wages, and included a

variety of subjective illnesses. Moreover, sickness benets replaced a worker's wages

between 80 and 100% during the transition to disability insurance, and workers on

sickness benets for a full year were routinely transferred to the DI program without

a serious reappraisal of their disability (Kalwij et al., 2014). These factors fueled a

rapid rise in DI recipients, from 4% participation of the eligible population in 1967

to over 8% by 1980. Modest reforms in the early 1980s were enacted in an attempt

to stem the rise, but were largely ineective. Participation reached a peak of 12% in

the late 1980s, with payments ballooning to 4.2% of gross domestic product.

   Starting in the 1990s, a series of reforms were implemented to control the spiral-

ing costs of the DI system, including reductions in benet levels, tightened eligibility

criteria, changes to the sickness benet program, and increased nancing and respon-

sibility transferred to individual employers. The cumulative eect of these reforms

was that by 2012 the participation rate had fallen to just over 7% of the eligible pop-

ulation. Going forward, the participation rate is predicted to fall even further as the

stock of older recipients transitions out of the DI program and on to the retirement

pension program. The trends over time are documented in Appendix Figure A1 and

discussed in more detail by Koning and Lindeboom (2015).

   The current state of DI in the Netherlands is that payments now total around

2.1% of GDP (as of 2016). This compares to 2.3% in other European countries, and

1.7% in the U.S. In terms of participation, the Dutch rate of 7% is higher compared to

the U.S. rate of 5%, but lower than Norway's 10%, for example. Several researchers

have proposed adopting aspects of the Dutch system to reverse steeply increasing DI

trends in the U.S. (Autor, 2015; Burkhauser et al., 2014).

   Before continuing, we note several dierences between the current Dutch and U.S.

programs. First, in the Netherlands, individuals can receive payments for a partial

disability and therefore continue to work and earn benets simultaneously, while in the

U.S. disability determination is binary. Second, health insurance and other benets

are unrelated to DI receipt in the Netherlands, but directly linked in the U.S. Third,

benets do not depend on family size in the Netherlands, while they do in the U.S.

Fourth, the replacement rate in the Netherlands is not a function of tenure, with all

workers being covered 100% the rst day on the job. Finally, the replacement rate of

70% for complete disability in the Netherlands is higher than the average U.S rate of

40 to 50% (see Borghans et al., 2014; Autor and Duggan, 2003).




                                           6
2.2 1993 Reform
Many changes are responsible for the reduction in DI expenditures in the Netherlands;

in this paper we take advantage of a 1993 reform which generates a discontinuity in

program generosity based on age. As this is the same cohort discontinuity used by

Borghans et al. (2014) to study benet substitution, we only briey explain the most

salient features of DI in the Netherlands and the 1993 reform, and refer readers to

their paper for further details.

    In the Netherlands, individuals receive DI payments depending on the degree of

their disability, which is based on the calculated income loss due to a disability. Calcu-

lated income loss is determined by comparing pre-disability earnings to a constructed

measure of earnings capacity.          The reform we exploit aected the calculation of

earnings capacity in a way which made DI less generous.

    The degree of disability is denoted in 7 categories which determine the replacement
        4
rate;       which category an individual belongs to is determined by the ratio of pre-

disability earnings minus earnings capacity to pre-disability earnings.                  Individuals

can continue to work and earn up to their remaining earnings capacity (pre-disability

earnings minus earnings capacity), and at the same time receive DI payments for the
                             5
fraction of lost earnings.

    To explain the cohort discontinuity, we rst need to describe how earnings capac-

ity and benets were determined before and after the 1993 reform.                    Prior to 1993,

a medical doctor examined applicants and created a subjective list of work activi-

ties the applicant could still perform, based on a set of 27 physical activities (e.g.,

lifting, kneeling) and 10 psychological abilities (e.g., the ability to work under time

pressure). This work activity list, in conjunction with the applicant's education level,

was used to create a list of suitable occupations from a dictionary of occupational

requirements. The applicant's earnings capacity was then dened as the average wage

in the 5 highest-paying suitable occupations which had at least 10 active workers in

the applicant's geographic region. If 5 suitable occupations could not be found, earn-

ings capacity was set to 0. The calculated degree of disability was then binned into

categories which determined the replacement rate. Replacement rates varied from 0

to 70% of prior earnings (see footnote 4).

   4 For  a degree of disability between 80-100% the replacement rate is 70%, for 65-80% it is 50.75%,
for 55-65% it is 42%, for 45-55% it is 35%, for 35-45% it is 28%, for 25-35% it is 21%, for 15-25% it
is 14%, and for less than 15% it is 0%. In our data, we observe the category, but not the continuous
measure, for the degree of disability.
    5 Pre-disability annual earnings are indexed and subject to a cap (roughly 36,000 euro in 1999). If
individuals exceed their capped earnings exemption, DI benets are reduced temporarily; if earnings
exceed the cap for three years, individuals are reclassied.

                                                  7
   The 1993 reform altered this process in two ways. First, it mandated the doctor

create a list of work activities based on a more objective medical diagnosis which

could be directly linked to functional work limitations. Second, (i) the list of suitable

occupations was expanded by no longer taking education level into account, (ii) only 3

suitable occupations were used to calculate earnings capacity, and (iii) the geographic

region of 10 active workers was expanded to be roughly three times larger. Each of

these changes weakly reduce the degree of disability for an applicant compared to

the old criteria, as remaining earnings capacity can only rise.     Moreover, the new

rules make it more likely that enough suitable occupations can be found, reducing

the chances of total disability. The end result is that fewer individuals qualify for DI

and benet levels are weakly reduced for those who continue to qualify.

   All new applicants, regardless of age, were subject to the new rules.         But for

existing DI recipients, the original 1993 reform specied that those age 50 or older

at the time of the reform would continue to be subject to the old rules.        Since it

was not logistically feasible to re-examine all existing DI participants below age 50

immediately, they were scheduled to be re-examined over the ensuing years based on

their age cohort. They started with the youngest cohorts under the age of 35 as of

August 1, 1993. The 35 to 40 year old cohort was scheduled to be re-examined in 1995,

the 41-45 year old cohort between 1996-1997, and the 45-50 year old cohort between

1997-2001. However, on November 12, 1996 the Dutch Parliament passed a motion

grandfathering the 45-50 year age group into the old, more generous rules.          This

grandfathering creates a sharp cuto in the generosity of DI based on an individual's

age, a feature we exploit for identication.


2.3 Data
Our analysis uses several data sources that we can link through a unique identier

assigned to all individuals in the Netherlands. We combine administrative data from

several sources on the universe of children of DI recipients for the time period we

study. The disability administrative records begin in 1996 and are observed as late as

2014. The records include information on the start and end dates of a spell, the binned

disability rating, DI payments received, and pre-disability earnings. The records do

not contain the medical doctor's diagnosis, the list of work activities the individual

could still perform, or the set of suitable occupations.

   We merge in data from a variety of administrative records for the period 1999 to

2014.   We use data from Statistics Netherlands for earnings, self-employment, and

unemployment insurance which is compiled using information from three dierent

tax and social insurance record sources.    This data starts in 1999.    Unemployment


                                           8
insurance in the Netherlands can last up to 5 years depending on prior work history.

    Data on general assistance (traditional cash welfare) and miscellaneous benet

programs come from the various organizations that administer the programs.                        As

opposed to the U.S., general assistance has no time limit in the Netherlands and

does not require dependents, although it is means tested.                 There are a variety of

miscellaneous benet programs during our time period, most of which are small in

terms of benet amounts and the size of the eligible population.                 This information

comes from the register which is used to determine eligibility and benet amounts for

all Dutch social insurance programs. Additional details on many of these variables,

and how they are measured, can be found in Appendix B of Borghans et al. (2014).

    We further merge in educational attainment as of 2014.                The education data is

complete for younger cohorts, but comprises only a sample for older cohorts. Crime

data on arrests and incarcerations come from two dierent data sources, and both

span 2005-2014.      We also merge in information on prescriptions for mental health

drugs; this data is available starting in 2005.            Finally, we use municipal registry

les for basic demographics. One advantage of this rich dataset merged from several

sources is that we can study a variety of spillover eects across generations.

    Our data window focuses on parents who were between the ages of 40 and 50 and

on DI as of the reform date of August 1, 1993. Due to data availability, our sample is

limited to children of parents who were receiving DI benets on August 1, 1993 and

who were still on DI in 1995. It is important to realize this sample limitation should

not create any biases. The reason is that 1995 is still before the DI re-examinations

took place for the age 40-45 cohort and before the passage of the DI rule change

exempting the age 45-50 cohort. Starting with 1995 aects the interpretation of our

estimates, but not their validity.        We also require the child to be living at home

around the time of the reform and to be at least 25 by 2014 (so that they have had an

opportunity to nish their schooling and enter the formal labor market); as an extra

specication, we estimate eects for children not living at home at the time of the
                                                                                                    6
reform date. After imposing these restrictions, we have a sample of 116,356 children.

For the education analyses, our sample is smaller since education was collected for all

individuals in later cohorts, but only a subsample of earlier cohorts. For the crime,

arrest, and mental health prescription outcomes, we use the same sample restrictions,

but only require the child to be age 18 or older by 2014.

   6 We  drop parents of Turkish and Moroccan origin, as birthdate is often incorrectly registered for
these individuals, and parents from the East Indies, as immigration rules were changing over time.
We further drop children whose mother was less than age 18 at the time of their birth, children with
missing covariates, and children with two parents on DI where one parent is treated and the other
is not (we include children with two parents on DI if both parents have the same treatment status).

                                                  9
    Summary statistics for both parents and children can be found in Appendix Table

A1. The rst column displays sample means for parents who were between the ages

of 40 to 50 and on DI as of the cuto date, and still on DI as of 1995. The other

two columns show means for subsamples on each side of the 45 year-old age cuto.

On average, parents have been on DI for almost 7.5 years as of the reform cuto

date, with the older sample having approximately an extra half year of participation.

Fifty-eight percent of parents are classied as fully disabled.                Older parents are 10

percentage points more likely to be fully disabled, while younger parents have higher

rates of low-level disability. Parents in our sample are predominantly male, married,

and native Dutch.

    Turning to children, their average age is 15.6 as of the reform date.                 Appendix

Figure A2 graphs the distribution of child ages separately for parents on each side of

the age cuto for the main sample. There is substantial overlap in the two distribu-

tions. The fact that we have a sample of somewhat older children is due to two factors

related to our sampling frame. First, few parents between the ages of 40 and 50 have

young children, as fertility is highest when individuals are in their twenties and early

thirties. Second, children in the Netherlands commonly live with their parents during

their early years in the labor market and while attending college.



3 Model and Identication
3.1 Regression Discontinuity Design
The discontinuity we exploit arises from the fact that the reform aected some DI

participants, but not others, based on their age. Parents who were age 45 to 50 as of

August 1, 1993 were subject to the old DI rules, while parents between the ages of 40

to 45 were re-examined according to the new, more stringent rules. The direct eect

of the reform on parental outcome         yP   can be modeled in an RD framework as:

        yiP = αP + 1[aPi ≥ c](gl (aPi − c) + θ) + 1[aPi < c]gr (c − aPi ) + δ P xi + ePi            (1)

where   aP    is the age of the parent on August 1, 1993,        c   is the cut-o age of 45,   x   is a

vector of pre-determined parental and child characteristics,              eP   is an error term, and

gl , and gr   are unknown functions. The coecient         θ   is the rst stage coecient for the

associated parental outcome (DI payment amount, or alternatively, DI participation).

    The corresponding reduced form model for child outcome                 yC   is:


        yiC = αC + 1[aPi ≥ c](hl (aPi − c) + λ) + 1[aPi < c]hr (c − aPi ) + δ C xi + eC
                                                                                      i             (2)

where   eC    is an error term, and   hl , and hg   are unknown functions. The coecient            λ is
the reduced form (RF) or intention to treat (ITT) eect of the reform on outcomes.



                                                    10
3.2 Threats to Identication
Manipulation. The validity of an RD design requires that individuals cannot manip-
ulate the assignment variable, which in our setting is the parent's age at the time of

the reform. Since parents cannot change their actual or ocially recorded age easily

in the Netherlands, there is little chance for this type of direct manipulation.

   Since the DI data is not available until 1995, a similar threat to validity is that

the reform caused dierential attrition around the age 45 cuto. As a reminder, our

sample includes parents who were receiving DI benets on August 1, 1993 (the reform

date) and who were were still on DI in 1995. In other words, we can only observe

whether an individual was receiving DI at the time of the initial implementation of

the reform if they remained on DI until 1995. While the reform likely caused some

claimants to exit DI in anticipation that they would be re-examined, it is unlikely

to have caused a jump in exits around the age 45 cuto.                The reason is the re-

examinations for individuals age 40-45 did not start until after 1995 and it was not

until November 1996 that Parliament decided the 45-50 year old cohort would be
                                                       7
grandfathered in to the old, more generous rules.

   Borghans et al.      (2014) perform two empirical tests for manipulation for their

sample, which includes all individuals on DI, and not just parents. They rst graph

the histogram of age at the time of the reform, and nd no noticeable jumps around

the age 45 cuto. We nd a similar result for our sample of parents: using a McCrary

(2008) test, we do not reject the null hypothesis of a smooth density around the 45

year old cuto (p-value=0.25). Second, they nd no systematic evidence of changes

in the distribution of pre-determined characteristics around the reform date. Using

our sample of parents, we nd similar results.         Moreover, our RD estimates barely

move when we include these characteristics in the regressions.


Exclusion Restriction and Monotonicity.          With no manipulation or dierential at-

trition, the RD design identies the causal RF impacts.              There is no need for an

exclusion restriction or monotonicity. Since the RF captures the policy relevant in-

tergenerational parameters, these estimates are interesting in their own right.

   A practical reason to focus on RF instead of IV estimates is that the DI reform af-

fected parents on both the intensive margin (payment amounts) and extensive margin

(participation). Since the reform only provides one instrument, it is not feasible to
                                                           8
disentangle the separate eects attributable to each.          Consider the challenge of using

  7 While   40 year olds were initially scheduled to be re-examined at the end of 1995, the re-
examinations took longer than initially expected. In conversations with the disability insurance
oce, we learned that few 40 year olds were re-examined before 1996.
   8 If the eects of the reform on exit versus a drop in payments could be predicted based on


                                              11
the extensive margin of participation as the instrument. To satisfy the exclusion re-

striction, the intensive margin would need to not directly aect children's outcomes.

This would imply a drop in DI payments from 10,000 euros to 2,000 euros has no

eect on children, and likewise that a drop in payments from 10,000 euros to 0 euros

and a drop in payments from 2,000 euros to 0 euros, have the same eect. This is

clearly not a reasonable assumption.

    Now consider the assumption required to use the intensive margin as the in-

strument.    To interpret the resulting IV estimates as causal requires the exclusion

restriction that parental exit has no direct eect.            This implies, for example, that

a parental reduction in benets from 10,000 to 7,000 euros has the same eect as a

parent who previously received 3,000 euros exiting the program and receiving 0 euros.

This assumption, while not perfect, is more reasonable. Therefore, near the end of

the paper to facilitate a comparison to OLS estimates, we present IV estimates which
                                                                 9
scale the eects by the parental drop in DI payments.

    If the eect of the drop in parental DI payments is constant for each child outcome,

then the absence of manipulation combined with the exclusion restriction are sucient

for consistent IV estimation. With heterogeneous eects, however, monotonicity is

also needed. In our setting, monotonicity requires that if a parent was exposed to the

new, more stringent DI rules, they must receive DI payments which are lower or the

same compared to what they would have received under the old rules. Since the new

rules weakly reduced payments for any individual whose situation had not changed,

monotonicity holds by construction for most of the sample.                  The one exception is

that if a parent's illness has worsened, re-examination under the new, stricter rules

could still result in a higher degree of disability classication (and hence a higher

DI payment).      Comparing the 40-45 age cohort, which was exposed to the stricter

rules, with the 45-50 age cohort reveals this is unlikely to be an important issue.

For the 40-45 age cohort, 5.8% of the sample had their degree of disability rating

increase between 1996 and 1999, whereas for the 45-50 age cohort, 6.6% had their

rating increase. This comparison indicates that any margin for non-monotonicity to

matter is small, even taking into account that rating increases are expected to occur

somewhat more often for older individuals.

predetermined characteristics, one could interact these predetermined characteristics with the reform
cuto to get a sense of the two margins. Unfortunately, there is not enough predictive dierence
based on pre-determined characteristics to make this exercise useful.
   9 The 1993 reform may also have triggered a variety of changes for exposed parents, such as
changes in parental labor supply, available family income, or even family structure. It is important
to note these changes do not violate the exclusion restriction. Instead, they are potential mechanisms
through which a shock to parental DI generosity aects children.


                                                 12
4 Eect on Parents
This section documents the eect of the reform on parents using an RD design. An

advantage of RD is that results can be presented graphically, which provides a trans-

parent way of showing how the intergenerational spillovers are identied. Throughout

the paper, we will begin with a graphical depiction of key outcomes before turning

to a more detailed regression-based analysis. The gures will include outcomes ag-

gregated into parental age bins, as well as separate linear trends on each side of the

cuto estimated using the underlying data and baseline regression specication. The

regression lines best illustrate the trends in the data and the size of the jump, whereas

the binned means provide a sense of the underlying variability in the data.

   Figure 1 graphs the relationship between the reform and parent's intensive and

extensive use of DI. The sample is comprised of parents who were already receiving

DI benets prior to the reform. The running variable is the parent's age as of the

reform date of August 1, 1993 and the cuto age of 45 determines whether the parent

is subject to the new versus old DI rules. On the y-axes are parental benets in 1999

and parental DI exit by 1999; we use 1999 since this is after all the re-examinations

have taken place. Our age variable is recorded at the monthly level; each observation

in the graph is the average DI payment for parents in six-month age bins.                 Three-

month age bins for this gure, and all other RD graphs, can be found in the Appendix.

   The left gure reveals that DI benet payments rise with age, largely reecting

the fact that older individuals have higher degree of disability ratings on average and

therefore higher DI payments. More importantly, there is a sharp drop in payments

for individuals just to the left of the cuto. To document the extensive margin of the

DI reform, in the right panel we graph the fraction of parents who exit DI. The rst

pattern to notice is that exits decrease with age. More relevant for our RD design,

at the cuto there is a sizable increase in exits for parents exposed to the reform.

   In Table 1 we present regression results corresponding to these gures.                   Our

baseline specication, here and in what follows, regresses the relevant outcome on

a dummy for the reform cuto and separate linear trends in parental age to the left

and the right of the cuto. We use triangular weights so that observations nearer the

cuto will have more inuence. Although the coecients are not reported, we also

include a variety of covariates for both the parent and the child which are measured
                                                                      10
as of January 1, 1996 and listed in the footnote to the table.

  10 January 1, 1996 is before the passage of the law exempting the 45-50 age cohort from the new,
less generous DI rules and before the re-examinations have occurred for the 40-45 age cohort, so
these controls should be exogenous to the cuto.


                                               13
   The rst specication in Table 1 looks at a parent's DI payments in the year 1999.

Mirroring what was drawn in the left panel of Figure 1, there is a sizable 1,300 euro

drop in benets for parents exposed to the reform, which amounts to a 13% reduction

compared to the mean. The second specication uses exit from DI by 1999 as the

outcome, and nds a large and precisely estimated 5.4 percentage point drop at the

cuto, which is roughly a 60% higher exit rate than otherwise would be predicted.

Both the size and the precision of these rst stage eects are useful for identifying

spillover eects on children, as spillovers are by their nature second order eects.

   As a reminder, some individuals exposed to the reform were kicked o the program

(extensive margin), while others remained on DI but with lower benets (intensive

margin). While it would be interesting to disentangle the separate eects attributable

to each margin, this is not feasible since the reform only provides one instrument. We

therefore focus on the reduced form eects on children's outcomes, which are the

policy relevant parameters for reforms of this type. To provide a sense of scale, later

in the paper in Section 8.4, we present IV estimates which use the total drop in

parental DI payments (including drops to zero and assuming no extensive margin

eect beyond the drop in payments) as an instrument.

   As a result of the reform, other parental outcomes changed as well. Borghans et

al.'s (2014) analysis nds a strong rebound in labor earnings of 0.62 euros on average

per euro of lost DI benets and a 0.30 euro substitution to other social assistance

programs in the short run. These eects diminish in magnitude over time, so that

nancial resources decline in the long run. We nd similar patterns for our sample

of parents. These other eects are important to keep in mind when interpreting the

child spillovers we estimate in the paper.



5 Spillovers in Program Participation and Work
5.1 Child DI Participation
We begin our investigation of intergenerational spillovers by exploring the linkage in

DI participation between parents and their children. Figure 2 presents RD graphs for

the extensive and intensive margins of DI use. The x-axes are the same as in Figure

1, with the running variable being the age of the parent as of the reform date and

the cuto age of 45 being marked with a vertical line. But now the y-axis plots the

child's participation in DI, rather than the parent's.

   An advantage of our long panel is that we can measure outcomes when the children

are much older, after they have had a chance to live on their own, enter the labor

market, and participate in the DI program. For our main child outcomes, we measure



                                             14
cumulative eects as of 2014, which is 21 years after the reform cuto date. By this

time, children are 37.4 years old on average, with the range of child ages spanning

from 28 years old at the 10th percentile to 40 years old at the 90th percentile. Between

1999 and 2014, over 10% of children in our sample have participated in DI at some

point, with an average number of 298 days spent on the program (including zeros).

   The left graph in Figure 2 looks at whether a child has ever participated in DI

between 1999 and 2014. There is a noticeable jump in child DI participation at the

parental age cuto of 45.    Likewise, there is a noticeable jump in the cumulative

number of days a child has been on DI in the right graph.         Table 2 presents the

reduced form estimates corresponding to these graphs. For the extensive margin of

participation, there is a statistically and economically signicant 1.1 percentage point

drop for children if their parent was exposed to the reform.     This is an 11% eect

relative to the mean. Likewise, children participate in DI for 47 fewer days if their

parent was subject to the stricter DI rules, which represents a 16% drop relative to

the mean.

   To arrive at the cost savings to taxpayers from the reduced DI use of children,

in Figure 3 we plot an RD graph with the dollar amount of cumulative DI receipt

as the outcome.   There is a drop of approximately 1,600 euros in cumulative child

DI benets between 1999 and 2014. As reported in Table 3, this is a sizable eect

relative to the mean of 10 thousand euros in DI receipt (including zeros).


5.2 Other Government Transfer Programs
We next look at other government transfer programs. This is important, because if

children are simply shifting from one social assistance program to another, the cost

savings to the government from children's reduced DI use will be overstated. Indeed,

Borghans et al.   (2014) document that while the reform lowered DI participation

and benets for those directly aected, a sizable portion of this loss was replaced by

increased participation in other social assistance programs in the short run. Similar

program substitution occurs for the directly aected parents in our sample.

   With this motivation in mind, we pool together all of the miscellaneous benet

programs besides DI which are part of the social safety net in the Netherlands, and

see if a child's receipt of these other benets is aected by having a parent subject

to the harsher DI rules. The right graph in Figure 3 reveals no noticeable change in

other benet receipt at the cuto. Table 3 conrms that the point estimate is small

and statistically insignicant.   The table breaks things down further by separately

reporting RD estimates for UI income, general assistance (traditional cash welfare),

and the remaining miscellaneous benet programs. For each type of benet category,


                                           15
the estimates are small and insignicant.

    These results stand in stark contrast to those of their parents, who themselves had

substantial substitution to these other programs in the short run (in particular to the

UI program). This means that a parent's increased reliance on these other transfer

programs did not transfer to their children.            Any learning and spillover eects are

apparently linked to the DI program itself. The conclusion is that the cost savings

from the next generation due to lower DI use is not oset by increased participation

in other programs.


5.3 Labor Market Earnings and Taxes Paid
We now turn to labor market earnings and taxes paid by children.                     The left panel

of Figure 4 plots the cumulative earnings of children for the 16 year period from

1999 to 2014. Cumulative earnings includes wage income as well as income from self

employment. In this graph, we plot the residuals from a regression of child earnings

on child age. The reason to plot residuals is that children's cumulative earnings have

a steep own-age prole and child age increases on average with their parent's age as

of the reform date. This makes the range of the y-axis so wide with raw data that it
                                                                11
is dicult to zoom in on the RD jump at the cuto.                   The left gure shows a jump

in cumulative child earnings at the parental age cuto. Turning to Table 4, the RD

estimate is an increase of a little over 7 thousand euros in earnings for children whose

parents were subject to the reform. This is roughly a 2% increase in earnings relative

to the overall mean.

    While earnings changes are inherently interesting, what matters for the govern-

ment's balance sheet is taxes minus transfers. We therefore calculate predicted taxes
                                     12
for children from 1999 to 2014.           The right graph of Figure 4 plots cumulative child

tax payments versus the running variable of parental age.                As we did for earnings,

we rst regress out a child's age for this graph. Table 4 documents a large and sta-

tistically signicant reduced form eect on taxes: estimated taxes paid rise by two

thousand euros, which is a little under 2% of the mean.

  11 We  note that while child age is positively correlated with parent age, this should not be a
problem, as child age is smooth through the RD cuto. Using child age as the outcome variable,
and parent's age as the running variable, yields a small, and statistically insignicant jump of -.044
(s.e.=.066) at the cuto.
   12 We calculate taxes using the relevant tax brackets for each year. We allow individuals to carry
losses backward and forward, as specied by the Dutch tax code. The rules specify that losses are
rst used to oset positive income in the last three years, with further losses being carried forward
for up to nine years. Since our income data begins in 1999, we are limited in applying carrybackward
losses until 2002. As an alternative, we also tried using a variable which ignored the ability to oset
losses. The results using this alternative tax measure are similar.


                                                  16
6 Fiscal Consequences
6.1 Cumulative Fiscal Eects
To provide a comprehensive picture of the scal spillover eects, we estimate the

cumulative change in taxes minus transfers up through 2014. Policy makers should

ultimately be concerned with this net eect, since this is what matters for the gov-

ernment's budget. To do this, we create a variable which combines DI and all other

government transfer program payments and subtract this from taxes paid by a child.

As shown in Table 4, we nd that taxes minus transfers increase by 3,483 euros

(s.e.=1,271) for children of parents who were subject to the stricter DI rules.

   To provide further insight into the scal eects over time, Figure 5 plots year-

by-year RD estimates for cumulative DI benets, cumulative other transfers, and

cumulative tax payments over time.      There is a small, but statistically signicant

savings in DI payments in the rst ve years, and this eect grows larger over time.

In contrast, other cumulative transfers are close to zero and insignicant for the entire

period. Cumulative tax payments, plotted in the upper left graph, start out small

and rise little in the rst 5 years. This makes sense, as many of the children are still

in school and have not yet begun working full time in the early years of our data.

But the increase in estimated tax payments rises with time, so that by 2006 the eect

becomes statistically signicant.

   The lower right panel in Figure 5 plots the net eect of taxes minus transfers over

time.   It mirrors the reduction in DI payments and the rise in tax payments over

time, as expected. It is interesting to note that by 2014, increased taxes account for a

slightly larger fraction of the net savings to the government's budget compared to the

reduction in DI payments. This highlights the limitation of looking at DI in isolation,

without considering other possible scal spillovers.


6.2 Budget Savings from Children versus Parents
To gauge the importance of child spillovers, we compare the budget savings of the re-

form, including all transfers and taxes, due to children versus their parents. Borghans

et al. (2014) estimate direct eects on parents from 1999 to 2005. We extend their

analysis to calculate a measure of the cumulative scal costs for parents until manda-

tory retirement at age 65, which occurs in 2013 for parents at the reform cuto.

Mandatory retirement complicates this calculation, as once parents within the esti-

mation window start reaching age 65, we can no longer use an RD design. This is

because parents over age 65 are no longer eligible for DI benets and instead auto-

matically begin to collect their government provided pension (which is a xed amount



                                           17
and does not depend on work history).

    To deal with this, we estimate the cumulative scal eects using an RD design for

each year from 1999 to 2008, before any parents in our estimation window reach age

65. It turns out the increase in cumulative net taxes minus all transfers is remarkably

linear in years; a regression of the estimated RD coecients on a year trend has a

slope coecient of 1,167.7 euros (s.e.=21.4) and an R-squared of 0.997.                   We then

extrapolate this linear trend for the years 2009 to 2013. Assuming a discount rate

of 3% per year, we calculate a PDV budgetary savings of 12,999 euros per parent

exposed to the reform up through 2013. Using the RD estimates for children from

Figure 5, we calculate a PDV budgetary savings of 3,485 euros from children per
                                                                                                  13
exposed parent (taking into account that some parents have more than one child).

    These calculations imply the child spillover eects account for 21% of the scal

benets of the reform by 2013.          This is likely an underestimate going forward in

time, however.     This is because while the parents are no longer eligible to work or

participate in DI, their children have an average of 30 years of DI eligibility and

work life remaining.      Extrapolating the estimated child spillovers beyond 2013, we

calculate that 40% of the present discounted value of the savings in the long run is
                  14
due to children.

    Projections about future DI use and taxes paid by both parents and children

should be viewed as suggestive, in part because the economic and policy environment

is likely to change over time. These rough estimates also do not include the public

costs and benets associated with the extra education, lower crime and imprisonment,

and improved mental health we document in the next section. But the basic point

remains: scal spillovers from the next generation are nontrivial, and ignoring their

eects greatly understates the cost savings of the reform in the long run.



7 Spillovers in Education, Crime, and Mental Health
When viewed in isolation, the fact that children participate less in DI if a parent

is exposed to the reform could be either good or bad.               If children participate less

in DI even though they have a debilitating condition, or if the reduction in family

income harms a child's development, then children in treated families are worse o.

However, children could also react positively to the parental shock.                The fact that

  13 Allgures are indexed to be in 2014 euros.
  14 We use a linear extrapolation based on the RD estimates for taxes minus transfers for 2005-2014.
We exclude 1999-2004, since the lower right panel of Figure 5 reveals a dierent trend when children
are nishing school and beginning their work life. A regression of the estimated RD coecients on
a year trend has a slope coecient of 255.6 euros (s.e.=7.8) and an R-squared of 0.992.


                                                 18
children earn more and do not change their participation in other government benet

programs suggests increased self-suciency. To further explore whether aected chil-

dren are better or worse o, we examine three child outcomes which are key markers

of future well-being: educational investments, criminal activity, and mental illness in

adulthood.


7.1 Educational Investments
We rst examine whether children alter their educational investments. We collected

data on children's educational attainment as of 2014. In Figure 6, the left graph plots

child years of education against the running variable of the parent's age as of the

reform date. While most children will be done with their formal education by 2014,

not all are. Indeed, one can see in the gure that education trends slightly upward in

the graph as a function of parental age, which is correlated with child age. Table 5

reports the corresponding estimate and standard error for years of education. There

is a signicant jump at the reform cuto, with children of reform-exposed parents

getting 0.12 years more education, relative to a mean of 11.5 years.

    The right panel in Figure 6 plots the RD graph with upper secondary school

completion (roughly the equivalent of High School in the U.S.) as the outcome vari-

able.     There is a signicant jump of 2.2 percentage points at the reform cuto, as

documented in Table 5. This is a modestly sized, but economically signicant, eect

relative to the overall mean of 78%.
                                                                                         15
    Table 5 further reports RD estimates for other levels of schooling.                       We nd

no eect of a parent's exposure to the DI reform on their children's completion of

lower secondary school.        This is as expected, since most children are too old to be

aected, and most children complete this minimal level of schooling anyway due to

compulsory schooling laws. In contrast, children of reform-exposed parents are not

only more likely to complete upper secondary school, but they are also more likely to

obtain higher education. This could be in part because admittance to college requires

completion of upper secondary school.

    These results are intriguing, because they provide some of the rst well-identied

and precisely estimated evidence documenting anticipatory investments by children

as a result of parental program participation. The DI decision occurs in the future,

after a child has grown up and entered the labor market. But it appears that children

(or their parents) anticipate this lower reliance on DI and increased labor market

  15 Asbackground, from the ages of 4 or 5 to 12 or 13, children attend elementary school. Further
education in secondary school is split into three tracks, and takes an additional 4 to 6 years depending
on whether the student enrolls in a vocational or college preparatory program.

                                                  19
attachment in the future, and make dierent investment choices while they are still

young. These higher levels of education can help explain a portion of the increase in

earnings and tax revenue we observe, as we discuss later in Section 8.1. More broadly,

higher education levels are associated with increased life satisfaction and happiness

(e.g., Di Tella et al., 2001).


7.2 Crime
We next turn to an examination of criminal activity. Crime could decrease for two

reasons. First, the opportunity cost of committing crime should rise as children work

and earn more in the formal labor market.              Second, if the home environment im-

proves or parents become better role models after reducing their reliance on DI (and

increasing their employment), this could help children stay out of trouble. On the

other hand, children's crime could increase since treated parents have less time to su-

pervise their children once their employment increases. To evaluate intergenerational

spillovers in crime, we examine both arrests and incarceration.

    Panel A in Table 6 reports results for having ever been arrested between 2005 and

2014, broken down by dierent categories of crime. The rst entry looks at arrests for

any crime type, and nds a negative, but statistically insignicant eect. The next

two specications split the crime types into minor versus serious crimes. Minor and

serious crimes are dened based on whether the crime an individual is arrested for
                                                                                          16
is associated with an above or below median probability of imprisonment.                       Minor

crimes include arrest categories such as shoplifting, threats, and trac violations,

while serious crimes include arrest categories such as rape, residential burglary, and

arson (see Appendix Table A3 for a full listing).              Using this breakdown, we nd

small and insignicant eects for minor crimes. In contrast, arrests for serious crimes

drop by 0.54 percentage points relative to a mean of 3.63, which translates into a

15% reduction in arrests (see Table 7 for the corresponding RD graph). To provide

additional insight, we further break down serious crimes into serious violent versus

serious property crimes.       There are sizable drops in both subsets of serious crime,

with 33% reduction for serious violent crime and a 12% decrease for serious property
         17
crime.
  16 While  we have arrest and incarceration information for each individual broken down by crime
type, we cannot ascertain which arrest is linked with which incarceration. Moreover, the crime types
listed in the arrest records are somewhat dierent compared to those in the incarceration records.
So to dene crime severity, we take everyone who was arrested for a specic crime in 2014 (e.g.,
assault) and then calculate the probability these individuals are incarcerated in 2014 for any reason.
Serious and minor crimes are dened as an incarceration probability above or below the median
across the 48 arrest categories using the Standard Crime Classication of Statistics Netherlands.
   17 We do not have enough power to precisely estimate eects for each of the 48 crime categories



                                                 20
    Panel B reports results for having ever been imprisoned between 2005 and 2014.

Children of parents exposed to the reform have a 0.29 percentage point lower proba-

bility of being sent to prison, a result which is signicant at the ten percent condence

level. Relative to an incarceration rate of 0.165, this represents an 18% drop in impris-

onment. Imprisonment occurs for more serious crimes, so it is interesting to see that

the incarceration result lines up with the arrest result for serious crimes (i.e., those

likely to result in imprisonment). We note the arrest and imprisonment data come

from two separate data sources, each collected by dierent governmental agencies, so

the similar results are not mechanical.


7.3 Mental Health
Finally, we explore whether a child's mental health in adulthood (when the data rst

become available) is aected by a parent's exposure to the DI reform. Our measure

of mental health is based on having had a prescription for one of several drugs. The

prescription drug categories are antipsychotics, anxiolytics, hypnotics and sedatives,

antidepressants, and psychostimulants. For Table 7, we limit the sample to children

age 14 or younger around the time their parents were exposed to the reform.                     We

focus on this age range because it corresponds to the critical period identied by the

World Health Organization, which notes that Mental health evolves throughout the

life-cycle... The early stages of life present a particularly important opportunity to

promote mental health and prevent mental disorders, as up to 50% of mental disorders

in adults begin before the age of 14 years (WHO, 2013). In the robustness section,

we report results for children of other ages as well.

    In the rst specication of Table 7, we nd that adult prescriptions for any type

of mental health drug fall by 2.6 percentage points for children who were young when

their parents were exposed to the reform. This is relative to the average of 23% of

children having been prescribed a mental health drug by between 2005 and 2014, or

an 11% drop. Figure 8 graphs the corresponding RD gure. When we break up the

analysis into the 5 types of mental health drugs, the estimates are all negative and

economically meaningful, with eect sizes of 23%, 13%, 30%, 11%, and 7% relative

to their respective means.        When interpreting these estimates, it is important to

remember that we are using exposure at a young age to measure mental health drug

use as adults. One interpretation of our ndings is that children experience a more

stable home environment if their parent relies less on DI and more on earnings from

separately, but we note that almost all of the individual estimates are negative. One exception is
trac crime, which is relatively common and has a large positive eect. This could reect the fact
that trac crimes require a car, which may be more likely if a person works and has higher earnings.

                                                21
work. Children could also experience less stigma and stress by having a parent in the

labor force at this formative age. Another possible interpretation is that the observed

increases in education and earnings of the children themselves contribute to more

positive mental health.



8 Specication Checks and IV versus OLS
8.1 Eects by Child Age
To better understand the intergenerational spillovers just documented, in this section

we break up the estimated eects by child age as of November 1996. The reason to

focus on child age as of this date is that it is when the Dutch Parliament decided the

45-50 year old cohort would be grandfathered in under the old DI rules. It is also

the approximate time when the re-examinations for the 40-45 year old cohort began,

and hence when children began to be dierentially aected by the reform. We split

children into two roughly equally-sized groups: those who are 18 and younger versus
                                       18
19 and older as of November 1996.           To look at younger ages, we also present results

for children less than age 14 at the time of the reform. While it would be interesting

to look at even younger children, the sample of parents around the reform cuto of

age 45 are too old for such an analysis.

    Table 8 reports separate RD estimates for our main outcomes by child age. Look-

ing at the DI spillovers in specications A through C, the eects are all large and

statistically signicant for the younger groups.        The estimated eects for the older

group, while going in the same direction, are smaller, especially compared to the

sample means. For other social programs in specication D, we nd no eect for any

of the age groups, in line with what we found for the entire sample. When we turn

to earnings, we nd a relatively large and marginally signicant eect for the older

group. These increased earnings also translate into higher taxes paid, although the

estimate is marginally insignicant at conventional levels. For the younger groups,

the eects are the same sign, but smaller. This apparent puzzle, given the opposite

pattern found for DI participation by child age, has a simple explanation which we

return to after discussing the education outcomes.

    Specications G and H estimate the spillover eects on child education.                The

estimate for the age 18 and younger group shows an increase of 0.17 years of schooling

associated with the reform, with the age 14 and younger group having a slightly larger

increase. In contrast, there is no statistically signicant spillover in years of education

  18 As
      a reminder, we limit our sample to children still living at home at the time of the reform
announcement, including children living at home while attending college.

                                                22
for those age 19 and older. Looking at upper secondary school completion, we again

nd larger eects for the younger age groups.              Upper secondary school is usually

completed by age 18 or 19, so for the older group, there is less time to aect this
                     19
schooling margin.

    How do these results t together, particularly the stronger DI eect for the younger

groups and the larger earnings eect for the older group? First, it is important to

recognize that because of their age, the 19 and older group has had over three more

prime-age years to work in the labor market compared to the 18 and younger group;

indeed, mean cumulative earnings for the older group are over 50% higher. On top

of this, the younger groups get more education, which delays the start of their prime

earnings years. Accounting for this education-induced absence from the workforce can
                                                                                                   20
more than explain the dierence in the earnings eects found across the age groups.

Education-induced absences from the workforce can also help explain the stronger DI

result for younger children, as individuals cannot be enrolled full time in school and

concurrently on DI.

    Turning to our nal two outcomes, specication I reports results for serious crime.

The estimate is larger for the      ≤18   split, but relative to their means, the >19 split is

roughly the same percent size and close to signicant at the 10% level. Finally, the

evidence on mental health drugs is concentrated among the youngest age group, with

little evidence of an eect for either of the other age categories. While most of the

outcomes in specications A-I are associated with statistically signicant eects for

the entire sample of children, and often for the age subsamples, the mental health

result only shows up for the      ≤14 age group.      This could be due to the youngest group

being particularly vulnerable for the onset of mental health conditions (WHO, 2013).

    Overall, the pattern of results in Table 8 indicates that younger children are more

strongly aected by their parents.          A natural set of explanations is that younger

children are more impressionable, have a longer period to observe their parent's DI

and work experiences, and have more time to alter their educational and work plans.

  19 A small number of children complete their education at older ages if they are either on a 6 year
educational track or have previously repeated a grade.
  20 To make a comparison, focus on the age>19 versus age≤18 split. Treated children in the
younger group receive an extra 0.171 years of education, compared to 0.065 for the older group.
A reasonable estimate of earnings in prime age years can be taken from the dierence in average
cumulative earnings for the two groups (448,788-290,500 euros) divided by the average age dierence
between the groups (3.41 years). Assuming individuals do not work while in school, this implies an
education-induced loss of 5,431 in earnings for treated children. Adding this to the estimate of 4,744
for the younger group (specication E) equals 10,175, which is larger compared to the estimate of
7,998 for the older group.



                                                 23
8.2 Robustness
Appendix Table A4 reports a variety of specication checks for our main outcomes.

For simplicity, the table only reports the reduced form estimates. The rst row repeats

our baseline estimates for ease of comparison. In Specication B, we allow separate

quadratic trends on each side of the cuto; the estimates are larger, but the standard

errors also increase. The next two specications remove the triangular weights and

the control variables from the regression, and yield similar ndings to the baseline.

    In specications E and F we narrow the RD estimation window.                    As we shrink

the window down to 45 or 30 months on each side of the cuto, the estimates be-

come somewhat larger, but the standard errors increase as well. All estimates remain

statistically signicant (except for cumulative other transfers, which is never signif-

icant).   As an alternative set of specications, we estimate local linear regressions.

Depending on the bandwidth, some of the estimates become insignicant, but the

point estimates are broadly similar to the baseline.

    In specication J, we limit the sample to only include children not living at home

at the time of the reform. This can occur if the child has moved out or because a child

does not live with their biological parent (e.g., if the parent is divorced). With this

sample, we nd no signicant eect for most outcomes, which suggests that rst-hand

exposure is required for the intergenerational eects to materialize. In specication

K we cluster the standard errors by parental age and nd it makes little dierence.

The nal two specications exclude non-native Dutch and children whose parents left

DI by 1995. The RD estimates remain similar to the baseline.


8.3 Placebo Tests
To further explore the validity of our estimates, we conduct placebo tests for our

main outcomes. To do this, we collected a completely dierent sample of children:

those whose parents were      not on DI    as of 1995.
                                                        21
                                                             Since these parents are all subject

to the new DI examination rules (regardless of their age), they should not be treated

dierentially.   As a result, there should be no discontinuity at the 45 year old age

cuto. Indeed, we nd no evidence of a rst stage for this sample.

    Table 9 replicates our baseline reduced form specications for child outcomes, with

the only exception being the dierent, and much larger, sample. There is no evidence

of an eect for any of these outcomes, with the point estimates being uniformly small

and statistically insignicant. This provides reassurance our results are being driven

  21 Asa reminder, November 1996 is when the Dutch Parliment passed the motion to grandfather in
the 45-50 years olds under the old DI rules. The grandfathering was contingent on being continuously
on DI from before the reform date in August 1993.

                                                24
by the change in DI strictness, and not other policies which dierentially aected

parents at a similar age cuto.


8.4 IV versus OLS
As a nal exercise, we compare OLS to similarly scaled IV estimates. To construct

our OLS estimates, we use all parents between the ages of 40 to 50 at the time of the

reform who have at least one child still living at home with them. This sample includes

parents who were on DI as of the reform date, but additionally includes parents who

were not on DI as of the reform date. To make sure dierential re-examinations for

those under versus over the age 45 cuto do not drive our OLS estimates, we split this

sample into two groups: parents between the ages of 40 and 45, and parents between

the ages of 45 and 50. We estimate the eect of parental DI benet amounts in 1996

on each of our main child outcomes separately for each of the groups.

   To construct IV estimates we use the total drop in parental DI payments, including

drops to zero, as the rst stage outcome variable (see panel A in Table 1). These IV

estimates will have the opposite sign compared to the RF, as the rst stage estimate

is negative. To be valid, one must assume the exclusion restriction that there is no

direct eect of exit from DI (see Section 3.2).

   Table 10 presents the OLS and IV estimates. The OLS estimates for the younger

versus older parent samples are generally quite similar, but diverge sharply from the

IV estimates.   Specication A uses whether the child was ever on DI by 2014 as

the outcome variable.   The OLS estimates imply an extra 1,000 euros in parental

DI payments increases a child's probability of participating in DI by 0.3 percentage

points for both the older and younger parent samples. This contrasts with the larger

IV estimate of 0.9 percentage points. Likewise, looking at days on DI, income from

DI, earnings, taxes, education, crime, and mental health the IV estimate is roughly

between 2 and 4 times larger compared to OLS. Interestingly, the OLS estimates for

cumulative total benets from other social assistance programs is large and signicant,

while the IV estimate is close to zero.

   Why are the IV estimates substantially larger in general? There are several pos-

sible explanations. First, it should be noted the mean DI participation rate is higher

in the IV versus OLS samples, with similar dierences for the other child outcomes

(see Appendix Table A2). Second, OLS could be biased due to nonrandom parental

changes in DI participation and payment amounts. For example, in the OLS sample,

a parent may be choosing to voluntarily exit because their health has improved or

their payments may be falling because they have found part-time employment.         In

contrast, the IV estimates compare parents whose health conditions and job prospects


                                          25
are presumably similar, but whose DI payments involuntarily change due to an unex-

pected shock. A third reason is that the exclusion restriction could be violated (see

Section 3.2). In this case, the IV estimates fail to account for the fact that the reform

also aects parental DI exit, which could have a direct eect on children.                   A nal

reason is that IV estimates a local average treatment eect (LATE) for compliers,

while OLS estimates an average treatment eect (ATE) for the whole population.

The reform reduced DI benets for marginal participants who were deemed to have

substantial work capacity. In contrast, OLS includes parents with more severe dis-

abilities as well as parents with little attachment to the DI program. This dierence is

emphasized by De Haan and Schreiner (2018) when discussing how to compare inter-

generational ATEs estimated using their bounding assumptions to LATEs estimated
                                         22
using quasi-experimental methods.



9 Conclusion
Mapping out the nature and breadth of intergenerational DI spillovers is crucial for

understanding long-term child well-being and budgetary impacts. But the endogene-

ity of parental participation makes this a dicult task. To obtain causal estimates,

we take advantage of a DI reform in the Netherlands combined with high quality

register data.

    Our results indicate that children respond strongly when a parent exits DI or

has their benets reduced, with wide-ranging personal and societal eects. Children

whose parents were exposed to the reform are less likely to participate in DI themselves

as adults, do not increase their participation in other public assistance programs,

increase their earnings and taxes paid, invest signicantly more in their education,

commit less crime, and have better mental health as adults.                   Three explanations

consistent with our ndings are that children learn about the labor market from their

parent's increased employment, have a better home home environment, or experience

a scarring eect where they infer they cannot rely on government support. From a

policy perspective, our study serves as an important lesson for the evaluation of costs

and benets from reforms to the social safety net. Considering current participants

only, without accounting for the long-run eects within families, would be a mistake.

We nd that ignoring intergenerational spillovers underestimates the cost savings of

  22 Tobetter understand who the compliers are in the RD regressions, Appendix Table A5 calculates
the average characteristics of compliers (see Borghans et al. 2014 for details). The table compares
these averages to the characteristics of all children in the OLS sample whose parents are between 44.5
and 45.5 years old as of the reform date. The biggest dierence is the degree of parental disability,
with 57% of the OLS sample being fully disabled, but only 48% of compliers. Compliers have also
been on DI for 10 months longer on average.

                                                 26
the Dutch reform by 40 percent in the long run. Additional benets which are harder

to quantify in euros, but which are nonetheless important, include children's increased

education, decreased criminal activity, and improved mental health as adults.

   Taken together, our results indicate the reform curtailing parental DI benets had

positive spillover eects on children, both from an individual and societal perspective.

Lowering DI benets for parents did not appear to create a resource trap which

harmed children and prevented them from being self-sucient, even though parental

income did not change in the short run and declined in the long run. And from a

government budget perspective, the resulting intergenerational scal benets were

large. It is important to recognize, however, that our setting captures the eect of

lowering DI use for parents with marginal disabilities and substantial work capacity.

This is arguably the most policy relevant group, but care should be taken not to

extrapolate to other populations. In future work it would be interesting to explore

intergenerational spillovers in other settings, including instances with more severely

disabled parents or policy reforms where social assistance becomes more, rather than

less, generous.


References
Antel, J. J. (1992).      The intergenerational transfer of welfare dependency:    Some
  statistical evidence.   The Review of Economics and Statistics 74 (3), 46773.
Autor, D. (2015). The unsustainable rise of the disability rolls in the United States:
  Causes, consequences and policy options. In    Social Policies in an Age of Austerity,
  Chapter 5, pp. 107136. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Autor, D. and M. Duggan (2003). The rise in the disability rolls and the decline in
  unemployment.    Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 157206.
Autor, D., M. Duggan, K. Greenberg, and D. Lyle (2016). The impact of disability
  benets on labor supply: Evidence from the VA's disability compensation program.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (3), 3168.
Autor, D., A. Kostol, M. Mogstad, and B. Setzler (forthcoming). Disability benets,
  consumption insurance, and household labor supply.      American Economic Review .
Björklund, A. (1985). Unemployment and mental health: Some evidence from panel
  data.   Journal of Human Resources 20 (4), 469483.
Black, S. and P. Devereux (2011). Recent developments in intergenerational mobility.
  In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.),     Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B,
  Chapter 16, pp. 14871541. Elsevier.
Borghans, L., A. Gielen, and E. Luttmer (2014). Social support substitution and the
  earnings rebound: Evidence from a regression discontinuity in disability insurance
  reform.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (4), 3470.
Bound, J. and R. Burkhauser (1999). Economic analysis of transfer programs targeted
  on people with disabilities. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.),   Handbook of Labor
  Economics    (1st ed.), Volume 3, Part C, Chapter 51, pp. 34173528. Elsevier.


                                            27
Bratberg, E., Øivind Anti Nilsen, and K. Vaage (2015). Assessing the intergenera-
  tional correlation in disability pension recipiency.   Oxford Economic Papers 67 (2),
  205226.
Burkhauser, R. V., M. C. Daly, D. McVicar, and R. Wilkins (2014).             Disability
  benet growth and disability reform in the United States:         Lessons from other
  OECD nations.    IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3 (4), 130.
Campolieti, M. and C. Riddell (2012). Disability policy and the labor market: Ev-
  idence from a natural experiment in Canada, 1998-2006.         Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 96 (3), 306316.
Chen, K., L. Osberg, and S. Phipps (2015). Inter-generational eects of disability ben-
  ets: Evidence from Canadian social assistance programs.        Journal of Population
  Economics 28 (4), 873910.
Chen, S. and W. van der Klaauw (2008). The work disincentive eects of the disability
  insurance program in the 1990s.    Journal of Econometrics 142 (2), 757784.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. Katz (2016). The eects of exposure to better neigh-
  borhoods on children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment.
  American Economic Review 106 (4), 855902.
Dahl, G., A. R. Kostol, and M. Mogstad (2014). Family welfare cultures.       Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 129 (4), 17111752.
Dahl, G. and L. Lochner (2012). The impact of family income on child achievement:
  Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.     American Economic Review 102 (5),
  19271956.
De Hann, M. and R. C. Schreiner (2018).         The intergenerational transmission of
  welfare dependency. CReAM Discussion Paper 1810.
de Jong, P., M. Lindeboom, and B. van der Klaauw (2011).            Screening disability
  insurance applications.   Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (1), 106
  129.
Deshpande, M. (2016). Does welfare inhibit success? The long-term eects of remov-
  ing low-income youth from disability insurance.    American Economic Review 106,
  33003330.
Di Tella, R., R. MacCulloch, and A. Oswald (2001). Preferences over ination and
  unemployment:     Evidence from surveys of happiness.        American Economic Re-
  view 91 (1), 335341.
French, E. and J. Song (2014).     The eect of disability insurance receipt on labor
  supply.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (2), 291337.
Gruber, J. and J. D. Kubik (1997). Disability insurance rejection rates and the labor
  supply of older workers.   Journal of Public Economics 64 (1), 123.
Hartley, R. P., C. Lamarche, and J. P. Ziliak (2017). Welfare reform and the inter-
  generational transmission of dependence. IZA Discussion Paper 10942.
Kalwij, A., K. de Vos, and A. Kapteyn (2014).        Health, disability insurance, and
                                                         Social Security Programs
  labor force exit of older workers in the Netherlands. In
  and Retirement Around the World: Disability Insurance Programs and Retirement,
  pp. 211249. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Katz, L., J. Kling, and J. Liebman (2001).        Moving to Opportunity in Boston:
  Early results of a randomized mobility experiment.      The Quarterly Journal of Eco-

                                          28
  nomics 116 (2), 607654.
Koning, P. and M. Lindeboom (2015). The rise and fall of disability insurance enroll-
  ment in the Netherlands.    Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (2), 15172.
Kostol, A. and M. Mogstad (2014). How nancial incentives induce disability insur-
  ance recipients to return to work.   American Economic Review 104 (2), 62455.
Lee, D. and T. Lemieux (2010).      Regression discontinuity designs in econometrics.
  Journal of Economic Literature 48, 281355.
Levine, P. and D. Zimmerman (1996).       The intergenerational correlation in AFDC
  participation: Welfare trap or poverty trap?     Institute for Research on Poverty
  Discussion Paper 1100-96.
Maestas, N., K. Mullen, and A. Strand (2013).       Does disability insurance receipt
  discourage work?     Using examiner assignment to estimate causal eects of SSDI
  receipt.   American Economic Review 103, 17971829.
Maestas, N., K. Mullen, and A. Strand (2018).      The eect of economic conditions
  on the disability insurance program: Evidence from the great recession.        NBER
  Working Paper 22419.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experi-
  ences aect risk taking?   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 373416.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression disconti-
  nuity design: A density test.   Journal of Econometrics 142 (2), 698714.
Milligan, K. and M. Stabile (2011).     Do child tax benets aect the well-being of
  children? Evidence from Canadian child benet expansions.        American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy 3 (3), 175205.
Mullen, K. and S. Staubli (2016). Disability benet generosity and labor force with-
  drawal.    Journal of Public Economics 143 (49-63).
Oreopoulos, P. (2003). The long-run consequences of living in a poor neighborhood.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 15331575.
Oreopoulos, P., M. Page, and A. Stevens (2008).         The intergenerational eects of
  worker displacement.    Journal of Labor Economics 26 (3), 455483.
Pepper, J. (2000). The intergenerational transmission of welfare receipt: A nonpara-
  metric bounds analysis.    The Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 472488.
Rege, M., K. Telle, and M. Votruba (2011). Parental job loss and children's school
  performance.    Review of Economic Studies 78 (4), 14621489.
Stevens, A. H. and J. Schaller (2011). Short-run eects of parental job loss on chil-
  dren's academic achievement.    Economics of Education Review 30 (2), 289299.
von Wachter, T., J. Song, and J. Manchester (2011). Trends in employment and earn-
  ings of allowed and rejected applicants to the Social Security Disability Insurance
  program.    American Economic Review 101 (7), 330829.




                                          29
                                                                                                                                                .24
                             13
                             12




                                                                                                                                                .2
      Parental DI benefits
       (in 1,000 of euros)




                                                                                                                                                .16
                             11




                                                                                                                            Parental DI exit
                                                                                                                                                .12
                             10




                                                                                                                                                .08
                             9




                                                                                                                                                .04
                             8
                             7




                                                                                                                                                0
                                   40        41        42        43    44    45     46    47     48   49   50                                         40   41   42   43     44    45     46     47   48   49   50
                                                                 Age of parent at reform date                                                                         Age of parent at reform date


                                                                                 Figure 1: Eects of the Reform on Parents
                              Notes: Each observation represents average parental DI receipt in 1999 (left panel) or average
                              parental DI exit by 1999 (right panel) in 6 months age bins, based on the parent's age as of
                              the reform date of August 1993. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto of age
                              45. The solid trend lines are based on regressions using unbinned data, with dotted lines
                              indicating pointwise 90 percent condence intervals.
                                                                                                                                               450
                   .14
                   .13




                                                                                                                                               400
                                                                                                                 Child cumulative days on DI
                   .12




                                                                                                                                               350
Child ever on DI
                   .11




                                                                                                                                               300
                   .1




                                                                                                                                               250
                   .09




                                                                                                                                               200
                   .08




                                                                                                                                               150
                   .07




                              40        41        42        43        44    45    46     47     48    49   50                                         40   41   42   43    44    45     46     47    48   49   50
                                                            Age of parent at reform date                                                                             Age of parent at reform date


                                                                                         Figure 2: Child DI Participation
                              Notes: Each observation represents average child DI participation by 2014 (left panel) or
                              average cumulative child days on DI by 2014 (right panel) in 6 months age bins, based on
                              the parent's age as of the reform date of August 1993. The dashed vertical lines denote the
                              reform cuto of age 45. The solid trend lines are based on regressions using unbinned data,
                              with dotted lines indicating pointwise 90 percent condence intervals.




                                                                                                                30
                                    15




                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                         Child cumulative benefits, excluding DI

                                                                                                                                                   16
                                    13
Child cumulative DI benefits




                                                                                                                                                   15
     (in 1,000 of euros)




                                                                                                                  (in 1,000 of euros)
                                    11




                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                   13
                                    9




                                                                                                                                                   12
                                    7




                                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                                   10
                                    5




                                           40   41   42   43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50                                                    40   41   42   43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50
                                                          Age of parent at reform date                                                                                  Age of parent at reform date


                                                                      Figure 3: Child DI and Other Benet Receipt
                                          Notes: See Table 3 and notes to Figure 2.
                                    40




                                                                                                                                                   12
(residualized, in 1,000 of euros)




                                                                                                         (residualized, in 1,000 of euros)
                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                          Child cumulative tax payments
   Child cumulative earnings

                                    20




                                                                                                                                                   4
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                   −4
                                    −20




                                                                                                                                                   −8
                                    −40




                                                                                                                                                   −12




                                           40   41   42   43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50                                                    40   41   42   43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50
                                                          Age of parent at reform date                                                                                  Age of parent at reform date


                                                                     Figure 4: Residualized Child Earnings and Taxes
                                          Notes: See Table 4 and notes to Figure 2. In these graphs, we rst regress out child age to
                                          keep the range of the y-axis from being too large.




                                                                                                        31
                                          500




                                                                                                                                                               3500
                                          0




                                                                                                                     Child cumulative tax payments
Child cumulative DI benefits

                                          −500




                                                                                                                                                               2500
     (in 1,000 of euros)




                                                                                                                           (in 1,000 of euros)
                                          −1500




                                                                                                                                                               1500
                                          −2500




                                                                                                                                                               500
                                                                                                                                                               0
                                          −3500




                                                                                                                                                               −500
                                                  1999                  2004                2009             2014                                                           1999                  2004                2009             2014
                                                                                Year                                                                                                                      Year
                                          2000




                                                                                                                                                               5500
Child cumulative benefits, excluding DI




                                                                                                                     Child cumulative taxes minus transfers

                                                                                                                                                               4500
                                          1000




                                                                                                                                                               3500
         (in 1,000 of euros)




                                                                                                                              (in 1,000 of euros)
                                                                                                                                                               2500
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                               1500
                                          −1000




                                                                                                                                                               −500 0 500
                                          −2000




                                                  1999                  2004                2009             2014                                                           1999                  2004                2009             2014
                                                                                Year                                                                                                                      Year


                                                                    Figure 5: Cumulative Fiscal Eects Over Time for Children
                                                  Notes: Each graph plots year-by-year RD estimates of cumulative eects, using the speci-
                                                  cations of Tables 2-4. Dotted lines indicate pointwise 90 percent condence intervals.
                                                                                                                                                         .84
                           12




                                                                                                                     Child secondary school completion
                                                                                                                                                         .82
Child years of education
                           11.75




                                                                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                                                                                         .78
                           11.5




                                                                                                                                                         .76
                           11.25




                                                                                                                                                         .74
                                                                                                                                                         .72
                           11




                                                                                                                                                         .7




                                                  40     41   42   43      44   45     46     47   48   49    50                                                            40     41   42   43      44   45     46     47   48   49    50
                                                                   Age of parent at reform date                                                                                              Age of parent at reform date


                                                                                       Figure 6: Child Educational Attainment
                                                  Notes: See Table 5 and notes to Figure 2.

                                                                                                                    32
                                                             .055
                     Child ever arrested for serious crime
                                                             .045
                                                             .035
                                                             .025
                                                             .015


                                                                    40    41   42   43    44    45     46     47   48   49   50
                                                                                    Age of parent at reform date


                                                                         Figure 7: Child Serious Crime
Notes: See Table 6 and notes to Figure 2.
                                                             .3
                     Child ever prescribed mental drugs
                                                             .27
                                                             .24
                                                             .21
                                                             .18




                                                                    40    41   42   43    44    45     46     47   48   49   50
                                                                                    Age of parent at reform date


                                                                         Figure 8: Child Mental Health
Notes: See Table 7 and notes to Figure 2. This graph is limited to children who were age 14
or younger at the time of implementation (November 1996).




                                                                                               33
                 Table 1: RD Estimates of the Reform on Parental DI


                   Dependent variable               First Stage    Mean


                   A. Parental DI benets            -1.300**     10.063
                       (in 1,000 euros)                (.095)


                   B. Parental exit from DI           .054**        .114
                                                       (.005)


                   Observations                       116,356

Notes: The sample is parents between the ages of 40-50 and on DI as of the reform date of
August 1, 1993, who were still on DI in 1995, and had children living at home around the
time of the reform. Parental DI benets measure payments received in 1999, indexed to the
year 2014. Parental exit measures whether the parent has exited DI by 1999. All coecients
are estimated using an RD model with separate linear trends on each side of the cuto and
triangular weights. Parent control variables are measured as of January 1, 1996 and include
age, birth month dummies, a gender dummy, a cubic in pre-disability earnings, a dummy
for no pre-disability earnings, six dummies for degree of disability, a cubic in DI duration,
a dummy for native Dutch, a marriage dummy, and number of children in the household;
child control variables include age and a gender dummy. Parents appear more than once if
they have more than one child. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10


                   Table 2: RD Estimates of Child DI Participation



                     Child outcome in 2014               RF       Mean


                     A. Ever on DI                     -.011**     .104
                                                        (.004)


                     B. Cumulative days on DI          -47.2**     298
                                                        (13.9)


                     Observations                      116,356

Notes: See notes to Table 1. The independent variables measure whether a child ever partic-
ipated in DI between 1996 and 2014 and the cumulative number of days on DI between 1996
and 2014. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10




                                             34
Table 3: RD Estimates of Child Benets from DI and Other Government Programs



      Child outcome in 2014 (in 1,000 euros)                          RF         Mean


      A. DI benets


          A1. Cumulative DI income                                -1.578**     10.107
                                                                     (.499)


      B. Other benets


          B1. Cumulative total benets, excluding DI                 .092      13.746
               (B2+B3+B4)                                            (.379)


          B2. Cumulative UI income                                   -.067       5.639
                                                                     (.162)


          B3. Cumulative general assistance income                   .092        4.432
               (traditional cash welfare)                            (.266)


          B4. Cumulative misc. benet income                         .067        3.675
               (all other government safety net programs)            (.145)


      Observations                                                116,356

Notes: See notes to Table 1. Independent variables measure cumulative amounts between
1996 and 2014, indexed to the year 2014. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the
parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10


                 Table 4: RD Estimates of Child Earnings and Taxes



            Child outcome in 2014 (in 1,000 euros)           RF         Mean


            A. Cumulative income from work                 7.178**     371.282
                                                           (2.836)


            B. Cumulative estimated taxes                  1.997**     109.565
                                                            (.969)


            C. Cumulative taxes minus transfers            3.483**      85.712
               (taxes - DI benets - other benets)        (1.271)


            Observations                                   116,356

Notes: See Table 3 and notes to Table 1. Independent variables measure cumulative amounts
between 1996 and 2014, indexed to the year 2014. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered
at the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10

                                            35
              Table 5: RD Estimates of Child Educational Investments


                Child outcome in 2014                         RF     Mean


                A. Years of education                       .117**    11.49
                                                            (.050)


                B. Lower secondary school or more            -.001     .95
                                                            (.003)


                C. Upper secondary school or more           .022**     .78
                                                            (.007)


                D. Bachelor degree or more                  .017**     .33
                                                            (.008)


                E. Master degree or more                     .009*     .10
                                                            (.005)


                F. Advanced degree or more                   -.001     .01
                                                            (.001)


                Observations                                79,924

Notes: See notes to Table 1. Education is measured as of 2014. Upper secondary school or
more includes both academic and vocational tracks. The sample size in this table is smaller,
as education data is a census for younger cohorts, but a sample for older cohorts. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered at the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10




                                            36
                         Table 6: RD Estimates of Child Crime


               Child outcome in 2014                            RF       Mean


               A. Ever arrested


                   A1. Any crime                              -.0023     .1370
                        (A2|A3)                              (.0043)


                   A2. Minor crime                            -.0016     .1256
                        (low prob of prison)                 (.0042)


                   A3. Serious crime                         -.0054**    .0363
                        (high prob of prison; A4|A5)         (.0023)


                   A4. Serious violent crime                 -.0030**    .0090
                                                             (.0012)


                   A5. Serious non-violent crime             -.0037*     .0306
                                                             (.0021)


               B. Ever imprisoned


                   B1. Any crime                             -.0029*     .0165
                                                             (.0016)


               Observations                                  123,186

Notes: See notes to Table 1; the sample diers in this table because the data covers 2005-2014
and because individuals are required to be 18 or older by 2014. Minor and serious crime are
dened based on whether the crime an individual is arrested for is associated with an above
or below median probability of imprisonment. See Appendix Table A3 for denition details
and a listing of minor versus serious crimes. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at
the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10




                                             37
                    Table 7: RD Estimates of Child Mental Health


                                                     Children 14 or younger
                                                     around implementation


             Child outcome in 2014                     RF           Mean


             A. Ever prescribed


                 A1. Any mental health drug          -.026**        .234
                     (A2|A3|A4|A5|A6)                 (.013)


                 A2. Antipsychotics                  -.011*         .047
                                                      (.006)


                 A3. Anxiolytics                      -.014         .109
                                                      (.009)


                 A4. Hypnotics and sedatives         -.015**        .050
                                                      (.006)


                 A5. Antidepressants                  -.014         .132
                                                      (.010)


                 A6. Psychostimulants                 -.003         .041
                                                      (.006)


             Observations                            27,218

Notes: See notes to Table 1; the sample diers in this table because the data covers 2005-
2014 and because individuals are required to be 18 or older by 2014. Moreover, we limit the
sample to children who were age 14 or younger at the time their parents were exposed to the
reform in November 1996. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10




                                            38
                            Table 8: RD Estimates by Age of Child



                                                    Child age around implementation
                                         age ≤14               age ≤18              age>19
Child outcome in 2014                  RF      Mean          RF       Mean       RF       Mean

A. Ever on DI                        -.022**    .091       -.019**     .093      -.006     .114
                                      (.010)                (.006)              (.006)

B. Cumulative days on DI             -66.4**    255        -64.9**     265      -36.4*     330
                                      (32.0)                (19.3)              (20.0)

C. Cumulative DI income              -1.687*    7.979      -2.184**    8.677    -1.293*   11.480
   (in 1,000 euro)                   (1.014)                (.650)               (.747)

D. Cum. total benets, excl. DI        -.536    8.036        -.318    11.553     .332     15.851
   (in 1,000 euro)                    (.600)                (.467)              (.584)

E. Cumulative income from work        5.314    189.613      4.744     290.500   7.998*    448.788
    (in 1,000 euro)                  (3.762)               (3.080)              (4.417)

F. Cumulative estimated taxes         1.208    48.861        .944     80.228     2.462    137.714
    (in 1,000 euro)                  (1.042)                (.973)              (1.577)

G. Years of education                 .185*     11.33      .171**      11.57     .065      11.39
                                      (.102)               (.067)               (.069)

H. Upper secondary school or more    .031**     .744       .028**      .775      .015      .783
                                     (.015)                (.009)               (.010)

I. Ever arrested for serious crime    -.0066    .0590      -.0068*     .0438     -.0047    .0281
                                     (.0068)               (.0037)              (.0029)

J. Ever prescribed mental drugs      -.026**    .234         -.009     .262      .008      .288
                                      (.013)                (.008)              (.008)

Observations (A-F)                   20,388                56,974               59,382
Observations (G, H)                  19,765                45,913               34,011
Observations (I, J)                  27,218                63,804               59,382
   Notes: See notes to Tables 1-7. Child age is measured as of November 1996, which is when
   the Dutch Parliament passed the motion to grandfather in the 45-50 year olds under the old
   DI rules.
   **p<.05, *p<.10

                                               39
       Table 9: Placebo Tests  RD Estimates for Parents Not on DI in 1995


          Child outcome in 2014                                RF            Mean


          A. Ever on DI                                        -.0002         .057
                                                               (.0009)


          B. Cumulative days on DI                             -2.126         158
                                                               (3.232)


          C. Cumulative DI income                              -.150         5.346
              (in 1,000 euro)                                  (.117)


          D. Cumulative total benets, excluding DI            .042          8.761
              (in 1,000 euro)                                  (.092)


          E. Cumulative income from work                       -.041        378.393
              (in 1,000 euro)                                  (.940)


          F. Cumulative estimated taxes                        -.178        110.906
              (in 1,000 euro)                                  (.360)


          G. Years of education                                .010          12.56
                                                               (.015)


          H. Upper secondary school or more                    .000           .87
                                                               (.002)


          I. Ever arrested for serious crime                   -.0007        .0233
                                                               (.0006)


          J. Ever prescribed mental drugs                      .001           .169
                                                               (.003)




          Observations (A-F)                                   1,286,355
          Observations (G, H)                                  971,599
          Observations (I)                                     1,393,368
          Observations (J)                                     415,157

Notes: The placebo sample is comprised of children whose parents were not on DI as of
1995. Since these parents are all subject to the new DI rules (regardless of their age), there
should be no discontinuity at the cuto in any of the child outcomes. See notes to Tables
1-7 for details on the RD estimator, the included control variables, and the child outcome
variables. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10

                                             40
                           Table 10: OLS versus IV Estimates


                                                    Independent variable: Parental DI
                                                    payments in 1996 (in 1,000 euros)


                                                              OLS                 IV


                                                       Parent age:            Parent age:
    Child outcome in 2014                            40-45          45-50        40-50


    A. Ever on DI                                   .003**      .003**          .009**
                                                     (.000)         (.000)       (.004)


    B. Cumulative days on DI                         8.6**          8.4**       37.5**
                                                      (.3)           (.3)        (14.6)


    C. Cumulative DI income                         .293**      .289**          1.256**
        (in 1,000 euro)                              (.009)         (.010)       (.522)


    D. Cumulative total benets, excl. DI           .230**      .235**           -.073
        (in 1,000 euro)                              (.007)         (.008)       (.388)


    E. Cumulative income from work                 -2.383**     -2.964**        -5.711*
        (in 1,000 euro)                              (.062)         (.080)      (2.951)


    F. Cumulative estimated taxes                   -.668**     -.933**         -1.589
        (in 1,000 euro)                              (.023)         (.032)      (1.008)


    G. Years of education                           -.052**     -.050**         -.096**
                                                     (.001)         (.001)       (.050)


    H. Upper secondary school or more               -.005**     -.005**         -.018**
                                                     (.000)         (.000)       (.007)


    I. Ever arrested for serious crime              .0009**     .0009**         .0042*
                                                    (.0000)     (.0000)         (.0024)


    J. Ever prescribed mental drugs                 .004**      .004**           .019*
                                                     (.000)         (.000)       (.011)

Notes: OLS samples include children still living at home, regardless of whether the parent
was on DI as of the reform date. The OLS samples are split into two parental age groups
to ensure the stricter DI rules for those parents under versus over the age 45 cuto do not
contribute to the estimates. See notes to Table 1 for a list of control variables and Appendix
Table A2 for means and sample sizes. For the IV estimates, the RF is scaled using the drop
in DI payments, assuming exit itself has no eect; see Tables 1-7 for the corresponding RF
estimates. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10
                                             41
    For Online Publication:

Appendix Figures and Tables

Intergenerational Spillovers in Disability Insurance


        Gordon B. Dahl and Anne C. Gielen
                                                                12




                                                                                                                                          2
                     Percent of insured receiving DI benefits




                                                                                                                                                New awards as a percent of insured
                                                                10




                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                8




                                                                                                                                                         (dashed line)
                                    (solid line)
                                                                6




                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                4




                                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                2
                                                                                Reform Date
                                                                0




                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                         1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                                                   Year


Appendix Figure A1:                                             DI Stocks and Inows as a Percentage of Insured Workers,
1968-2016.
Notes: Data come from the Dutch Employee Insurance Agency (Uitvoeringsinstituut Werkne-
mersverzekeringen), as used in Koning and Lindeboom (2015). Estimates of the number of
insured workers are used to calculate receipt and award percentages for 2014 to 2016.
                                           .1
                                           .08
                                           .06
                     Density
                                           .04
                                           .02
                                           0




                                                                     5            10             15               20           25                            30
                                                                                                      Child age
                                                                                       Parent age 40−45                Parent age 45−50



       Appendix Figure A2: Child Age as of the Reform Date of August 1993
Notes: Kernel density estimates of child age, trimmed to exclude .3 percent of the data for
visual clarity.
                                                                                                                             .24
                         13
                         12




                                                                                                                             .2
Parental DI benefits
 (in 1,000 of euros)




                                                                                                                             .16
                         11




                                                                                               Parental DI exit
                                                                                                                             .12
                         10




                                                                                                                             .08
                         9




                                                                                                                             .04
                         8
                         7




                                                                                                                             0
                               40    41    42    43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50                                       40   41   42   43    44    45     46     47   48   49   50
                                                 Age of parent at reform date                                                                     Age of parent at reform date


                                                      Appendix Figure A3: Eect of the Reform on Parents
                              Note: Graphs mirror those in Figure 1, but with 3 month age bins.


                                                                                                                             450
                   .14
                   .13




                                                                                                                             400
                                                                                               Child cumulative days on DI
                   .12




                                                                                                                             350
Child ever on DI
                   .11




                                                                                                                             300
                   .1




                                                                                                                             250
                   .09




                                                                                                                             200
                   .08




                                                                                                                             150
                   .07




                              40    41    42    43    44    45     46     47    48   49   50                                       40   41   42   43    44    45     46     47   48   49   50
                                                Age of parent at reform date                                                                      Age of parent at reform date


                                                              Appendix Figure A4: Child DI Participation
                              Note: Graphs mirror those in Figure 2, but with 3 month age bins.
                                    15




                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                        Child cumulative benefits, excluding DI

                                                                                                                                                  16
                                    13
Child cumulative DI benefits




                                                                                                                                                  15
     (in 1,000 of euros)




                                                                                                                 (in 1,000 of euros)
                                    11




                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                  13
                                    9




                                                                                                                                                  12
                                    7




                                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                  10
                                    5




                                           40   41   42   43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50                                                   40   41   42   43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50
                                                          Age of parent at reform date                                                                                 Age of parent at reform date


                                                           Appendix Figure A5: Child DI and Other Benet Receipt
                                          Note: Graphs mirror those in Figure 3, but with 3 month age bins.
                                    40




                                                                                                                                                  12
(residualized, in 1,000 of euros)




                                                                                                        (residualized, in 1,000 of euros)
                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                         Child cumulative tax payments
   Child cumulative earnings

                                    20




                                                                                                                                                  4
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                  −4
                                    −20




                                                                                                                                                  −8
                                    −40




                                                                                                                                                  −12




                                           40   41   42   43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50                                                   40   41   42   43    44    45     46    47    48   49   50
                                                          Age of parent at reform date                                                                                 Age of parent at reform date


                                                          Appendix Figure A6: Residualized Child Earnings and Taxes
                                          Note: Graphs mirror those in Figure 4, but with 3 month age bins.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .84
                           12




                                                                                                                                                               Child secondary school completion
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .82
Child years of education
                           11.75




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .78
                           11.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .76
                           11.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .74
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .72
                           11




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .7
                                   40   41   42   43    44    45                                             46        47        48        49        50                                                  40    41    42    43    44    45     46     47   48   49   50
                                                  Age of parent at reform date                                                                                                                                             Age of parent at reform date


                                                         Appendix Figure A7: Child Educational Attainment
                                   Note: Graphs mirror those in Figure 6, but with 3 month age bins.
                                                                                                           .055
                                                                   Child ever arrested for serious crime
                                                                                                           .045
                                                                                                           .035
                                                                                                           .025
                                                                                                           .015




                                                                                                                  40        41        42        43        44                               45             46    47    48    49    50
                                                                                                                                                Age of parent at reform date


                                                                                      Appendix Figure A8: Child Serious Crime
                                   Note: Graph mirrors Figure 7, but with 3 month age bins.
                                                          .3
                     Child ever prescribed mental drugs
                                                          .27
                                                          .24
                                                          .21
                                                          .18


                                                                40   41   42   43    44    45     46     47   48   49   50
                                                                               Age of parent at reform date


                                Appendix Figure A9: Child Mental Health
Note: Graph mirrors Figure 8, but with 3 month age bins.
                       Appendix Table A1: Summary Statistics



                                                           Parent age:        Parent age:
                                            Overall           40-45               45-50


A. Parents


Female                                        .27               .29                .26


Married                                       .87               .87                .87


Age (Aug 1993)                               45.17            42.58               47.36


Duration DI (months)                         88.38            85.20               91.08


Degree of disability
   15-25%                                     .10               .14                .07
   25-35%                                     .12               .14                .10
   35-45%                                     .08               .09                .08
   45-55%                                     .07               .06                .08
   55-65%                                     .02               .02                .03
   65-80%                                     .02               .02                .03
   80-100% (Full disability)                  .58               .53                .63


Pre-DI earnings (euros)                      6,529            6,249               6,766


Native Dutch                                  .91               .91                .91


Number of kids in HH                          1.71             1.87               1.58


Parent observations                         70,319            32,279             38,040


B. Children


Female                                        .44               .46                .41


Age (Aug 1993)                               15.60            13.86               17.27


Child observations                          116,356           57,028             59,328

Notes: The sample in panel A is parents between the ages of 40-50 and on DI as of the
reform date of August 1, 1993, who were still on DI in 1995, and had children living at
home around the time of the reform. The sample in panel B is the children of these parents.
A degree of disability between 0-15% does not qualify for DI benets. Variables are measured
as of January 1, 1996, unless otherwise indicated.
**p<.05, *p<.10
       Appendix Table A2: Outcome Means for OLS versus RF/IV Samples



                                                          OLS                  RF/IV
                                                         Samples              Samples


                                                     Parent age:             Parent age:
Child outcome in 2014                             40-45         45-50           40-50


A. Ever on DI                                     .060           .070            .104


B. Cumulative days on DI                           164           203             298


C. Cumulative DI income                           5.495         7.039          10.107
    (in 1,000 euro)
D. Cumulative total benets, excl. DI             9.160         10.707         13.746
    (in 1,000 euro)
E. Cumulative income from work                   347.254      442.195          371.282
    (in 1,000 euro)
F. Cumulative estimated taxes                    99.245       134.848          109.565
    (in 1,000 euro)
G. Years of education                             12.39         12.47           11.49


H. Upper secondary school or more                  .85             .87           .78


I. Ever arrested for serious crime                .0271         .0203           .0363


J. Ever prescribed mental drugs                   .171           .185            .234


Observations (A-F)                               498,378      421,731          116,356
Observations (G, H)                              387,264      287,799          79,924
Observations (I)                                 923,119      612,885          123,186
Observations (J)                                 368,372        85,202         27,218

Notes: OLS samples include children still living at home, regardless of whether the parent
was on DI as of the reform date. The RF/IV samples correspond to those used in Tables
2-7.
         Appendix Table A3: Serious and Minor Crimes by Arrest Category



A. Serious crimes
Mugging, Theft of a car, Theft of a motorcycle, Extortion, Burglary in a school,
Theft of items from a car, Burglary in a shed/garage, Murder, Vandalism of a
public building, Rape, Burglary in a sports complex, Burglary in a residence, Theft
of a bicycle, Pickpocketing, Commerical theft, Trespassing, Arson, Possession of
stolen goods, Fraud, Assault, Other public disturbance or trespass, Gun oense,
Violation of court order


B. Minor crimes
Cybercrime, Drunk driving, Sexual acts with a minor, Other trac violation,
Leaving the scene of an accident, Disorderly conduct, Miscellaneous civil oense,
Public indecency, Maltreatment, Stalking, Other sexual oense, Drug oense,
Vandalism of a car, Miscellaneous criminal oense, Disrespecting public authority,
Other violent oense, Other nancial crime, Driving with a suspended license,
Forgery, Shoplifting, Other theft or burglary, Kidnapping, Other Vandalism, Threats


Notes: These are translations of the 48 arrest categories used in the Standard Crime Classi-
cation of Statistics Netherlands. To categorize serious versus minor crime, we take everyone
who was arrested for a specic crime in 2014 (e.g., assault) and then calculate the probability
that these individuals are incarcerated in 2014 for any reason. Serious and minor crimes
are dened as an incarceration probability above or below the median across the 48 arrest
categories, respectively.
                      Appendix Table A4: Robustness Tests for Main Child Outcomes (Reduced Form Models)



                                            Cum.        Cum.        Cum.                                       Upper
                                 Ever        days         DI         other      Cum.        Cum.     Years    second.   Serious    Mental
Specication                     on DI      on DI       income     transfers   earnings     taxes    educ.     school    crime     drugs
A. Baseline                      -.011**   -47.151**    -1.579**     .092      7.178**     1.997**   .117**   .022**    -.0055**   -.026**
                                  (.004)    (13.921)     (.499)     (.379)     (2.836)      (.969)   (.050)   (.007)     (.0023)    (.013)
B. Quadratic trends              -.016**   -57.876**    -2.076**     .346      10.469**    3.120**   .130**   .026**    -.0075**   -.046**
                                  (.006)    (20.334)     (.729)     (.562)      (4.165)    (1.415)   (.073)   (.010)     (.0034)    (.018)
C. No triangular weights         -.010**   -36.897**    -1.175**     .021      5.282**     1.313     .099**   .018**    -.0042**   -.020**
                                  (.004)    (13.054)     (.469)     (.354)     (2.642)     (.908)    (.046)   (.006)     (.0022)    (.012)
D. No control variables          -.010**   -44.400**    -1.515**     .098      5.877**      1.548    .100**   .019**    -.0049**   -.028**
                                  (.004)    (13.822)     (.497)     (.385)     (3.242)     (1.117)   (.052)   (.007)     (.0024)    (.013)
E. 45 month window               -.012**   -52.179**    -1.776**     .128      8.028**     2.248**   .120**   .022**    -.0058**   -.031**
                                  (.004)    (15.094)     (.541)     (.411)     (3.084)     (1.051)   (.054)   (.007)     (.0025)    (.014)
F. 30 month window               -.018**   -69.737**    -2.440**     .264      11.077**    2.941**   .142**   .026**    -.0080**   -.044**
                                  (.005)    (18.142)     (.651)     (.495)      (3.684)    (1.254)   (.065)   (.009)     (.0031)    (.016)
G. Local linear regression       -.010**   -37.323**    -1.227**     -.019       3.923      .676      .076    .015**    -.0039**   -.022*
   bandwidth 60 months            (.004)    (12.737)     (.459)     (.345)      (3.040)    (1.029)   (.048)   (.006)     (.0022)   (.011)
H. Local linear regression       -.010**   -46.517**     -1.589      .954       6.116*      1.641    .091*    .018**    -.0048*    -.027**
   bandwidth 45 months            (.004)    (14.526)     (.543)     (.412)      (3.424)    (1.196)   (.055)   (.007)    (.0025)     (.013)
I. Local linear regression       -.016**   -67.382**    -2.338**     .308      8.993**      2.298    .147**   .025**    -.0075**   -.044*
    bandwidth 30 months           (.005)    (17.858)     (.629)     (.501)     (4.161)     (1.416)   (.067)   (.009)     (.0031)   (.016)
J. Sample of children not         -.007      -17.811      -.333      -.200       6.038      1.665    .122**    .013      .0035      -.006
    living at home               (.006)     (20.977)     (.812)     (.712)      (4.179)    (1.470)   (.066)   (.009)    (.0031)    (.007)
K. Cluster s.e.'s                -.011**   -47.151**    -1.578**     .091      7.178**     1.997**   .117**   .022**    -.0054**   -.026**
   by parental age                (.003)    (13.007)     (.513)     (.332)     (2.576)      (.792)   (.043)   (.005)     (.0019)    (.011)
L. Excluding non-natives         -.011**   -42.131**    -1.375**     .034      8.126**     2.229**   .124**   .023**    -.0040*    -.033**
                                  (.004)    (14.629)     (.521)     (.387)     (2.959)     (1.019)   (.052)   (.007)    (.0023)     (.014)
M. Excluding children whose      -.012**   -49.767**    -1.694**     .014      7.172**     1.837**   .126**   .022**    -.0059**   -.026**
   parents left DI in 1995        (.004)    (14.144)     (.506)     (.384)     (2.866)      (.977)   (.050)   (.007)     (.0024)    (.013)
Notes: See notes to Tables 1-7. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the parent level.
**p<.05, *p<.10
                  Appendix Table A5: Characteristics of Compliers



                                                          Parent age:
                                         Compliers          44.5-45.5       Dierence

A. Parents

Female                                     .208**            .226**            -.018
                                           (.016)            (.003)            (.016)

Married                                    .927**            .896**           .032**
                                           (.013)            (.002)            (.012)

Duration DI (months)                       98.697           88.943**          9.754**
                                           (2.804)           (.432)           (2.760)

Degree of disability
  15-25%                                   .100**            .086**             .014
                                           (.014)            (.002)            (.014)

  25-35%                                   .077**            .118**           -.040**
                                           (.015)            (.002)            (.015)

  35-45%                                   .166**            .094**           .072**
                                           (.014)            (.002)            (.013)

  45-55%                                   .099**            .076**            .023*
                                           (.012)            (.002)            (.012)

  55-65%                                   .035**            .026**             .010
                                           (.008)            (.001)            (.008)

  65-80%                                   .041**            .027**           .015**
                                           (.007)            (.001)            (.007)

  80-100% (Full disability)                .481**            .574**           -.093**
                                           (.020)            (.003)            (.020)

Pre-DI earnings                         6,586.082**       6,723.887**        -137.806
                                         (151.404)          (22.464)         (149.599)

Native Dutch                               .910**            .916**            -.006
                                           (.011)            (.002)            (.011)

Number of kids in HH                      2.051**           2.078**            -.027
                                           (.042)            (.006)            (.041)

B. Children

Female                                     .450**            .442**             .007
                                           (.021)            (.003)            (.021)

Age (Aug 1993)                            15.710**          15.634**            .076
                                           (.182)            (.028)            (.179)

Notes: See notes to Table A1. For details on how to calculate the complier averages, see
Borghans et al. (2014).
**p<.05, *p<.10
