                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DO CONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFERS IMPROVE ECONOMIC OUTCOMES
             IN THE NEXT GENERATION? EVIDENCE FROM MEXICO

                                        Susan W. Parker
                                           Tom Vogl

                                      Working Paper 24303
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24303


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




We are grateful to seminar participants at CIDE, El Colegio de Mexico, Georgetown, NEUDC,
Princeton, UC San Diego, and University of Maryland for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Susan W. Parker and Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Economic Outcomes in the Next Generation? Evidence
from Mexico
Susan W. Parker and Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 24303
February 2018
JEL No. I25,I38,J24,O15

                                         ABSTRACT

Conditional cash transfer programs have spread to over 80 countries in the past two decades, but
little is known about their long-term effects on the youth they target. This paper estimates the
impact of childhood exposure to the Mexican program Progresa on economic outcomes in early
adulthood by leveraging the age structure of program benefits and geographic variation in early
program penetration nationwide. The study design avoids the representativeness and attrition
issues that have plagued efforts to estimate longer-run impacts of Progresa and other similar
programs. Childhood exposure to the program improves educational attainment, geographic
mobility, labor market outcomes, and household economic outcomes in early adulthood.
Schooling impacts are similar for men and women, at roughly 1.5 years, while labor market
impacts are more pronounced for women, amounting to 30-40% of mean labor force participation
and 50% of mean labor income in pre-program cohorts. Indexes capturing household economic
impacts increase on the order of 0.2 standard deviations.


Susan W. Parker
4109 Van Munching Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
swparker@umd.edu

Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
123 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu
1     Introduction

Conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs were first introduced two decades ago and have
since spread around the world, now operating in more than 80 countries, in many cases
representing a key government strategy for reducing poverty. By linking monetary trans-
fers to children’s human capital investment, the programs aim to both alleviate current
poverty and reduce future poverty by increasing the human capital levels of children and
thus their lifetime earnings potential. One of the earliest of these programs was Mexico’s
program Progresa, which began in 1997 and is well known due to its initial randomized
evaluation, the basis for numerous published studies (Parker and Todd, 2017).1 The pro-
gram’s novelty and positive evaluation findings contributed to both a large scaleup within
Mexico and the spread of its key features to new programs around the world. CCT pro-
grams now operate throughout Latin America, in a number of poor countries in Africa and
Asia, and even in a few developed countries, including the United States.
    A number of previous studies of Progresa and other CCT programs have shown posi-
tive program impacts on the education levels of poor youth (Parker and Todd, 2017; Fizbein
and Schady, 2009; Baird et al., 2013). Nevertheless, evidence is notably lacking on whether
these increases in education translate to better economic outcomes in the next generation.
In part, the lack of evidence reflects the necessity of a relatively long follow-up for measur-
ing impacts on earnings for youth beneficiaries, and long term follow-ups of experimental
evaluations remain rare (Behrman, Parker, and Todd, 2011).
    This paper studies the long-term impacts of Progresa on the educational, labor market,
household, and demographic outcomes of its earliest beneficiaries, who were of primary
school age when the program began in 1997 and are now young adults. Following up
this group in the early stages of adulthood, we estimate the impacts in a difference-in-
difference design, comparing the early beneficiaries to a slightly older group that was too
    1 The
        program began in 1997 as Progresa (Programa de Educación, Salúd y Alimentación), was renamed
Oportunidades in 2001 at the start of the Fox presidency, and was renamed Prospera in 2013 during the Peña
Nieto presidency.

                                                    1
old at rollout to reap the program’s educational benefits, across municipalities with varying
exposure to early program rollout. Our main data source is the 10% sample of the 2010
Mexican Population Census, linked to administrative information on program enrollment
by municipality over time.
    Despite the popularity of CCTs, little evidence exists on their long-term or intergenera-
tional effects. Barham, Macours, and Maluccio et al. (2017) study a small CCT experiment
in Nicaragua, in which households were randomized to early (2000-2003) or late (2003-
2005) receipt of transfers. At ten-year follow-up, results showed some positive effects on
education (0.3 grades), off-farm work (6 percentage points), and income (15 percent) for
boys aged 9 to 12 at baseline, but the authors do not analyze data on girls, reporting that
results for them were not “easily interpretable” due to later ages of dropout. In another
related study, Barrera-Osorio, Linden, and Saavedra (2017) examine longer-term education
effects of a Colombian program that compared traditional bimonthly CCT payments with
variants that delay a portion of payments until late in the year when enrollment decisions
are made, finding larger schooling effects of the “savings” variant. They do not analyze
work outcomes. For Progresa specifically, efforts to analyze longer-run outcomes in the ex-
perimental cohort have been hampered by extremely high rates of attrition, with at least 25
percent of the cohort attriting within 10 years and over 99 percent lost within our follow-up
period (Rodríguez-Oreggia and Freije, 2012; Kugler and Rojas, 2018).2
    Relative to these studies, our paper provides the first estimates of the long-term im-
pacts of an influential and nationwide CCT program on a generation of youth who have
effectively grown up with it. Our difference-in-difference strategy is motivated by earlier
studies finding few schooling impacts on youth who were offered the program at age 15 or
later, past the critical transition between primary and secondary school (Parker and Todd,
2017). We confirm these findings in our data and thus use these older cohorts as compari-
son group. Our research design avoids the aforementioned attrition problems as well as the
   2 Theselonger-run studies using Progresa’s original evaluation sample find both positive and null results,
highlighting how high and selective attrition rates make results sensitive to methodological choices.

                                                     2
limited 1.5-year difference in program exposure in the original randomized experiment.
   Using this difference-in-difference strategy, we find that exposure to greater program
rollout before age 12 improves accumulated education, labor market outcomes, housing
characteristics, durable goods ownership, and geographic mobility. Compared with those
offered the program ’too late,’ early beneficiary men and women complete 1.4 additional
grades of schooling, 20 percent of mean educational attainment in pre-program cohorts.
Likely reflecting the benefits of this additional education, we also find large effects on labor
market outcomes. For women, childhood program exposure increases labor market partici-
pation 7-11 percentage points, more than one quarter of mean participation in pre-program
cohorts, while labor earnings rise US$30-40 per month, roughly half of mean earnings in
pre-program cohorts. Effects on male labor outcomes are less pronounced but still impor-
tant. Hours worked increase by more than three hours per week, accompanied by shifts
from agriculture to non-agriculture and from the formal to informal sectors, as well as a
positive but insignificant increase in labor earnings. Both sexes also display positive effects
on housing conditions and on ownership of durable goods, although it is not clear whether
this result reflects human capital accumulation or the direct benefits of greater parental
wealth. The estimated effects are large by any measure, particularly for women, who have
historically low status and labor force participation in program areas. Two decades after
CCT programs began, these results suggest that CCTs and their accompanying educational
gains have important economic consequences for the next generation.
   Beyond the literature on CCTs specifically, these results relate to a growing body of
work on cash transfers more generally, including those that do not condition on child in-
vestment. Debates persist on the pros and cons of conditionality (Baird et al., 2013), but
both forms of cash transfers are growing in popularity. Noting the limited evidence on
their long-term consequences, Blattman et al. (2017) call for a redoubling of efforts to learn
about the long run. In the case of unconditional transfers, long-run evidence is also thin. In
a developing country context, Araujo et al. (2017) carry out a ten-year follow-up study of


                                               3
Ecuador’s cash transfer program     in which transfers were unconditional, although some
beneficiaries mistakenly thought they were conditional     finding mixed results on educa-
tion and no significant effects on labor market outcomes. Some evidence is also available
from the historical United States, where welfare programs for mothers (Aizer, Eli, Ferrie,
and Lleras-Muney, 2016) and food stamp programs (Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and Almond,
2016) had a range of long-term benefits for individuals exposed as children.
    Our findings add much-needed evidence on the long-run impacts of a popular anti-
poverty policy. While the many studies on the short-run effects of Progresa and other CCT
programs provide much guidance to policymakers, long-term follow-up on the next gen-
eration is crucial to assessing whether the programs are achieving the second of their dual
goals of reducing poverty in future generations. The experience of the earliest beneficia-
ries of Mexico’s pioneering program bode well for the millions of other children benefiting
from CCTs around the world.



2    Program Background

Progresa began operating in small rural communities in 1997, following a macroeconomic
crisis in Mexico in 1995, and was part of a transition towards implementing targeted anti-
poverty programs and eliminating general food subsidies. It quickly grew over time and
currently covers six million families, or about one quarter of all families in Mexico. While
the program has expanded into urban areas, it remains largely rural, with about two thirds
of its household beneficiaries deriving from communities with less than 2500 inhabitants.
Figure 1 shows the aggregate numbers of households who became beneficiaries per year
since the program began. New enrollment activity was most intense during the first decade
of the program, under the presidencies of Ernesto Zedillo and Vicente Fox, with clear
troughs in presidential (2000, 2006, 2012) and midterm (2003, 2009, 2012) election years.
These troughs, which reflect an anti-vote buying policy that prohibits social program ex-
pansion in the leadup to national elections, provides a rhythm to the rollout that will be
                                             4
useful for our research design.
    The program conditions cash payments to families on children regularly attending schools
and on family members visiting health clinics for checkups. Program take up was exceed-
ingly high when the program began, with 97 percent of families who were offered the pro-
gram participating. Program rules allow students to fail each grade once, but if a student
repeats a grade twice, the schooling benefits are discontinued permanently. The program
also provides some additional subsidies for school supplies and a transfer linked to regular
visits to health clinics.3 Children and youth age 21 and younger are eligible to receive the
school subsidies.
    To illustrate the evolution of the benefit structure during the rollout period, Table 1
shows the monthly grant levels for children between the third grade and the twelfth grade
in the second semesters of 1997 and 2003 (when the exchange rate was about 8 and 11 pesos
per U.S. dollar, respectively).4 Originally, the program provided grants only for children
between the third and ninth grades, but in 2001, the grants were extended to grades 10-12.
At grades seven and above, the grants are slightly higher (by about 13 percent) for girls
than boys, a response to historically higher dropout rates among girls than among boys
after primary school.
    Specific grant amounts range in 2003 from $US9.50 (105 pesos) in the third grade of pri-
mary to about $US53 (580 pesos) for boys and $US60 (660 pesos) for girls in the third year of
senior high school (grades 10-12). By the senior year of high school, the grant amount rep-
resents about two thirds of Mexico’s minimum wage. All monetary grants are given to the
mother of the family, with the exception of scholarships for upper-secondary school, which
the youth can receive themselves subject to the mother’s authorization. The program is
means tested, with both geographic and household-level targeting. The geographic target-
ing uses aggregate census indicators to select poor rural communities based on a marginal-
   3 Since 2006, program benefits have been extended in several ways, including fixed benefits for households

with more elderly individuals (in 2006), for households with low energy consumption (in 2007), and for
households with more children under 9 (in 2010).
   4 The Mexican education system defines grades 1 through 6 as primary school (primaria), 7 through 9 as

junior high school (secundaria), and 10 to 12 as senior high school (media superior or prepatoria).
                                                     5
ity index described below. Once eligible communities are identified, Progresa officials carry
out a socio-economic survey for all households in the selected communities and then use
discriminant analysis to distinguish eligible from ineligible households using characteris-
tics such as dwelling conditions, dependency ratios, ownership of durable goods, animals
and land, and the presence of disabled individuals. Nearly all selected families enrolled
in the program in rural areas (Skoufias and Parker, 2001). Skoufias, Davis, and de la Vega
(2001) compare targeting algorithm with consumption- and geography-based alternatives
and conclude that the program performs well in targeting the poorest.
   The original, well-known evaluation of Progresa was based on an experimental pro-
gram design that randomly assigned 506 communities from 7 states to a treatment group
(320 communities) and control group (186 communities). Eligible households in treatment
communities began to receive benefits in 1998, while eligible households in control com-
munities began in 2000. This experimental evaluation generated a large number of studies
estimating short-term impacts of Progresa during the length of the experiment (Parker and
Todd, 2017). Longer-term follow-up evaluations based on the original experimental de-
sign are complicated by the small, 1.5-year difference in the duration of program exposure
between treatment and control communities.5
   Studies of education impacts during the 18-month experiment show large enrollment
effects at the transition between primary and secondary school (6th to 7th grade) (Schultz,
2004; Behrman, Sengupta, and Todd, 2005) and reductions in grade repetition in primary
school (Behrman, Sengupta, and Todd, 2005). However, few significant effects were ob-
served for youth who had 6 or more years of schooling or were older than 15 at the pro-
gram’s start. In a non-experimental study with longer follow-up, Behrman, Parker, and
Todd (2011) find that beneficiary children aged 9-12 at the program’s start accumulated
nearly a grade of additional schooling relative to a matched comparison group not re-
ceiving benefits, while older cohorts experienced much smaller effects. In short, previ-
  5 Two  additional follow-up surveys were conducted in treatment and control communities in 2003 and
2007, and a matched comparison group was added in 2003. The 2007 follow-up unfortunately suffers from
high levels of attrition.
                                                 6
ous studies of Progresa indicate large education gains for youth who had not yet reached
the primary-to-secondary transition at the start of receiving benefits. However, their older
counterparts saw no such gains, suggesting that this group—although technically eligible
for grants—was effectively too old; the offer of the program came too late to undo dropout.
This group thus offers a convenient comparison group for those offered the program at an
earlier age.
   Progresa’s school subsidies reduce the shadow wage (or relative value) of children’s
time in activities other than school but also raise income, so they have a priori ambiguous
effects on work and leisure. While the income effect tends to increase time spent in leisure,
the net effects on time spent at school and working would be respectively positive and
negative if the substitution effect dominates. Previous studies find child labor reductions
in similar age groups to those showing improvements in schooling (Skoufias and Parker,
2001). As children age, we expect the substitution effect of the program to change and
thus alter the overall impact of the program on work. As children and youth accumulate
schooling, they receive higher wage offers. Assuming diminishing marginal returns to
schooling, the marginal benefit of schooling (higher future wages) will eventually no longer
exceed the marginal cost (foregone wages and leisure time). These considerations lead us
to expect that over the longer run, our focus, the program should increase work and wages.
   School quality is lacking in the rural and isolated areas of Mexico where our study takes
places (OECD, 2013), and program critics have long pointed to the possibility that increas-
ing education levels in these areas may not raise incomes. Previous studies of program
effects on standardized achievement tests have suggested limited impacts on learning in
spite of increased schooling levels (Behrman, Parker and Todd, 2009), consistent with pos-
sible low returns to additional education. Additionally, a large proportion of the popu-
lation in rural areas is engaged in agriculture, where returns to schooling may be lower.
Nevertheless, research on school construction programs in similarly poor and rural areas
suggests large long-run benefits (Duflo 2001).


                                             7
3     Data and Method

3.1        Data

We use the 10% sample of households from the Mexican Population Census of 2010, at
which time early program beneficiaries were generally old enough to be out of school and
in the adult labor force.6 The census applied an extended questionnaire to all household
members, providing detailed information on schooling, labor market outcomes, house-
hold structure, geographic mobility, housing conditions, and durable goods ownership.
Our starting sample includes twenty cohorts of individuals, aged 20-39, although our main
empirical work restricts attention to a subset of these cohorts based on supplementary anal-
yses in the remainder of this section. To this micro-dataset, we merge administrative pro-
gram information on the cumulative number of households enrolled in Progresa by year
and by municipality, data supplied by Progresa administrative personnel.
    The census offers a range of useful outcome variables. For schooling, we analyze school-
ing level indicators as well as grades completed. For labor market outcomes, we con-
sider indicators for labor force participation, wage work, and agricultural work, as well
as weekly labor hours and monthly labor income. Due to high rates of non-attachment to
the labor force, especially among women, we measure income in levels rather than logs
and do not condition on participation. At the household level, we estimate effects on total
household monthly labor income, indices of housing conditions and durable goods own-
ership, and household composition. Each index is defined as the first principal component
of a vector of indicators relating to housing or durables ownership, standardized to have
mean 0 and standard deviation 1.7 Household composition outcomes include household
size and indicators for parental coresidence and marital status: all important for inter-
    6 We use the 2010 census rather than the 2015 intercensal survey because the latter poses more risk for
selection bias due to migration. The 2015 survey only provides municipal migration history back to 2010,
and we find large program effects on cross-municipal migration between 2005 and 2010.
   7 For the housing index, we use indicators for having a dirt floor, modern roof, flush toilet, sewage, piped

water, and electricity. For the durables index, we use indicators for same for having a car, mobile phone,
computer, washer, refrigerator, TV, and hot water heater.

                                                      8
preting the household economy results. Finally, to assess the possible role of geographic
mobility in explaining our results, we consider indicators for urban residence in 2010 and
for moving to a new municipality between 2005 and 2010.
    Progresa primarily operates in municipalities with a high or very high level of marginal-
ity (or poverty) as defined by CONAPO (the Mexican Population Council), which classi-
fies municipalities using a marginality index based on nine municipal-level socioeconomic
variables from the census.8 CONAPO assigns each municipality to one of five categories,
ranging from very low to very high marginality. Accordingly, our analysis focuses only on
municipalities with high or very high marginality in 1990, the year of the last pre-program
census. To accommodate the formation of (41) new municipalities over our sample period,
we aggregate municipalities into the smallest units with contiguous borders from 1990 to
2010, arriving at 1144 ’master’ municipalities with high or very high marginality, of a total
of 2383 ’master’ municipalities nationwide.
    The program was operating in all high and very high marginality municipalities by the
year 2000, so we measure the intensity of program penetration rather than an indicator
for any penetration.9 To measure enrollment intensity over any given period, we use di-
vide new household enrollment during that period by the number of households in the
municipality in the 2000 census.10 We call this measure the ’enrollment ratio.’



3.2    Research Design

Our identification strategy relies on two sources of variation: spatiotemporal variation in
program rollout at the municipal level and cohort variation in the age at which children
   8 The   index is the normalized first principal component of nine municipal population shares: the share
illiterate, the share with less than primary school education, the share without a toilet, the share without
electricity, the share without running water, the share with crowding (few rooms per capita), the share with
a dirt floor, the share living in communities with less than 5000 inhabitants, and the share earning less than
twice the minimum wage.
     9 Variation in the proportion of beneficiaries enrolled over time across municipalities may be due to differ-

ences in the timing of the rollout of the program at the community level or to differences in the proportion of
households in selected communities who receive the program.
   10 Results are similar if we interpolate between the 1990 and 2000 censuses for the 1997 households count.



                                                        9
in eligible households were offered the program. Our difference-in-difference estimations
interact age eligibility with administrative information on the proportion of households
receiving benefits in the municipality of residence.
   The early beneficiaries we study were the first cohort to grow up with the program:
those between ages 7 and 11 when the program began. Because this group was eligible
for the entire set of education grants beginning in the third grade of primary school, we
term this group ’fully exposed’ or ’post-program.’ Our comparison group, which we term
’not exposed’ or ’pre-program,’ includes individuals who were older than 15 when the
program began, mostly past the primary-to-secondary transition. The group aged 12-14 at
the program’s start may or may not have missed the opportunity to avoid dropout at the
primary-to-secondary transition, so it is effectively ’partially exposed.’ Because of the par-
tially exposed group’s ambiguous treatment status, we omit it from our main estimations,
but for transparency, we include it in graphical event study representations of our results.
   The ambiguity of treatment status is in fact broader than just the 12-14 cohort, owing to
high rates of grade repetition, especially among boys. The prevalence of grade repetition
is apparent in Figure A3, which uses data on sample municipalities in the 2000 census to
plot enrollment rates in each education level by age. At age 12, primary school enrollment
begins a slow decline, while secondary school enrollment begins a slow rise. Even at age 15,
an age we treat as past the primary-to-secondary transition, 16 percent of boys are enrolled
in primary school, compared to 40 percent in secondary. As such, our cohort exposure
classifications should be seen as approximate.
   Nevertheless, we expect the younger, fully exposed cohort to show greater program
impacts on education and thus also work, earnings, and other economic outcomes by early
adulthood. While education is likely to be an important mechanism, we do not attempt
to distinguish it from other potential mechanisms, such as greater parental income during
childhood. In that sense, our estimates represent the overall effect of childhood exposure
to conditional cash transfers.


                                             10
   We focus on variation in enrollment during the two main phases of rollout—1997 to
1999 and 2001 to 2005—which are separated by the election-related lull in enrollment ac-
tivity in the year 2000. Figure 2 plots the enrollment ratio against the 1990 marginality
index for the two rollout phases and shows, as expected, that enrollment intensity rises
with the level of marginality. In both phases, enrollment is most intense in high and very-
high marginality municipalities, which are to the right of the vertical line. The program is
slightly more targeted to high and very-high marginality municipalities in the first phase,
but the patterns are broadly similar.
   As shown in the Appendix, enrollment patterns in the first phase are more similar to
those in the second phase than to those after the second phase. Figure A1 and Table A1
show that, compared with new enrollment in the first two phases, new enrollment during
2006-11 is less associated with the marginality index. When we break up the marginality
index into its nine components, one striking results is that the rural population share be-
comes much less predictive of new enrollment intensity after 2005; its association with new
enrollment intensity even turns negative after conditioning on the other components of the
marginality index.11 To demonstrate changes in the geography of rollout more broadly, Fig-
ure A2 maps new enrollment ratios across municipalities in 1997-99, 2000-05, and 2006-11.
Here again, patterns are broadly similar in the first two periods, with more intense enroll-
ment in the poorer western and southern regions of Mexico. After 2005, enrollment spreads
into the wealthier northern region. The comparability of the first and second phases sup-
ports our use of municipalities with more intense enrollment activity during 2001-05 as a
control group for municipalities with more intense enrollment activity during 1997-99.



3.3    Estimation

Our identification strategy is a cohort difference-in-difference design, leveraging variation
in program exposure across cohorts and space. In the standard approach to this design,
  11 Thepost-2005 move away from rural areas also holds in our analysis sample of high and very high
marginality municipalities, as shown in Table A2.
                                                11
a researcher would regress an outcome on municipality fixed effects, cohort fixed effects,
and the interaction of early program intensity with a cohort exposure indicator. To yield
unbiased estimates of program impacts, this specification requires the assumption that in
the absence of the program, cross-cohort trends in municipalities more intensively treated
at the start of the program would be parallel to those in all other municipalities. Because
initial poverty so strongly predicts enrollment intensity, this assumption would be violated
if, for example, initially poor municipalities tended to converge toward rich municipalities
across successive cohorts. As such, we modify the standard specification to ask whether,
among municipalities with a given level of cumulative enrollment in 2005, those that saw
more of that enrollment before 2000 experienced larger gains in early beneficiary cohorts.
   In practice, this approach only requires us to include one additional covariate, the in-
teraction of later cumulative program intensity with a cohort exposure indicator. For indi-
vidual i from municipality m and birth cohort t, our main regression specification is:


                           1999                     2005
            yimt = β(enrollm    × postt ) + γ(enrollm    × postt ) + δm + ηt + ε imt          (1)


                                τ measures the cumulative enrollment ratio by the end of
where yimt is an outcome; enrollm
year τ (1999 or 2005); postt is an indicator for being younger than 12 in 1997; and δm and ηt
are municipality and cohort fixed effects, respectively. γ absorbs any cross-cohort changes
that differentially affect municipalities with more eligible households, while β captures the
effects of having greater enrollment intensity in the first rather than second phase of rollout.
   Coupled with our focus on high and very-high marginality municipalities, our inclusion
         2005 goes a long way in addressing concerns about cross-cohort convergence across
of enrollm
poorer and richer municipalities. As an additional robustness check, we also estimate a
specification that controls for interactions of postt with the components of the marginality
index:


                 1999                     2005                      1990 0
  yimt = β(enrollm    × postt ) + γ(enrollm    × postt ) + ( postt Xm   ) Ψ + δm + ηt + ε imt (2)

                                               12
       1990 is a vector of 9 municipal socioeconomic characteristics (see footnote 5) in the
where Xm
1990 census. In this regression, Ψ absorbs any differential cross-cohort changes driven by
variation in measured initial conditions. All regression tables report estimates of β using
equations (1) and (2), leaving out the partially exposed group aged 12-14 in 1997.
   To represent our results graphically, we also estimate an event study specification:


                                      1999            2005
                     yimt = β t enrollm    + γt enrollm    + δm + ηt + ε imt                (3)


We report estimates of β t in a series of event study diagrams, normalizing β t to zero for
middle cohort of the partially exposed group, aged 13 in 1997. To be consistent with our hy-
pothesized age pattern of program impacts, the event studies should show limited trends
in β t across unexposed cohorts older than 15 in 1997 and positive changes in β t for the fully
exposed cohorts aged 7-11 in 1997.
   All estimations are stratified by gender and make conservative assumptions for infer-
ence. Conventionally, researchers cluster standard errors at the municipality level in a
municipal panel analysis like ours. However, the maps in Figure A2 show that rollout
across municipalities in highly spatially correlated, raising concerns that the conventional
approach would overstate the precision of our estimates. To be conservative, we cluster at
the state level throughout the analysis.



3.4   Threats to Identification

In leveraging both the timing and intensity of rollout across municipalities, our empirical
strategy seeks to ensure unbiased estimates of program effects. While the strategy goes a
long way in achieving this goal, threats to identification arise in at least two areas: endoge-
nous enrollment intensity and endogenous migration.
   Progresa targets the poor, so municipal poverty dynamics may partially drive the tim-
ing of enrollment intensity. In this case, differential cross-cohort changes between mu-


                                               13
nicipalities with earlier and later enrollment intensity may reflect childhood exposure to
poverty rather than Progresa. We focus on broad implementation phases rather than higher-
frequency intervals partly to address this concern. Anecdotal evidence suggests that orga-
nizational idiosyncrasies unrelated to underlying poverty were important drivers of the
timing of enrollment intensity across these broad phases. Furthermore, by including inter-
actions of postt with the components of the marginality index, equation (2) eliminates bias
stemming from poverty dynamics that are related to measured initial conditions. In any
case, if residual poverty dynamics do play a role of the timing of enrollment intensity, they
likely bias us against finding positive program impacts. If Progresa tends to enter com-
munities during periods of increased poverty, then childhood exposure to the program is
associated with childhood exposure to adverse economic conditions. Based on this reason-
ing, our strategy delivers a lower bound on the long-term benefits of the Program.
   A separate threat to identification is migration. To avoid bias from endogenous internal
migration, our strategy requires that we assign program exposure to individuals according
to their pre-program municipality of residence, not the current municipality or residence at
the time of the 2010 census. The census includes questions on the municipality of residence
in 2005 as well as the state of birth, allowing us to “return” migrants to their places of
origin. Our analysis sample shows limited but nontrivial internal migration, with 7 percent
of individuals living in a different municipality in 2005 and 8 percent born in a different
state, with 11 percent meeting at least one of these conditions. As our main approach, we
use the municipality of residence in 2005 as a proxy for the municipality of residence in
1997, before the program.
   This approach goes a long way in reducing concern about endogenous adult migration,
although it still leaves some room for concern about migration before 2005, when fully ex-
posed cohorts were teenagers, and unexposed cohorts were in their early twenties. These
residual concerns are especially important for individuals who were born in a different
state from where they resided in 2005. In the Appendix, we report alternative estimations


                                             14
assigning state-level (rather than municipal) average program exposure to these individu-
als, finding broadly similar results.
    International migration poses a separate set of issues. If Progresa affected emigration
from Mexico, then individuals remaining in Mexico may be non-randomly selected, po-
tentially biasing our estimates. While no research has investigated the program’s long-
term effects on international migration, two studies on the initial years of the program
provide conflicting evidence on short-term effects, one suggesting more migration (An-
gelucci, 2013) and one suggesting less (Stecklov et al., 2005). However, both studies find
small impacts (in absolute terms), corresponding to less than a 0.5 percentage point change
in the probability of migrating to the United States (on a base of 1 percentage point).
    To assess potential selection from international migration, we test for differential changes
in municipal cohort size between municipalities more intensively treated in the first and
second phases of rollout. For all twenty cohorts in our starting sample, aged 20-39 in 2010,
we estimate municipal cohort size by summing the sampling weights within each munic-
ipal cohort cell. We then use the logarithm of these estimates as outcomes in a cell-level
version of equation (3). Appendix Figure A4 presents the resulting event study, reveal-
ing that from ages 20 and up in 1997, earlier rollout municipalities experienced differential
growth in cohort size. In contrast, the cohort size differential between earlier and later roll-
out municipalities is more stable across younger cohorts. If we estimate a cell-level version
of equation (1) replacing postt with an indicator for being 20 or older in 1997, we find that a
unit increase in our measure of earlier rollout is associated with a 15 percent larger cohort
size for the older cohorts. This result suggests that Progresa contemporaneously discour-
aged young adults from leaving program areas, perhaps because these areas became more
appealing places to start a family.12 Because of these potential migration effects among
individuals in their twenties at the start of rollout, our analysis sample only includes indi-
viduals who were younger than 20 in 1997.
  12 Consistent with the migration interpretation of the result, the differential increase in cohort size is even
larger, 17 percent, if we omit internal migrants from the municipal cohort size estimates.

                                                       15
    Additional insight on the migration issue can be gleaned from the census’s questions on
international migration, which asked household heads to list all former household mem-
bers who left for the United States during the past five years but who have not yet returned
to Mexico. These data indicate that, in our age groups, international migrants comprised
2 percent of the total population for women and 7 percent for men. These figures do not
include migrants who left between 1997 and 2005, but they make clear that our impact
estimates are based on the overwhelming majority of young adults who grew up in ben-
eficiary areas. They also make clear that international migration is much more prevalent
among men than among women, perhaps implying that our female results may be less
subject to selection concerns than our male results.



4     Results

4.1   Descriptive Statistics

Based on the cohort size results in the previous section, we restrict our sample to individu-
als who were less than 20 years old in 1997, leaving an analysis sample of 20-32 years olds
in 2010. To clarify our sample and study design, Figure 3 summarizes sample inclusion
and program exposure across cohorts. We omit individuals under 20 in 2010 (7 in 1997)
and over 20 in 1997 (33 in 2010). The former group is not old enough for the study of
adult economic outcomes, while the latter group shows evidence of a (negative) migration
response to early program exposure. Individuals 11 and under in 1997 are fully exposed,
while those 15 and over are unexposed, and those aged 12-14 are partially exposed. As de-
scribed in Section 3.2, estimations of equations (1) and (2) omit the partially exposed group,
while event study estimations of equation (3) use all 13 birth cohorts.
    Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the unexposed (pre-program) and fully exposed
(post-program) groups. The outcomes of the unexposed group provide a base from which
to measure the impact estimates below. Such a comparison works especially well for edu-

                                             16
cation, which is effectively fixed over the age range we study, but is slightly more complex
for outcomes with lifecycle profiles, like earnings. Nonetheless, we use unexposed group
averages as a basis for comparison throughout our discussion of the impact estimates.
   As shown in Table 2, the average individual in our sample is from a municipality where
Progresa had enrolled roughly 3 in 10 households by 1999 and 6 in 10 households by 2005.
Average educational attainment ranges from 6 to 9 grades, with younger cohorts outper-
forming older cohorts, a pattern more pronounced for women than for men. Geographic
mobility does not appear high. 5% of women and 10% of men migrated across municipal
borders in the previous 5 years, and parental coresidence is not uncommon. Coresidence
is higher in younger cohorts, which may partly explain the same pattern in household
monthly labor income. But surprisingly, housing conditions and durable goods ownership
do not vary substantially across cohorts.
   Labor market outcomes differ substantially by both cohort and gender. Among men,
labor force participation is high and rises with age, from 0.76 for the younger cohorts to 0.87
for the older cohorts, with concomitant gains in monthly labor income, from 1822 pesos to
2429 pesos. In contrast, women’s participation and income are lower and show less change
across cohorts. Approximately one quarter of women work, and they earn between 600
and 800 pesos per month on average.13 About 40 percent of men (unconditional) work in
agriculture jobs, compared with 3 percent of women.
   Sample size is another important source of difference between men and women. The
male sample is approximately 15 percent smaller than the female sample, likely reflecting
two phenomena. One of them is migration; as discussed in Section 3.4, men are more
likely than women to emigrate from Mexico. The other is mortality; male life expectancy
in Mexico declined in Mexico between 2005 and 2010, driven in large part by a rise in
homicide mortality in the age group we study (Aburto et al., 2016). Either of these margins
may respond to Progresa exposure, so the difference in sample sizes reinforces the notion
that concerns about selection bias are more applicable to males than females.
 13 In   US dollars, average monthly labor income was about $200 for men and about $55 for women.
                                                    17
4.2   Event Studies

To present our identifying variation most transparently, we begin by reporting event study
estimates based on equation (3) in Figures 4-6. The figures plot the estimated coefficients on
interactions between cohort indicators and the proportion of households enrolled between
1997 and 1999, along with 95 percent confidence intervals. The coefficient is normalized to
zero for the middle cohort of the partially exposed group, aged 13 in 1997.
   Figure 4 shows event study graphs for education, showing clear evidence of Progresa-
related gains. We include four separate measures of education: completed grades, the
proportion with some secondary school completed, the proportion with some high school
completed, and the proportion with some college completed. Beginning with grades of
completed schooling, the estimated coefficients rise with program exposure for both men
and women aged 7-11 in 1997, consistent with positive program impacts on education.
The partially exposed group, aged 12-14 in 1997, displays smaller but still positive gains
over the fully exposed group, aged 15 and over in 1997. Additionally, the coefficients are
relatively flat across fully exposed cohorts, supporting a lack of differential pre-program
trends between municipalities with earlier and later enrollment intensity. For both genders,
the event study graphs for the proportion with some secondary school and some high
school show similar patterns, with the largest impacts for the fully exposed group and
smaller impacts for the partially exposed group, as well as little evidence of pre-program
trends in the unexposed group. In the final panel of Figure 4, the event study coefficients
for some college are completely flat across all cohorts, suggesting that childhood exposure
to Progresa does not raise college attendance.
   Figure 5 presents similar event study graphs for six (unconditional) labor market out-
comes: labor market participation, participation in paid and agricultural work, hours, job-
related health insurance, and labor earnings. Turning first to women, graphs for all labor
market outcomes except agricultural work show gains for post-program cohorts in earlier
rollout municipalities, although the individual coefficients are imprecisely estimated. Coef-

                                             18
ficients are positive for the fully exposed group, generally decline for the partially exposed
group, and stay small for the unexposed group. Coefficients for agricultural work are es-
sentially constant across cohorts, suggesting little effect of Progresa on participation in agri-
cultural work for women: unsurprising, given that only 3 percent of women participate in
that sector. For men, the event studies for labor market outcomes are noisier for participa-
tion in any work and paid work, showing no clear evidence of effects on these outcomes.
Other labor market outcomes               including hours, agricultural work, and income                     show
similar (but still less precise) patterns as education. Agricultural work declines, hours in-
crease, and income increases.14 Overall, Figure 5 suggests meaningful impacts on labor
market outcomes, but estimates are imprecise for individual birth cohorts.
    Do these suggestive impacts translate to changes in living standards and living arrange-
ments? Figure 6 provides event study graphs for household and demographic outcomes,
including total household labor income, housing conditions, durable goods, parental cores-
idence, marital status, household size, cross-municipal migration, and urban residence. For
the household economy, estimates are noisy for household labor income but show improve-
ments in housing conditions and durable goods for fully exposed cohorts in earlier rollout
municipalities. This greater household wealth could reflect the greater earnings potential
of early beneficiaries, the greater wealth of their parents (either from coresidence or inter
vivos transfers), or changes in living arrangements that raise household resources. Thus,
the analyses of living arrangements help shed light on the household economy results.
Marriage and household size show no clear effects for either sex, while parental cores-
idence if anything declines with childhood program exposure for men, suggesting that
changes in living arrangements do not explain the improvement in household economic
outcomes.
    Geographic mobility may be an important channel for program impacts on labor mar-
ket outcomes, so the final two panels of Figure 6 report event studies for cross-municipal
  14 Due to the positive coefficient for the cohort aged 18 in 1997, it is difficult to distinguish a program effect
on agricultural work from pre-existing trends.

                                                        19
migration and urban residence. Though imprecise, the graphs suggest positive effects on
both outcomes, implying a possible role for migration from depressed rural areas to more
economically vibrant urban areas.



4.3     Impact Estimates

Wide confidence intervals on the cohort-specific coefficients hinder the conclusions we can
draw from the event studies. By pooling cohorts into two groups, estimates of equations
(1) and (2) can help shed light on the overall significance of the labor market and household
economy impacts. Tables 3-5 present these estimates, the main difference-in-difference re-
sults of the paper. For each outcome we present four results: two specifications, one with
marginality component interactions and one without, separately for men and women. For
brevity, we report only the impact coefficients, β in equations (1) and (2).


4.3.1   Educational Outcomes

Starting with education, Table 3 reveals that receiving the offer of the program before the
critical primary-to-secondary transition has large, positive effects on completed years of
education. The estimated coefficients indicate about 1.4 years of additional schooling for
both men and women. Compared to the average education of the unexposed group, 7 years
for men and 6.6 for women, this effect corresponds to 20 percent of baseline schooling for
men and 21 percent for women.
   Which schooling levels account for these increases? For both men and women, Table
3 shows significant effects on the probability of accumulating some secondary school and
some high school. The secondary school impacts are 30 percentage points for women and
18 percentage points for men: enormous when compared to secondary schooling rates in
the unexposed group (45 percent among men, 39 percent among women). For high school,
the effects are no less impressive. From a baseline of 18 percent among unexposed men and
16 percent among unexposed women, childhood exposure to Progresa raises the probabil-

                                              20
ity of completing some high school 10-15 percentage points for both sexes. The secondary
and high school impacts range from 40 to 70 percent of baseline rates. All of the aforemen-
tioned effects are significant at the 1 percent level. In contrast, we find no significant effects
on college enrollment, although the coefficients for men are positive. Overall, the esti-
mated education impacts represent remarkable increases in educational attainment among
children who grow up with Progresa.


4.3.2   Labor Market Outcomes

We now turn to the long-run impacts of Progresa on labor market outcomes. The large
increases in education documented in Table 3 may translate to improved outcomes in the
labor market as the young adults in our sample enter the workforce. As discussed pre-
viously, while increased education is likely to be the principal vehicle for labor market
effects, other mechanisms may also be at work. For example, due to program transfers,
early beneficiaries may have consumed a higher quality diet in childhood. Our research
design cannot isolate these mechanisms, allowing us only to observe the overall effects of
being in the exposed group in an earlier-rollout municipality.
   Consistent with the large impact on female education relative to baseline, Table 4 reveals
that Progresa had equally impressive effects on female labor market outcomes. Against a
baseline participation rate of 26 percent for the unexposed cohort, program impacts on la-
bor force participation range from 7 to 11 percentage points. Virtually all of this impact is
driven by increases in paid work, which also increases 7-11 percentage points compared
with a baseline rate of 15 percent. Progresa also raises hours worked and labor earnings.
Unconditional labor supply increases by 4 to 6 hours per week on average, from a base of 10
hours for unexposed women. Affiliation with the social security health insurance system,
a measure of formal sector attachment, increases by a few percentage points, but insignif-
icantly. Program impacts on monthly labor market earnings range from 360 to 420 pesos,
from a base of 750 pesos. For these outcomes, estimates based on equation (1)        without the

                                               21
marginality component interactions            are all significant at the 10 percent level and some-
times significant at the 5 percent level, while estimates based on equation (2)                 with the
interactions      are significant at the 5 percent level.
   Table 4 also demonstrates some labor market effects for men. While the probability
of working or receiving a wage for men does not change significantly (87 percent of the
unexposed cohort works), we observe large reductions in agricultural work, increases in
hours worked, and increases in formal sector attachment. Hours worked rise on the order
of 3-4 per week, compared to an average of 39 in the unexposed group, while agricultural
employment declines 10-12 percentage points against a base of 43 percent, and job-related
health insurance rises 9-10 percentage points on a base of 15 percent.15 In the specifica-
tion with marginality component interactions, both results are significant at the 5 percent
level; without the interactions, the agriculture result is significant at 5 percent, while the
labor supply result is significant at 10 percent. Effects on labor earnings are insignificant,
although the coefficients are positive and larger than those for women. The larger standard
errors for men reflect their higher dispersion of incomes.
   To what extent can the earnings results be attributed to changes in labor force partici-
pation? Figure 7 plots effects on the complementary cumulative distribution of earnings
for each sex separately. For a series of thresholds from 0 to 5000 pesos per month (in in-
crements of 100), we estimate versions of equations (1) and (2) in which the dependent
variable is an indicator for earnings exceeding the threshold. Consistent with an important
role for female labor force participation, the results reveal that the largest change in the
female earnings distribution is at the bottom: a shift from zero to positive earnings. For
men, the largest shift in mass occurs more centrally in the distribution, although none of
the estimated effects are statistically significant.
   An increase in labor supply           on the extensive margin, for women           plays a clear role
in the labor market effects documented in Table 4. But to what extent do labor market out-
comes improve conditional on participation? An analysis of this issue is fraught with selec-
  15 However,   the event study for agricultural employment showed some ambiguity on pre-existing trends.
                                                    22
tion concerns, especially for women, but Table A3 repeats the analysis in Table 4 restricting
the sample to workers. Results point to effects of the same sign as the unconditional effects,
although significance levels are mixed. Conditional on participation, men see significant
increases in paid work, decreases in agricultural work, and increases in weekly hours; the
labor income coefficients are positive and of a similar magnitude to those in Table 4, but
they are insignificant. Women see significant increases in paid work, marginally significant
increases in labor income, and insignificant increases in hours.
   To summarize this section and the last, in a context of low female labor force partic-
ipation and lagging female education, Progresa has led to striking growth in both areas
for young adult women. Male education has increased by similar amounts, accompanied
by significant but proportionately more modest effects on labor supply and sectoral affili-
ation. Estimated effects on labor income are positive for both sexes but statistically signif-
icant only for women. Both the mean and the dispersion of earnings rise steeply with age
and experience early in the lifecycle, so these effects will likely grow as Progresa’s early
beneficiaries approach middle age. Additionally, productivity losses from lost labor mar-
ket experience due to obtaining more education will likely fade over time. In fact, about
10% of our sample remains in school, so further work and education impacts may become
apparent once these remaining youth finish school.


4.3.3   Household and Demographic Outcomes

A key question is whether Progresa’s apparent labor market benefits translate to higher
consumption, which bears a more direct link to welfare. Although the census does not di-
rectly measure consumption, the housing quality and durable goods indices offer proxies
based on a subset of the consumption basket. However, any impacts on these household-
level economic outcomes are inter-related with how the program affects marriage, living ar-
rangements, and total resources available to the household, so we also analyze total house-
hold labor income, parental coresidence, household size, and marital status. Estimated

                                             23
impacts on these outcomes appear in Table 5.
   Table 5 shows positive impacts on household housing quality and durable goods own-
ership for both sexes         significant at the 5 percent level in all specifications           as well as
positive but insignificant coefficients for total household labor income. Housing condi-
tions improve by 0.2-0.3 standard deviations, while durable goods ownership increases by
0.1-0.2 standard deviations. As the event studies in Figure 6 suggested, the data show little
effect on marriage or household size but a marginally significant decline in parental cores-
idence among men.16 The decline in parental coresidence presumably reduces household
wealth, so the effects on housing conditions and durable goods may be a lower bound
for men. Importantly, however, parents who received program benefits for a longer time
may transfer some of their accumulated wealth to their children, so the increased house-
hold economic status do not necessarily directly reflect the labor market improvements we
observe in our sample. This caveat is especially germane because over half of the fully
exposed group continues to live with at least one parent.
   A related question is whether childhood program exposure alters spousal characteris-
tics. Marriage rates are still low in our younger cohorts, around one-half, so any analysis
of spousal characteristics is subject to some concern about selection into marriage, even if
the program did not affect the risk of marriage on average. Nevertheless, Appendix Table
A4 uses data on married individuals to assess effects on spousal age, education, labor force
participation, and labor income. Average spousal education increases by roughly 1 grade
for both sexes. Spousal age effects diverge by sex, however, with suggestive (marginally
significant) evidence that the average age of wives rises by 1 year and the average age
of husbands declines by 0.25-0.75 years. We observe no significant effects on labor force
participation or labor income.
   The final two rows of Table 5 examine a separate demographic phenomenon that may
be relevant to understanding Progresa’s labor market effects: migration. Women show con-
sistently significant increases in cross-municipal migration                on the order of 10 percentage
 16 One   of the coefficients for household size is positive and significant for men, however.
                                                       24
points in the previous 5 years, twice the migration rate in the unexposed group                          and in
urban residence        on the order of 7-13 percentage points, more than one-fifth of the urban
share in the unexposed group. These results suggest that part of the benefit women enjoy
from childhood program exposure derives from moving to opportunity. As elsewhere in
the analysis, coefficients for the migration outcomes are positive but insignificant for men.
    Taken together, Table 6 points to positive effects on household economic status for both
men and women, which cannot be explained by changes in living arrangements. While
Progresa did not affect the probability of being married, is does appear to have altered
spousal characteristics in some dimensions, most notably by increasing the average educa-
tion among both husbands and wives. Part of the program’s effect on economic outcomes
may be driven by migration, especially for women.



4.4       Robustness and Falsification Checks

Throughout the analysis, we have reported estimations with and without marginality com-
ponent interactions to give a sense of their robustness. Overall, the results are similar
with and without these additional covariates, reducing concerns that our difference-in-
difference results are spurious. For added evidence on this issue, this section performs two
additional checks on our research design.
    The first check involves the way we assign program exposure to migrants. So far, our
strategy has been to use the municipality of residence in 2005. However, some individu-
als in our sample were born in a different state from where they lived in 2005, and where
these migrants resided in the late 1990s is unclear. As an alternative to our main strategy,
we assign them state-level enrollment ratios based on their states of birth. It is not pos-
sible to determine whether these individuals were born in high or very high marginality
municipalities (an inclusion criterion for our sample), so we restrict to states of birth with
higher marginality.17 The state-level assignment rule for out-of-state migrants also makes
  17 We define higher marginality states as either (1) having at least 10 percent of the state’s population living
in high or very high marginality municipalities or (2) having an average marginality index that exceeds the
                                                       25
municipality fixed effects impossible, so we instead include the main effects of cumulative
enrollment in 1999 and 2005. As reported in Appendix Table A5, this alternative approach
to dealing with migrants if anything increases the magnitude and significance of our re-
sults.
    The second check is a falsification exercise, applying our research design in a dataset
that should show no program effects. We do so using the 1990 census, 20 years before our
main dataset was collected and 7 years before the start of Progresa. We assign program
exposure based on municipality of residence and age in 1977, which preceded our main
cohort classification year by 20 years. Carrying out this exercise for 10 outcomes for each
gender, we find 1 significant coefficient out of 20 estimated, and it is of the wrong sign: an
increase in agricultural work for men. The 1990 results suggest that our 2010 findings do
not reflect longstanding differential trends between earlier and later rollout municipalities.



5    Conclusions

Conditional cash transfer programs began two decades ago, transforming anti-poverty pol-
icy around the world. Their linkage of payments to human capital investment had the dual
goals of alleviating current poverty and reducing poverty in the next generation. While pre-
vious studies have found contemporaneous education and health benefits for children from
beneficiary households, little research has effectively addressed whether these changes im-
prove the lives of these children when they reach adulthood. Whether the benefits of CCTs
flow intergenerationally has remained an open question.
    This paper provides new evidence that the intergenerational benefits of CCTs may be as
large as or larger than the current poverty effects. We estimate the long-term effects of the
Mexican program Progresa on the educational, labor market, household, and demographic
outcomes of young adults who effectively grew up with the program. The results show
large effects on the next generation’s completed education, work, earnings, and household
municipal threshold for high/very-high status. These definitions lead to similar results.
                                                     26
economic status, particularly for women. Before Progresa, women’s labor force participa-
tion was extremely low in its original communities, as was their status in the household
(Attanasio and Lechene, 2002). Relative to average outcomes in pre-program cohorts, the
estimated effects on female labor force participation exceed one-quarter, and the estimated
effects on female labor income exceed one-half. Women also experience large increases in
urban residence and cross-municipal migration, suggesting that geographic mobility may
play a role in these impacts. Men exhibit similar education effects but more nuanced labor
market effects. While labor income impacts are insignificant (albeit positive) for men, we
find significant increases in labor supply and significant decreases in agricultural work.
For both sexes, housing conditions and durable goods ownership rise, although it is un-
clear whether these results reflect greater human capital or greater parental wealth.
   These results are highly encouraging for the long-term prognosis of children from house-
holds receiving CCTs. Nevertheless, further work is needed on the issue, including long-
term follow-up studies on other countries’ CCT programs. For Progresa, further studies
following youth beneficiaries past their early twenties would be useful, although the diffi-
culty of tracking and the small size of the affected group in the original randomized eval-
uation seem likely to complicate such efforts. Incorporating migrants to the United States
would also be an important area for future research.
   Our analysis does not directly speak to the debate over whether cash transfers to poor
families should be conditional (Baird et al. 2013). At the same time, for conditional transfers
to be preferable to unconditional transfers, they must at a minimum improve the lives
of children, the sole targets of conditionality. Short-run benefits like increases in school
enrollment do not on their own meet this standard, unless one views enrollment as having
intrinsic rather than instrumental value. As a result, our evidence of long-run benefits to
childhood beneficiaries provide a necessary, though not sufficient, input to policymakers
involved in the design of anti-poverty programs.




                                              27
References

Angelucci, M. 2015. “Migration and Financial Constraints: Evidence from Mexico.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 97(1): 224-228.

Aburto, J.M., H. Beltrán-Sánchez, V.M. García-Guerrero, and V. Canudas-Romo. 2016.
“Homicides in Mexico Reversed Life Expectancy Gains for Men and Slowed Them for
Women, 2000–10.” Health Affairs 35(1): 88-95.

Aizer, A., S. Eli, J. Ferrie, and A. Lleras-Muney. 2016. “The Long-Run Impact of Cash
Transfers to Poor Families.” American Economic Review 106(4): 935-971.

Araujo, M. Caridad, M. Bosch, and N. Schady. 2017. “Can Cash Transfers Help Households
Escape an Inter-Generational Poverty Trap?” In C.B. Barrett, M.R. Carter, and J.P. Chavas,
eds., The Economics of Asset Accumulation and Poverty Traps. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Attanasio, O.P., and V. Lechene. (2002). “Tests of Income Pooling in Household Decisions.”
Review of Economic Dynamics 5: 720-48.

Baird, S., F.H.G. Ferrerira, B. Ozler, and M. Woolcock. 2013. “Relative Effectiveness of Con-
ditional and Unconditional Cash Transfers for Schooling Outcomes in Developing Coun-
tries: A Systematic Review.” Campbell Systematic Reviews 2013(8).

Barham, T., K. Macours, and J.A. Maluccio. 2017. “Are Conditional Cash Transfers Fulfill-
ing Their Promise? Schooling,Learning, and Earnings After 10 Years.” Mimeo, Paris School
of Economics.

Barrera-Osorio, F., L.L. Linden, and Juan Saavedra. 2017. “Medium- and Long-term Ed-
ucational Consequences of Alternative Conditional Cash Transfer Designs: Experimental
Evidence from Colombia.” NBER Working Paper 23275.

Behrman, J.R., P. Sengupta, and P.E. Todd. 2005. “Progressing through PROGRESA: An
Impact Assessment of a School Subsidy Experiment.” Economic Development and Cultural
Change 54: 237-276.

Behrman, J.R., S.W. Parker and P.E. Todd. 2009. “Medium-Term Impacts of the Oportu-
nidades Conditional Cash Transfer Program on Rural Youth in Mexico.” In S. Klasen and
F. Nowak-Lehmann, eds., Poverty, Inequality, and Policy in Latin America. Cambridge, Mas-
sachussets: MIT Press, pp. 219–270.

Behrman, J.R., S.W. Parker and P.E. Todd. 2011. Do Conditional Cash Transfers for School-
ing Generate Lasting Benefits? A Five-Year Follow-up of PROGRESA/Oportunidades.”
Journal of Human Resources 46(1): 93-122.

Blattman, C., M. Faye, D. Karlan, P. Niehaus, and C. Udry. 2017. “Cash as Capital.” Stanford
Social Innovation Review Summer.
                                             28
Bobonis, G.J. 2011. “The Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers on Marriage and Divorce.”
Economic Development and Cultural Change 59(2): 281-312.

Duflo, E. 2001. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment.” American Economic Review 91(4):
795-813.

Fiszbein, A., and N.R. Schady. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future
Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hoynes, H., D.W. Schanzenbach, and D. Almond. 2016. “Long-Run Impacts of Childhood
Access to the Safety Net. American Economic Review 106(4): 903-934.

Kugler, A., and I. Rojas. 2018. “Do CCTs Improve Employment and Earnings in the Very
Long-Term? Evidence from Mexico.” NBER Working Paper 24248.

OECD. 2013. PISA In Focus: What Makes Urban Schools Different. Paris: Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development.

Parker, S., and P. Todd. 2017. “Conditional Cash Transfers: The Case of Progresa/ Oportu-
nidades.” Journal of Economic Literature.

Rendall, M., and S. Parker. 2014. “Two Decades of Negative Educational Selectivity of
Mexican Migrants to the United States.” Population and Development Review 40(3): 421-446.

Rodríguez-Oreggia, E., and S. Freije. 2012. “Long Term Impact of a Cash-Transfers Program
on Labor Outcomes of the Rural Youth in Mexico.” CID Working Paper 230.

Schultz, T.P. 2004. “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating a Mexican Strategy for Re-
ducing Poverty.” Journal of Development Economics 74(1): 199-250.

Stecklov, G., P. Winters, M. Stampini, and B.Davis. 2005. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers
Influence Migration? A Study Using Experimental Data from the Mexican PROGRESA
Program.” Demography 42: 769-790.




                                            29
                                                                    
                              Figure  1:  Number  of  New  Households  Enrolled  Per  Year,  Nationwide  
                             800




                                                     Zedillo             Fox                 Calderón
             Households enrolled (in 1000s)
              200        400 0         600




                                              1997             2000   2003            2006   2009           2012
                                                                               Year
                                                                                                                      
Note:  Presidential  elections  took  place  in  2000,  2006,  and  2012;  midterm  elections  took  place  in  1997,  2003,  
and  2009.                                          




                                                                             30  
 Figure  2:  Municipal  Economic  Conditions  and  New  Enrollment  Intensity,  1997-­‐‑99  vs.  2000-­‐‑05  


                                                                         Cutoff for marginal classification
                         .5




                                                                         1999-97
                                  .4
              New enrollment ratio
                         .3




                                                                                                                            Density
                                                                                       2000-05
            .1    .2




                                                                                                                  0 .2 .4
                         0




                                                                                       Histogram




                                       -3   -2        -1          0                1               2          3
                                                           Marginality Index
                                                                                                                                        
Note:  The  new  enrollment  ratio  is  the  count  of  new  households  enrolled  divided  by  the  total  number  of  
households  in  the  municipality  in  the  2000  census.  The  marginalization  index  is  defined  (using  1990  
census  data)  by  the  Mexican  government  as  the  normalized  first  principal  component  of  nine  municipal  
population  shares:  the  share  illiterate,  the  share  with  less  than  primary  school  education,  the  share  
without  a  toilet,  the  share  without  electricity,  the  share  without  running  water,  the  share  with  crowding  
as  measured  by  number  of  rooms  divided  by  household  size,  the  share  with  a  dirt  floor,  the  share  living  
in  communities  with  less  than  5000  inhabitants,  and  the  share  earning  less  than  twice  the  minimum  wage.  
                                                   




                                                                  31  
                                       Figure  3:  Cohort  Exposure  Timeline  
                                                              
                        20                       24      Age in 2010       28                       33

                        7                         11     Age in 1997       15                      19
     Too young - NILF                                                                                 Too old - migration
                        Post-program: fully exposed    Partially exposed    Pre-program: non-exposed
                                                                                                                              
                                        




                                                             32  
                                                                           Figure  4:  Event  Study  Graphs,  Education  
                                                                                                    
                                                         A.  Grades  completed                                                                                                                          B.  Some  secondary    
                                              Men                                                              Women                                                                     Men                                                         Women
                  4




                                                                                     4




                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .4
                  2




                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .2
      Event study coefficient




                                                                         Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Event study coefficient
                0




                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.2
                  -2




                                                                                     -2




                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.4
                  -4




                                                                                     -4




                                  7   10       13        16       19                                 7   10       13        16        19                                    7    10       13        16     19                              7   10       13        16   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                           Age in 1997                                                        Age in 1997                                                             Age in 1997                                                   Age in 1997



                                                                       C.  Some  high                                                                                                                       D.  Some  college  
                                              Men                                                               Women                                                                    Men                                                         Women
                                                                                                                                                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .4
                     .4




                                                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .2
        Event study coefficient




                                                                           Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                  Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Event study coefficient
                         .2




                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
           0




                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                               -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.2
                     -.2




                                                                                        -.2
                     -.4




                                                                                        -.4




                                                                                                                                                               -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.4




                                  7   10       13        16       19                                 7   10       13        16        19                                    7    10       13        16     19                              7   10       13        16   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                           Age in 1997                                                        Age in 1997                                                             Age in 1997                                                   Age in 1997



                                                                                                                                             
Note:  Coefficients  on  interactions  of  cohort  indicators  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  1999.  The  
interaction  for  the  cohort  aged  13  in  1997  is  omitted.  Capped  spikes  represent  95%  confidence  intervals  based  
on  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  include  cohort  fixed  effects,  municipality  fixed  
effects,  and  interactions  of  cohort  indicators  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  2005.                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                       33  
                                                           Figure  5:  Event  Study  Graphs,  Labor  Market  Outcomes  
                                                                                           
                                                                A.  Working                                                                                                                 B.  Working  for  a  wage  
                                                Men                                                           Women                                                                Men                                                        Women
                    .4




                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2
                              .2




                                                                                               .2
      Event study coefficient




                                                                       Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                          Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Event study coefficient
                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
       0




                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                      -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.2
                    -.2




                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.4
                                    7   10       13        16     19                                7   10       13        16        19                             7      10       13        16   19                              7   10       13        16   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                             Age in 1997                                                     Age in 1997                                                        Age in 1997                                                 Age in 1997



                                                   C.  Working  in  agriculture                                                                                                             D.  Weekly  labor  hours  
                                                Men                                                           Women                                                                Men                                                       Women

                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                        .4




                                                                                       .4
                        .2




                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
          Event study coefficient




                                                                         Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                          Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Event study coefficient
                      0




                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                        -.2




                                                                                       -.2




                                                                                                                                                      -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -10
                        -.4




                                                                                       -.4




                                                                                                                                                      -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -20



                                    7   10       13        16     19                                7   10       13        16        19                             7      10       13        16   19                              7   10       13        16   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                             Age in 1997                                                     Age in 1997                                                        Age in 1997                                                 Age in 1997



                                                 E.  Health  Insurance  from  Job                                                                                                         F.  Monthly  labor  earnings  (pesos)  
                                                Men                                                           Women                                                                Men                                                        Women
                                                                                                                                                      4000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4000
                    .4




                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                      2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                    .2




                                                                                     .2
      Event study coefficient




                                                                       Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                          Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Event study coefficient
                0




                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                      -2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2000
                    -.2




                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                      -4000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -4000
                    -.4




                                                                                     -.4




                                    7   10       13        16     19                                7   10       13        16        19                             7      10       13        16   19                              7   10       13        16   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                             Age in 1997                                                     Age in 1997                                                        Age in 1997                                                 Age in 1997



  
Note:  Coefficients  on  interactions  of  cohort  indicators  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  1999.  The  
interaction  for  the  cohort  aged  13  in  1997  is  omitted.  Capped  spikes  represent  95%  confidence  intervals  
based  on  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  include  cohort  fixed  effects,  
municipality  fixed  effects,  and  interactions  of  cohort  indicators  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  
2005.                                           



                                                                                                                                      34  
                                                        Figure  6:  Event  Study  Graphs,  Household  and  Demographic  Outcomes  
                                  A.  Household  monthly  labor  income                                                                                                                              B.  Index  of  housing  conditions  
                                                                   Men                                                          Women                                                                                           Men                                                      Women




                                                                                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                  5000




                                                                                                      5000




                                                                                                                                                                                                .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                                                                                                   Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Event study coefficient
                     Event study coefficient




                                                                                          Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                              0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.5
                                  -5000




                                                                                                      -5000




                                                                                                                                                                                                -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                7        10         13        16     19                               7   10       13        16    19                                                            7    10        13        16   19                              7   10       13        16   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                Age in 1997                                                    Age in 1997                                                                                  Age in 1997                                                 Age in 1997



                                                                     C.  Index  of  durable  goods                                                                                                                                   D.  Living  with  parents  
                                                                   Men                                                           Women                                                                                         Men                                                       Women




                                                                                                                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .4
                               1




                                                                                                        1
                               .5




                                                                                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                 Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Event study coefficient
                   Event study coefficient




                                                                                           Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                             0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                             -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.2
                               -.5




                                                                                                        -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                             -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.4
                               -1




                                                                                                        -1




                                                7        10         13        16     19                               7   10       13        16    19                                                        7       10         13        16   19                              7   10       13        16   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                Age in 1997                                                    Age in 1997                                                                                  Age in 1997                                                 Age in 1997



                                                                                   E.  Married                                                                                                                                             F.  Household  size  
                                                                   Men                                                           Women                                                                                         Men                                                        Women
                                                                                                                                                                                       3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                   .3




                                                                                                         .3
                                   .2




                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                      Event study coefficient




                                                                                            Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                           Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Event study coefficient
                                        .1




                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                           0




                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                   -.1




                                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                       -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                   -.2




                                                                                                         -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                       -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -2




                                                    7     10        13        16     19                               7   10       13        16    19
                                                                Age in 1997                                                    Age in 1997                                                                   7       10         13        16   19                              7   10       13        16    19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Age in 1997                                                 Age in 1997



                                                    E.  New  municipality  past  5  years                                                                                                                                                F.  Urban  residence  
                                                                   Men                                                           Women                                                                                         Men                                                       Women
                                                                                                                                                                                          .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
                            .4




                                                                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                            .2




                                                                                                        .2
                Event study coefficient




                                                                                           Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                              Event study coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Event study coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                         0




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                          -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.2
                            -.2




                                                                                                        -.2
                            -.4




                                                                                                        -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                          -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.4




                                                7        10         13        16     19                               7   10       13         16    19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                             7       10         13        16   19                              7   10       13        16   19
                                                                Age in 1997                                                    Age in 1997                                                                                  Age in 1997                                                 Age in 1997



Note:  Coefficients  on  interactions  of  cohort  indicators  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  1999.  The  
interaction  for  the  cohort  aged  13  in  1997  is  omitted.  Capped  spikes  represent  95%  confidence  intervals  based  
on  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  Regressions  include  cohort  and  municipality  fixed  effects,  plus  
interactions  of  cohort  indicators  with  cumulative  enrollment  in  2005.  


                                                                                                                                                                    35  
 Figure  7:  Program  Impacts  on  the  Complementary  Cumulative  Distribution  of  Labor  Income  

                                                                       Men                                                                          Women
                            .2




                                                                                                               .2
     Effect on probability of exceeding threshold
                                   .1




                                                                                                               .1
                                                                                                      Effect
                  0




                                                                                                               0
                            -.1




                                                                                                               -.1
     Share exceeding threshold
         .5 .4 .3 .2 .1 0




                                                                                                      .5 .4 .3 .2 .1 0
                                                                                                           Share




                                                    0   1000     2000         3000      4000   5000                      0          1000       2000         3000      4000   5000
                                                               Labor income threshold                                                        Labor income threshold

                                                                                          FE                                 FE + baseline*post
                                                                                                                                                                                      
Note:  Coefficients  on  interaction  of  the  post  indicator  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  1999.  Dependent  
variable  is  an  indicator  for  labor  income  exceeding  the  specified  threshold,  which  increases  in  increments  of  
100.  Shaded  areas  represent  95%  confidence  intervals  based  on  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  
Regressions  include  cohort  and  municipality  fixed  effects,  plus  interaction  of  the  post  indicator  with  
cumulative  enrollment  in  2005.                                              




                                                                                                36  
                     Table  1:  Monthly  Amount  of  Schooling  Grants,  1997  and  2003    
                                                          2nd  semester  1997                      2nd  semester  2003  
Grade                                                    Boys                Girls                Boys                Girls  
Primary  school                                                                                                    
    3   year  
          rd                                               60                 60                  105                 105  
    4th  year                                              70                 70                  120                 120  
    5th  year                                              90                 90                  155                 155  
    6th  year                                             120                120                  210                 210  
Secondary  school                                                                                                          
    1st  year                                             175                185                  305                 320  
    2   year  
          nd                                              185                205                  320                 355  
    3   year  
          rd                                              195                225                  335                 390  
High  school                                                                                                               
1   year  
     st                                                                                           510                 585  
2   year  
     nd                                                                                           545                 625  
3   year  
     rd                                                                                           580                 660  
                                                                                                                                  
Max  HH  amount  without  HS  beneficiaries                        550                                     950  
Max  HH  amount  with  HS  beneficiaries                                                                   1635  
Note:  Amounts  in  nominal  pesos.  The  peso-­‐‑to-­‐‑dollar  exchange  rate  was  exchange  rate  was  roughly  8  in  
1997  and  11  in  2003.  HS  stands  for  ‘high  school.’  Source:  www.prospera.gob.mx.  
                                                                  
                                            




                                                            37  
                                              Table  2:  Descriptive  Statistics  
                                                                   Men                                          Women  
                                                 Pre-­‐‑program         Post-­‐‑program          Pre-­‐‑program        Post-­‐‑program  
                                                            (1)                 (2)                      (3)                   (4)  
 A.  Program  data                                                                                                                 
 Cumul.  enrollment  ratio,  1999                         0.32                 0.32                     0.31                  0.32  
                                                      (0.14)                (0.13)                    (0.13)                (0.13)  
 Cumul.  enrollment  ratio,  2005                         0.60                 0.60                     0.59                  0.60  
                                                      (0.21)                (0.21)                    (0.21)                (0.21)  
 B.  Education  outcomes                                                                                                           
 Some  secondary                                          0.45                 0.68                     0.39                  0.65  
                                                      (0.50)                (0.47)                    (0.49)                (0.48)  
 Some  high                                               0.18                 0.32                     0.16                  0.32  
                                                      (0.38)                (0.47)                    (0.36)                (0.47)  
 Some  college                                            0.07                 0.09                     0.07                  0.10  
                                                      (0.26)                (0.29)                    (0.26)                (0.29)  
 Grades  completed                                          7.0                 8.6                      6.6                   8.5  
                                                         (4.2)                (3.7)                     (4.2)                (3.8)  
 C.  Labor  market  outcomes                                                                                                       
 Working                                                  0.87                 0.76                     0.26                  0.25  
                                                      (0.34)                (0.43)                    (0.44)                (0.43)  
 Working  for  a  wage                                    0.49                 0.47                     0.15                  0.18  
                                                      (0.50)                (0.50)                    (0.36)                (0.38)  
 Working  in  agriculture                                 0.43                 0.36                     0.03                  0.03  
                                                      (0.50)                (0.48)                    (0.18)                (0.16)  
 Weekly  labor  hours                                     38.9                 34.2                      9.9                  10.6  
                                                      (23.1)                (24.9)                    (19.9)                (21.0)  
 Monthly  labor  income  (pesos)                         2429                 1822                       750                   609  
                                                      (5349)                (4405)                   (2447)                 (1925)  
 D.  Household  and  demographic  outcomes                                                                                         
 HH  monthly  labor  income                              4478                 5545                      4373                 5198  
                                                      (8853)                (9851)                   (9427)               (10,637)  
 Index  of  housing  conditions                         -­‐‑0.04               0.00                     0.02                  0.03  
                                                      (1.00)                (1.00)                    (0.99)                (0.99)  
 Index  of  durable  goods                              -­‐‑0.05               0.00                     0.02                  0.04  
                                                      (0.98)                (1.00)                    (1.00)                (1.02)  
 Living  with  parent                                     0.30                 0.67                     0.22                  0.45  
                                                      (0.45)                (0.47)                    (0.41)                (0.50)  
 Married                                                  0.79                 0.41                     0.77                  0.53  
                                                      (0.41)                (0.49)                    (0.42)                (0.50)  
 Household  size                                          5.68                 5.61                     5.12                  4.35  
                                                      (2.81)                (2.75)                    (2.34)                (2.27)  
 New  municipality,  last  5  years                       0.08                 0.09                     0.05                  0.05  
                                                      (0.27)                (0.29)                    (0.21)                (0.21)  
 Urban  residence                                         0.36                 0.37                     0.34                  0.35  
                                                      (0.48)                (0.48)                    (0.47)                (0.48)  
 E.  Sample  sizes                                                                                                                 
 Observations                                       139,446                182,464                  166,787                211,887  
 Municipalities                                        1,144                 1,144                     1,144                 1,144  
 States                                                     24                   24                      24                     24  
Note:  Sample  sizes  correspond  to  Panel  A;  they  vary  slightly  in  Panels  B  and  C.  Enrollment  ratios  equal  cumulative  
enrollment  divided  by  the  2000  Census  household  count.  Housing  index  is  the  standardized  first  principal  
component  of  indicators  for  having  a  dirt  floor,  modern  roof,  flush  toilet,  sewage,  piped  water,  and  electricity;  
durables  index  is  the  same  for  having  a  car,  mobile  phone,  computer,  washer,  refrigerator,  TV,  and  hot  water  heater.  


                                                                  38  
                                Table  3:  Program  Impacts  on  Educational  Attainment  
                                                               Men                                          Women  
                                                        (1)                (2)                       (3)                    (4)  
     A.  Grades  completed                                                                                                     
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                         1.405               1.453                   1.458                  1.398  
         ×  post  cohort                             [0.419]             [0.244]               [0.408]                [0.455]  
     Observations                                              320,423                                      375,892  
                                                                                                                               
     B.  Some  secondary                                                                                                       
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                         0.177               0.190                   0.306                  0.309  
         ×  post  cohort                             [0.055]             [0.047]               [0.060]                [0.085]  
     Observations                                              320,423                                      376,753  
                                                                                                                               
     C.  Some  preparatory                                                                                                     
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                         0.151               0.103                   0.165                  0.105  
         ×  post  cohort                             [0.061]             [0.034]               [0.045]                [0.037]  
     Observations                                              320,423                                      376,753  
                                                                                                                               
     D.  Some  college                                                                                                         
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                         0.024               0.027                 -­‐‑0.018              -­‐‑0.016  
         ×  post  cohort                             [0.018]             [0.019]               [0.024]                [0.020]  
     Observations                                              320,423                                      376,753  
                                                                                                                               
     Municipality  and  cohort  FE                       X                  X                         X                      X  
     1990  marginality  interactions                                        X                                                X  
     Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  additionally  control  for  
     the  interaction  of  the  post  indicator  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  2005.  
                                             




                                                                  39  
                                  Table  4:  Program  Impacts  on  Labor  Market  Outcomes  
                                                                     Men                                            Women  
                                                            (1)                     (2)                      (4)                (5)  
     A.  Working                                                                                                                    
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                          -­‐‑0.024               -­‐‑0.022                  0.068                0.113  
         ×  post  cohort                              [0.039]                 [0.031]                  [0.038]                [0.034]  
     Observations                                                    320,133                                        377,236  
                                                                                                                                    
     B.  Working  for  pay                                                                                                          
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                              0.042                  0.043                   0.071                0.113  
         ×  post  cohort                                [0.045]                [0.040]                 [0.033]                [0.036]  
     Observations                                                    313,459                                        374,600  
                                                                                                                                    
     C.  Working  in  agriculture                                                                                                   
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                            -­‐‑0.122              -­‐‑0.095               -­‐‑0.004              0.003  
         ×  post  cohort                                [0.067]                [0.041]                 [0.010]                [0.011]  
     Observations                                                    317,865                                        376,067  
                                                                                                                                    
     D.  Weekly  labor  hours                                                                                                       
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                              3.808                  3.266                   3.719                5.961  
         ×  post  cohort                                [1.821]                [1.572]                 [1.826]                [1.799]  
     Observations                                                    316,879                                        376,081  
                                                                                                                                    
     E.  Health  insurance  from  job                                                                                               
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                              0.098                  0.086                   0.033                0.024  
         ×  post  cohort                                [0.051]                [0.036]                 [0.028]                [0.018]  
     Observations                                                    319,695                                        376,409  
                                                                                                                                    
     F.  Monthly  labor  income                                                                                                     
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                                791                    331                     362                 471  
         ×  post  cohort                                    [550]                  [409]                   [196]               [187]  
     Observations                                                    307,326                                        373,088  
                                                                                                                                    
     Municipality  and  cohort  FE                             X                      X                       X                  X  
     1990  marginality  interactions                                                  X                                          X  
         Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  additionally  control  for  
         the  interaction  of  the  post  indicator  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  2005.  All  labor  market  
         outcomes  are  unconditional  on  labor  force  participation.  
                                                




                                                                       40  
                       Table  5:  Program  Impacts  on  Household  and  Demographic  Outcomes  
                                                                      Men                                              Women  
                                                         (1)                       (2)                    (4)                        (5)  
     A.  HH  monthly  labor  income                                                                                                     
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                           450                       1320                   1162                       1127  
         ×  post  cohort                               [782]                      [932]                  [844]                      [801]  
     Observations                                                    279,791                                           315,548  
                                                                                                                                          
     B.  Index  of  housing  conditions                                                                                                  
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                          0.281                      0.192                  0.291                      0.187  
         ×  post  cohort                              [0.124]                    [0.077]                [0.103]                    [0.086]  
     Observations                                                    315,190                                           370,997  
                                                                                                                                          
     C.  Index  of  durable  goods                                                                                                       
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                          0.170                      0.126                  0.224                      0.139  
         ×  post  cohort                              [0.085]                    [0.064]                [0.073]                    [0.070]  
     Observations                                                    316,412                                           372,371  
                                                                                                                                          
     D.  Living  with  parent                                                                                                            
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                          -­‐‑0.159                  -­‐‑0.100              -­‐‑0.042                  0.004  
         ×  post  cohort                              [0.087]                    [0.057]                [0.042]                    [0.035]  
     Observations                                                    321,910                                           378,674  
                                                                                                                                          
     E.  Married                                                                                                                            
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                          -­‐‑0.004                  -­‐‑0.026              -­‐‑0.032                  -­‐‑0.051  
         ×  post  cohort                              [0.032]                    [0.035]                [0.039]                    [0.050]  
     Observations                                                    321,368                                           378,009  
                                                                                                                                          
     F.  Household  size                                                                                                                 
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                          0.176                      0.582                  -­‐‑0.056                  0.221  
         ×  post  cohort                              [0.387]                    [0.248]                [0.358]                    [0.211]  
     Observations                                                    321,910                                           378,674  
                                                                                                                                          
     G.  New  municipality  last  5  years                                                                                               
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                          0.105                      0.080                  0.126                      0.097  
         ×  post  cohort                              [0.084]                    [0.055]                [0.058]                    [0.046]  
     Observations                                                    321,910                                           378,674  
                                                                                                                                          
     H.  Urban                                                                                                                           
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                          0.089                      0.066                  0.125                      0.066  
         ×  post  cohort                              [0.065]                    [0.040]                [0.053]                    [0.034]  
     Observations                                                    321,910                                           378,674  
                                                                                                                                          
     Municipality  and  cohort  FE                       X                 X                              X                     X  
     1990  marginality  interactions                                       X                                                    X  
      Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  additionally  control  for  
      the  interaction  of  the  post  indicator  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  2005.  The  housing  index  is  
      the  standardized  first  principal  component  of  indicators  for  having  a  dirt  floor,  a  modern  roof,  sewage,  a  
      flush  toilet,  piped  water,  and  electricity;  the  durables  index  is  the  same  for  indicators  for  having  a  car,  a  
      mobile  phone,  a  computer,  a  washer,  a  refrigerator,  a  television,  and  a  hot  water  heater.  
                                                

                                                                          41  
     APPENDIX       




        42  
     Figure  A1:  Economic  Conditions  and  Enrollment  Intensity,  1997-­‐‑99,  2000-­‐‑05,  and  2006-­‐‑11  
                       .6
             New enrollment ratio




                                                                      1997-99
                              .4




                                                                                                                  Density
                .2




                                                   2000-05                       2006-11




                                                                                                        0 .2 .4
                       0




                                                                                Histogram




                                    -3   -2        -1          0            1               2       3
                                                        Marginality Index
                                                                                                                              
Note:  The  new  enrollment  ratio  is  the  count  of  new  households  enrolled  divided  by  the  total  number  of  
households  in  the  municipality  in  the  2000  census.  The  marginality  index  is  defined  (using  1990  census  
data)  by  the  Mexican  government  as  the  normalized  first  principal  component  of  nine  municipal  
population  shares:  the  share  illiterate,  the  share  with  less  than  primary  school  education,  the  share  
without  a  toilet,  the  share  without  electricity,  the  share  without  running  water,  the  share  with  crowding  
as  measured  by  number  of  rooms  divided  by  household  size,  the  share  with  a  dirt  floor,  the  share  living  
in  communities  with  less  than  5000  inhabitants,  and  the  share  earning  less  than  twice  the  minimum  wage.  
                                                




                                                               43  
               Figure  A2:  Maps  of  Enrollment  Intensity,  1997-­‐‑99,  2000-­‐‑05,  and  2006-­‐‑11  
                                              A.  1997-­‐‑1999  




                                                                                                         
                                                     B.  2000-­‐‑2005  




                                                                                                         
                                                     C.  2006-­‐‑2011  




                                                                                                         
Note:  New  enrollment  ratio  is  the  count  of  new  households  enrolled  divided  by  the  total  number  of  
households  in  the  municipality  in  the  2000  census.                                       


                                                           44  
                               Figure  A3:  School  Enrollment  by  Age  in  2000  




                                                                                                                         
Note:  School  enrollment  in  sample  municipalities  in  the  2000  Census.  Cash  transfer  conditionality  was  
limited  to  primary  and  secondary  school  in  the  first  program  wave  (1997-­‐‑99).                                    




                                                          45  
                                                     Figure  A4:  Early  Program  Exposure  and  Log  Municipal  Cohort  Size  
              Δ log municipal cohort size (rel. to age97=13)
            -.4     -.2       0       .2        .4       .6




                                                               7         12                 17                22                  27
                                                                                       Age in 1997

                                                                   Without internal migrants             With internal migrants
                                                                                                                                         
Note:  Coefficients  on  interactions  of  cohort  indicators  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  1999.  
Capped  spikes  represent  95%  confidence  intervals  based  on  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  
Regressions  include  cohort  fixed  effects,  municipality  fixed  effects,  and  interactions  of  cohort  indicators  
with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  2005.  For  consistency  with  our  main  event  study  graphs,  the  
interaction  for  the  cohort  aged  13  in  1997  is  omitted.  Sample  includes  individuals  aged  20-­‐‑39  in  2010.  
                                        




                                                                                        46  
     Table  A1:  Economic  Conditions  and  Enrollment  Intensity,  1997-­‐‑99,  2000-­‐‑05,  and  2006-­‐‑11  
                                                 1997-­‐‑1999                    2000-­‐‑2005                     2006-­‐‑2011  
                                              Uni-­‐‑      Multi-­‐‑       Uni-­‐‑         Multi-­‐‑        Uni-­‐‑         Multi-­‐‑
                                             variate      variate       variate            variate         variate          variate  
                                               (1)          (2)             (3)                  (4)          (5)                 (6)  
A.  Overall  marginality  index                                                                                                      
Standardized  index                           0.147                        0.098                            0.069                    
    (mean  =  0,  s.d.  =  1.0)              [0.004]                  [0.007]                              [0.005]                   
                                                                                                                                     
B.  Index  components:  share  of  population…                                                                                       
Illiterate                                    0.909      0.146             0.587              0.063         0.515              0.385  
    (mean  =  0.23,  s.d.  =  0.15)          [0.079]    [0.124]      [0.061]               [0.045]      [0.037]             [0.073]  
Without  toilet                               0.455      0.003             0.316              0.043          0.21              0.000  
    (mean  =  0.42,  s.d.  =  0.25)          [0.025]    [0.023]      [0.028]               [0.027]      [0.022]             [0.018]  
Without  electricity                          0.457      0.052             0.319              0.097         0.221              0.055  
    (mean  =  0.24,  s.d.  =  0.23)          [0.045]    [0.022]      [0.037]               [0.035]      [0.024]             [0.024]  
Without  running  water                       0.397      0.031             0.246            -­‐‑0.032       0.169            -­‐‑0.029  
    (mean  =  0.34,  s.d.  =  0.25)          [0.046]    [0.020]      [0.032]               [0.022]      [0.022]             [0.023]  
With  dirt  floor                             0.521      0.223             0.331                0.09        0.233              0.008  
    (mean  =  0.41,  s.d.  =  0.27)          [0.028]    [0.035]      [0.030]               [0.026]      [0.025]             [0.018]  
Earning  <2x  minimum  wage                    0.85      0.145             0.571              0.106         0.341              0.006  
    (mean  =  0.77,  s.d.  =  0.13)          [0.054]    [0.027]      [0.051]               [0.034]      [0.054]             [0.062]  
With  primary  education                      0.807      0.146             0.533              0.082         0.378            -­‐‑0.028  
    (mean  =  0.57,  s.d.  =  0.16)          [0.031]    [0.065]      [0.046]               [0.033]      [0.032]             [0.053]  
With  crowding                                1.042      0.265             0.709              0.255         0.576              0.277  
    (mean  =  0.67,  s.d.  =  0.12)          [0.055]    [0.077]      [0.061]               [0.054]      [0.037]             [0.046]  
In  localities  with  pop.  <  5000           0.261      0.009             0.184              0.023         0.079            -­‐‑0.026  
    (mean  =  0.77,  s.d.  =  0.33)          [0.026]    [0.011]      [0.024]               [0.006]      [0.012]             [0.008]  
                                                                                                                                     
Number  of  municipalities                    2,383      2,383             2,383              2,383         2,383              2,383  
Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  In  odd  columns,  each  regression  
coefficient  is  from  a  separate  regression;  in  even  columns,  all  index  components  are  included  in  the  same  
regression.  The  dependent  variable  is  the  new  enrollment  ratio  in  each  period:  the  count  of  new  
households  enrolled  divided  by  the  total  number  of  households  in  the  municipality  in  the  2000  census.  In  
Panel  A,  the  index  is  the  standardized  first  principal  component  of  the  covariates  in  Panel  B.  
                                            




                                                                  47  
     Table  A2:  Economic  Conditions  and  Enrollment  Intensity,  1997-­‐‑99,  2000-­‐‑05,  and  2006-­‐‑11  
                       in  High  and  Very  High  Marginality  Municipalities  
                                                   1997-­‐‑1999                  2000-­‐‑2005                          2006-­‐‑2011  
                                                Uni-­‐‑      Multi-­‐‑        
                                                                           Uni-­‐‑         Multi-­‐‑              Uni-­‐‑        Multi-­‐‑
                                               variate      variate     variate            variate           variate             variate  
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)                  (4)               (5)                   (6)  
A.  Overall  marginality  index                                                                                                              
Standardized  index                        0.155                           0.100                                0.116                        
    (mean  =  0,  s.d.  =  1.0)           [0.018]                     [0.015]                                [0.013]                         
                                                                                                                                             
B.  Index  components:  share  of  population…                                                                                               
Illiterate                                 0.501         0.001             0.317            -­‐‑0.019           0.544               0.372  
    (mean  =  0.34,  s.d.  =  0.13)       [0.120]       [0.065]      [0.061]               [0.068]      [0.059]                  [0.082]  
Without  toilet                            0.144         0.000             0.122                0.04            0.139               0.018  
    (mean  =  0.60,  s.d.  =  0.19)       [0.061]       [0.038]      [0.033]               [0.040]      [0.042]                  [0.020]  
Without  electricity                       0.187         0.028             0.185              0.115             0.137               0.028  
    (mean  =  0.37,  s.d.  =  0.25)       [0.044]       [0.022]      [0.039]               [0.033]      [0.029]                  [0.022]  
Without  running  water                    0.102         0.013             0.067            -­‐‑0.025           0.057             -­‐‑0.023  
    (mean  =  0.51,  s.d.  =  0.24)       [0.027]       [0.017]      [0.030]               [0.030]      [0.022]                  [0.021]  
With  dirt  floor                          0.376         0.205             0.221              0.086             0.226               0.029  
    (mean  =  0.62,  s.d.  =  0.22)       [0.049]       [0.035]      [0.028]               [0.031]      [0.037]                  [0.020]  
Earning  <2x  minimum  wage                0.536          0.25             0.172              0.029             0.139             -­‐‑0.038  
    (mean  =  0.86,  s.d.  =  0.08)       [0.119]       [0.044]      [0.067]               [0.064]      [0.135]                  [0.066]  
With  primary  education                   0.708         0.231             0.453              0.188             0.612               0.064  
    (mean  =  0.70,  s.d.  =  0.10)       [0.137]       [0.067]      [0.077]               [0.077]      [0.063]                  [0.074]  
With  crowding                             0.892         0.542             0.499              0.266             0.695               0.371  
    (mean  =  0.74,  s.d.  =  0.08)       [0.125]       [0.076]      [0.115]               [0.089]      [0.075]                  [0.033]  
In  localities  with  pop.  <  5000        0.151         0.057             0.067              0.000           -­‐‑0.001              -­‐‑0.03  
    (mean  =  0.95,  s.d.  =  0.14)       [0.031]       [0.020]      [0.036]               [0.016]      [0.019]                  [0.013]  
                                                                                                                                             
Number  of  municipalities                 1,144         1,144             1,144              1,144             1,144               1,144  
Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  In  odd  columns,  each  regression  
coefficient  is  from  a  separate  regression;  in  even  columns,  all  index  components  are  included  in  the  same  
regression.  The  dependent  variable  is  the  new  enrollment  ratio  in  each  period:  the  count  of  new  
households  enrolled  divided  by  the  total  number  of  households  in  the  municipality  in  the  2000  census.  In  
Panel  A,  the  index  is  the  standardized  first  principal  component  of  the  covariates  in  Panel  B.  Sample  
includes  municipalities  exceeding  the  Mexican  government’s  marginality  index  threshold  for  
classification  as  a  marginalized  municipality.                                                       




                                                                     48  
          Table  A3:  Program  Impacts  on  Labor  Market  Outcomes,  Conditional  on  Participation  
                                                                  Men                                         Women  
                                                              (1)                    (2)               (4)                   (5)  
     A.  Works  for  pay                                                                                                        
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                              0.111                  0.116             0.151                 0.184  
         ×  post  cohort                                [0.052]                [0.052]           [0.096]               [0.078]  
     Observations                                                    248,428                                  80,663  
                                                                                                                                
     B.  Works  in  agriculture                                                                                                 
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                            -­‐‑0.137              -­‐‑0.121         -­‐‑0.024             -­‐‑0.010  
         ×  post  cohort                                [0.071]                [0.047]           [0.048]               [0.050]  
     Observations                                                    252,834                                  82,130  
                                                                                                                                
     C.  Hours                                                                                                                  
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                              5.904                  5.014             4.673                 5.438  
         ×  post  cohort                                [2.052]                [2.022]           [3.237]               [3.371]  
     Observations                                                    251,848                                  82,144  
                                                                                                                                
     D.  Monthly  labor  income                                                                                                 
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                              1,041                    490               1007                  1022  
         ×  post  cohort                                    [695]                  [532]             [619]                 [502]  
     Observations                                                    242,295                                  79,151  
                                                                                                                                
     Municipality  and  cohort  FE                             X                      X                 X                     X  
     1990  marginality  interactions                                                  X                                       X  
     Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  additionally  control  for  
     the  interaction  of  the  post  indicator  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  2005.  
                                             




                                                                  49  
              Table  A4:  Program  Impacts  on  Spousal  Characteristics,  Conditional  on  Marriage  
                                                                  Men                                         Women  
                                                          (1)                 (2)                      (4)                    (5)  
     A.  Spouse’s  education                                                                                                     
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                            1.000               0.877                  1.054                  0.984  
         ×  post  cohort                                [0.448]             [0.285]              [0.285]                [0.311]  
     Observations                                                 179,778                                     221,463  
                                                                                                                                 
     B.  Spouse’s  age                                                                                                           
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                            0.938               0.909                -­‐‑0.753              -­‐‑0.252  
         ×  post  cohort                                [0.488]             [0.564]              [0.418]                [0.486]  
     Observations                                                 180,542                                     222,496  
                                                                                                                                 
     C.  Spouse  works                                                                                                           
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                            0.027               0.028                  0.030                  0.016  
         ×  post  cohort                                [0.038]             [0.029]              [0.023]                [0.026]  
     Observations                                                 180,051                                     221,735  
                                                                                                                                 
     D.  Spouse’s  monthly  labor  income                                                                                        
     Enrollment  ratio,  1999                              35                  66                     981                    696  
         ×  post  cohort                                 [197]               [115]                   [461]                  [656]  
     Observations                                                 178,965                                     212,535  
                                                                                                                                 
     Municipality  and  cohort  FE                         X                   X                        X                      X  
     1990  marginality  interactions                                           X                                               X  
     Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  additionally  control  for  
     the  interaction  of  the  post  indicator  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  2005.                                     




                                                                   50  
     Table  A5:  Robustness  Check:  Assigning  Birth  State  Averages  to  Out-­‐‑of-­‐‑State  Migrants  
                                              Municipal  assignment  for      State-­‐‑level  assignment  for  out-­‐‑of-­‐‑state  migrants…  
                                                out-­‐‑of-­‐‑state  migrants      if  from  states  w/  >10%      if  state  avg.  index  exceeds  
                                                                                     living  in  marginalized        municipal  marginality  
                                                                                             municipalities                       threshold  
                                                      Men            Women                 Men       Women                 Men            Women  
                                                        (1)                (2)               (3)           (4)               (5)                (6)  
   Years  of  education                              1.721              1.861             2.706         2.973             2.100              2.241  
                                                  [0.799]            [0.616]           [0.814]        [0.792]          [0.568]            [0.512]  
   Observations                                  319,714             375,892      352,379            411,961           322,208            376,839  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Some  secondary                                   0.219              0.346             0.306         0.468             0.257              0.395  
                                                  [0.091]            [0.071]           [0.075]        [0.080]          [0.062]            [0.061]  
   Observations                                  320,423             376,753      353,236            412,978           322,928            377,709  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Some  high                                        0.144              0.179             0.255         0.242             0.201              0.208  
                                                  [0.092]            [0.052]           [0.112]        [0.080]          [0.072]            [0.050]  
   Observations                                  320,423             376,753      353,236            412,978           322,928            377,709  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Some  college                                     0.030            -­‐‑0.010           0.074         0.033             0.034            -­‐‑0.001  
                                                  [0.029]            [0.026]           [0.039]        [0.043]          [0.033]            [0.028]  
   Observations                                  320,423             376,753      353,236            412,978           322,928            377,709  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Working                                         -­‐‑0.031            0.117           -­‐‑0.049       0.084           -­‐‑0.027            0.097  
                                                  [0.040]            [0.046]           [0.051]        [0.060]          [0.046]            [0.062]  
   Observations                                  320,133             377,236      352,997            413,462           322,611            378,139  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Working  for  a  wage                             0.019              0.124             0.106         0.086             0.097              0.101  
                                                  [0.052]            [0.038]           [0.067]        [0.041]          [0.055]            [0.039]  
   Observations                                  313,459             374,600      345,811            410,486           315,913            375,478  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Working  in  agriculture                        -­‐‑0.165          -­‐‑0.004         -­‐‑0.201     -­‐‑0.004         -­‐‑0.176            0.001  
                                                  [0.083]            [0.010]           [0.076]        [0.011]          [0.064]            [0.009]  
   Observations                                  317,865             376,067      350,525            412,112           320,337            376,953  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Hours                                             2.608              6.458             4.269         4.796             4.376              5.527  
                                                  [1.418]            [2.468]           [1.880]        [2.998]          [1.523]            [3.075]  
   Observations                                  316,879             376,081      349,427            412,105           319,343            376,960  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Monthly  labor  earnings                      1,149.80            557.493      1,394.30           251.368      1,498.70                498.111  
                                                [611.506]           [251.347]      [617.731]   [420.101]      [516.163]                  [359.040]  
   Observations                                  307,326             373,088      338,365            408,128           309,573            373,842  
                                                                                                                                                   
   Index  of  housing  conditions                    0.264              0.278             0.285           0.24            0.203              0.249  
                                                  [0.163]            [0.153]           [0.146]        [0.095]          [0.104]            [0.091]  
   Observations                                  315,190             370,997      347,456            406,662           317,573            371,840  
Note:  Coefficients  on  the  1999  enrollment  ratio  interacted  with  the  post  indicator.  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  
clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  control  for  the  interaction  of  the  post  indicator  with  the  cumulative  
enrollment  ratio  in  2005,  as  well  as  cohort  indicators  and  the  main  effects  of  the  1999  and  2005  enrollment  ratios.  




                                                                         51  
                                                               
                                     Table  A6:  Falsification  Check:  1990  Census  
                                                                                             Men                      Women  
                                                                                               (1)                            (2)  
  Years  of  education                                                                      0.464                         0.464  
                                                                                          [0.422]                      [0.374]  
  Observations                                                                            91,184                        98,002  
                                                                                                                                    
  Some  secondary                                                                           0.069                         0.040  
                                                                                          [0.043]                      [0.031]  
  Observations                                                                            91,184                        98,002  
                                                                                                                                    
  Some  high                                                                                0.014                         0.021  
                                                                                          [0.028]                      [0.023]  
  Observations                                                                            91,184                        98,002  
                                                                                                                                    
  Some  college                                                                           -­‐‑0.005                     -­‐‑0.012  
                                                                                          [0.017]                      [0.009]  
  Observations                                                                            91,184                        98,002  
                                                                                                                                    
  Working                                                                                   0.017                       -­‐‑0.005  
                                                                                          [0.039]                      [0.027]  
  Observations                                                                            90,456                        96,933  
                                                                                                                                    
  Working  for  a  wage                                                                     0.018                       -­‐‑0.017  
                                                                                          [0.031]                      [0.026]  
  Observations                                                                            86,035                        95,727  
                                                                                                                                    
  Working  in  agriculture                                                                  0.076                         0.013  
                                                                                          [0.037]                      [0.008]  
  Observations                                                                            88,823                        95,736  
                                                                                                                                    
  Hours                                                                                   -­‐‑1.297                       0.115  
                                                                                          [2.417]                      [1.375]  
  Observations                                                                            87,443                        95,988  
                                                                                                                                    
  Monthly  labor  earnings                                                                    235                            -­‐‑35  
                                                                                             [236]                         [107]  
  Observations                                                                            85,123                        96,817  
                                                                                                                                    
  Index  of  housing  conditions                                                          -­‐‑0.083                       0.016  
                                                                                          [0.076]                      [0.043]  
  Observations                                                                            87,312                        97,125  
                                                                                                                                    
  Municipality  and  cohort  FE                                                                 X                                X  
 Note:  Brackets  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  state  level.  All  regressions  additionally  control  for  the  
 interaction  of  the  placebo  indicator  with  the  cumulative  enrollment  ratio  in  2005.  Placebo  cohorts  were  born  20  years  
 before  the  true  post-­‐‑program  cohorts.  The  1990  Census  does  not  include  questions  on  durable  goods;  sample  sizes  are  
 smaller  than  in  the  2010  Census  because  of  differences  in  sampling  methods  for  the  public  use  sample.  For  
 consistency  with  earlier  tables,  monthly  labor  earnings  are  measured  in  2010  pesos.  




                                                                   52  
