                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DEATH BY POKÉMON GO:
        THE ECONOMIC AND HUMAN COST OF USING APPS WHILE DRIVING

                                         Mara Faccio
                                      John J. McConnell

                                      Working Paper 24308
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24308


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2018




We thank Chief Jason Dombkowski of the West Lafayette Police Department, Captain Brad
Bishop of the City of Lafayette, Chief John Cox of the Purdue Police, and Sheriff Barry Richard
of the Tippecanoe County Sheriff’s Department for permitting access to the police accident
reports. We are especially thankful to Lafayette Police Department crime analyst Steve
Hawthorne who provided the police accident reports data and patiently answered our questions.
We thank Stuart Graham of CyanSub for providing the latitude, longitude, and the names of all
PokéStops and Gyms in Tippecanoe County. We thank John Barrios, Michael Brennan, Jillian
Carr, Logan Emery, Steve Hawthorne, Susan Lu, Maria-Teresa Marchica, Steve Martin, David
Parsley, and Donald Teder for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Adam Lawson
and Nate Hitze of Purdue University for developing the parsing program used to extract street
intersections data used in the online appendix. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Mara Faccio and John J. McConnell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Death by Pokémon GO: The Economic and Human Cost of Using Apps While Driving
Mara Faccio and John J. McConnell
NBER Working Paper No. 24308
February 2018
JEL No. O33,R40

                                         ABSTRACT

Using police accident reports for Tippecanoe County, Indiana, and exploiting the introduction of
the augmented reality game Pokémon GO as a natural experiment, we document a
disproportionate increase in crashes and associated vehicular damage, injuries, and fatalities in
the vicinity of locations where users can play the game while driving. We estimate the
incremental county-wide cost of users playing Pokémon GO while driving to be in the range of
$5.2 to $25.5 million over the 148 days following the introduction of the game. Extrapolating
these estimates to nation-wide levels yields a total ranging from $2.0 to $7.3 billion.


Mara Faccio
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
403 W. State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
and NBER
mfaccio@purdue.edu

John J. McConnell
403 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN
mcconnj@purdue.edu
        In the recent decade, smartphones and their applications or “apps,” as they

are popularly known, have become ubiquitous. No doubt this technology has

improved the quality and productivity of human lives.                         As with many

technological advances, though, smartphones have been taken to task for their

alleged “dark sides.”1        For example, smartphones and their apps have been

accused of attributing to an increase in teen suicide, a deterioration in human

interpersonal skills, and an increase in cybersecurity breaches.2                    A further

example, and the one that we investigate in this study, is the concern that the use

of smartphone apps while driving has given rise to an increase in vehicular

crashes with associated increases in deaths, injuries and property damage.

        As reported in the Wall Street Journal, insurers cite a possible connection

between smartphone usage and vehicular crashes as one explanation for the 16%

increase in US automobile insurance premiums between 2011 and 2016.3 If that

explanation were to account for, let’s say, 25% of the aggregate dollar increase in

insurance premiums over that time period, the amount attributable to smartphone

usage would be $37.3 billion.



1
  Perhaps the most famous (or infamous) example of concern with the dark side of technological
advances is the displacement of weavers by mechanical looms that led to riots and property
destruction in Lancashire, England, in 1826 (Aspin, 1995).
2
  The Economist, January 13, 2018, “Teens and Screens,” p. 14. BBC, August 29, 2013, “The
Crucial Skill New Hires Lack,” Forbes, December 20, 2017, “What Cybersecurity Chiefs Can
Learn From Warren Buffett.”
3
  Wall Street Journal, February 21, 2017, “Smartphone Addicts Behind the Wheel Drive Car
Insurance Rates Higher. Insurers increasingly blame distracted drivers as costs related to crashes
outpace premium increases.”




                                                1
        Certain circumstantial evidence supports such a connection.                To wit,

following a steady, though not uninterrupted, 25-year decline, vehicular fatality

crashes in the US reversed course in 2011. In 1988, fatality crashes totaled

42,130. In 2011, that number reached a low of 29,867. By 2015, the total had

increased to 32,166 (NHTSA, various years.) That reversal has been widely

reported and commented upon. Less well reported is that total vehicular crashes

followed a similar course with 6.887 million reported in 1988 falling to a low of

5.338 million in 2011, and reversing course to reach 6.296 million in 2015.

        The supporting circumstantial evidence is that diffusion of smartphone

apps has increased in parallel with the incidence of vehicular fatalities and

crashes. According to Wikipedia, in 2008, Apple’s App Store had available 800

smartphone apps with 10 million downloads. By 2011, those numbers were

500,000 apps and 18 billion downloads, and by 2017, they were 2.2 million apps

and 130 billion downloads.4 Of course, attributing any increase in crashes and

fatalities to smartphone usage and app availability is extraordinarily difficult

given that many other factors also changed over the years in which both

increased. The same WSJ article cited above notes that “[t]he rise in traffic deaths

is the result of many factors. Low gas prices and a U.S. economic recovery

combined to put more drivers on the road...”



4
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/App_Store_(iOS). A similar trend is documented for the other
large digital distribution platform, Google Play (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Play).




                                             2
        In this study, we circumvent this difficulty by examining the introduction

of a specific app that can be associated with specific geographic locations. The

app is the highly popular Pokémon GO augmented reality game. The game was

introduced on July 6, 2016.           Within one month, worldwide, the game was

downloaded more than 100 million times. For our purposes, the virtue of this app

is that the stockpile of a user’s “weapons” used to play the game can be

replenished in the vicinity of specific well-identified “PokéStops” many of which

are located near public thoroughfares. If the game is played while a player is

driving and if playing the game while driving increases the likelihood of crashes

occurring, locations near PokéStops should experience a disproportionate increase

in crashes following introduction of the game.5

        We examine nearly 12,000 police accident reports for Tippecanoe County,

Indiana, for the period of March 1, 2015, through November 30, 2016. We find a

disproportionate increase in crashes near PokéStops from before to after July 6,

2016. In the aggregate, these crashes are associated with increases in the dollar

amount of vehicular damage, the number of personal injuries, and the number of

fatalities.
5
  Anecdotally, a link between the introduction of Pokémon Go and crashes has been reported in
media outlets including the Wall Street Journal, “Pokémon Go’-Related Car Crash Kills Woman
in Japan”, August 25, 2016; USA Today, “Pokémon Go player crashes his car into a tree”, July 14,
2016; Fox News, “Death by Pokemon? Public safety fears mount as Pokemon GO craze
continues”; The Guardian, “Pokémon Go player crashes car into university while playing game,”
July 18, 2016. A study by Ayers, Leas, Dredze, Allem, Grabowski and Hill (2016) reports that a
nontrivial number of users are characterized in tweets as playing the game while driving.




                                               3
       Specifically, a difference-in-differences analysis indicates that 134

incremental crashes that occurred at locations in the proximity of PokéStops over

the 148 days following the introduction of the game can be attributed to the

introduction of Pokémon GO. This incremental increase in crashes accounts for

47% of the increase in the total number of county-wide crashes. Based on the

assessments of damage in the police reports, this increase in crashes in the vicinity

of PokéStops results in $498,567 of incremental vehicular damage, or 22% of the

increase in the total dollar amount of vehicular damage experienced county-wide

over the 148 days following the introduction of the game.

       The 134 incremental crashes give rise to 31 incremental personal injuries

in the vicinity of PokéStops. These account for 25% of the aggregate increase in

the number of personal injuries experienced county-wide over the same time

period. Based on data from the Insurance Information Institute and the Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention, the incremental claims for bodily injuries and

the estimated loss of lifetime income imply a county-wide total incremental cost

of $988,621.

       On a sadder note, our analyses point to two incremental vehicular fatalities

in the vicinity of Pokéstops following the introduction of the game. Based on

estimates of lifetime income lost from the American Community Survey Public

Use Microdata Sample files produced by the Census Bureau, a conservative

estimate of the value of lives lost is $3.8 million.




                                           4
        Thus, a conservative estimate of the total incremental county-wide cost of

users playing Pokémon GO in the vicinity of Pokéstops is $5.2 million over the

148 days following the introduction of the game. The great majority of this total

is the value of lives lost. Regardless of whether that number is included, the

incremental cost of users playing Pokémon GO while driving is significant.

Indeed, even ignoring the value of lives lost, the incremental cost associated with

users playing the game while driving implies a 3.34% increase in auto insurance

premiums for the 148 days following the introduction of the game.

        Ours is not the first study to investigate the connection between mobile

phone usage while driving and vehicular crashes. Bhargava and Pathania (2013)

and McCartt, Kidd and Teoh (2014) survey this literature.6 Both report that the

results of prior studies are inconclusive as to whether the use of mobile phones

while driving is associated with an increase in vehicular crashes. The prior study

most closely related to ours is Bhargava and Pathania (2013) who also consider a

natural experiment. They investigate whether mobile phone usage and vehicular

crashes increased in California around 9:00pm during 2002–2005. During those

years, mobile phone providers had a policy in effect whereby the per-minute price

of mobile phone usage dropped precipitously at 9:00pm. The authors report a

6
  Prior studies include, among others, Cohen and Graham (2003), Hahn and Prieger (2006), Kolko
(2009), and the classic study of Redelmeir and Tibshirani (1997). A number of authors have
questioned the effectiveness of regulations aimed at improving automobile safety (Peltzman,
1975) and regulations restricting the use of cell phones while driving (Lim and Chi, 2013). Abouk
and Adams (2013) study the effectiveness of bans on texting while driving and conclude that the
effect, if any, is short-lived.




                                               5
significant increase in mobile phone usage while driving from just before to just

after 9:00pm, but report no increase in crashes. This evidence implies that mobile

phone usage is not associated with an increase in vehicular crashes. As the

authors note, the lack of an effect of mobile phone usage on the incidence of

crashes could, like the lack of a finding in certain earlier studies, be due to drivers

merely substituting one form of “risky” behavior for another.

       In comparison with Bhargava and Pathania, the results of our study cannot

be due to substitution of one form of distraction for another as we document an

increase in crashes relative to the level that would have occurred absent the

introduction of the game. Our interpretation of the results, however, may give

rise to two broad concerns. First, it could be that the observed increase in crashes

is not due to the introduction of Pokémon GO but to another shock that correlates

with the introduction of the game and vehicular crashes. In that regard, one

concern specific to our analysis is that Tippecanoe County is the home of Purdue

University, a 40,000-student body university in a county with a “fulltime”

population of 188,000. The concern is that Pokémon GO was introduced during

the university summer “break” and that the student population fluctuated widely

in that time period. That phenomenon coupled with the possibility that students

might drive more in areas in the vicinity of PokéStops could give rise to our

results - - though the results would not be due to the introduction of Pokémon GO.

We address this concern directly by including in all regressions an interaction




                                          6
between PokéStop and university breaks. Our results, thus, reflect the impact of

the introduction of the game after explicitly accounting for university breaks and

related fluctuations in the population of Tippecanoe County.

         We also account for the possibility that some other unspecified omitted

factor might give rise to the increase in crashes that we document in the vicinity

of PokéStops following the introduction of Pokémon GO. We do so by narrowing

the time interval of our analysis in certain regressions. This greatly reduces the

number of unobserved shocks that might spuriously give rise to our results since

by narrowing the time interval employed, we exclude, by construction, any

confounding events that occur outside the time interval.                      Contrary to the

possibility that such unspecified shocks might spuriously give rise to our results,

the key coefficient is largest when a narrow time interval is employed.

         A second concern is that, although the increase in crashes is due to the

introduction of Pokémon GO, it is not due to drivers playing the game.7 It is, for

example, possible that the introduction of Pokémon GO increased driving near

Pokémon GO-related points of play as players drove to these locations for the

purpose of playing the game, but did not play the game until after parking their

cars. In Section 5, and in the internet appendix, we undertake tests to address this

and related concerns. To give a flavor of these tests, we briefly describe one here:



7
 In the state of Indiana, texting while driving is banned, but usage of mobile phones to play games
while driving is not (Indiana Code Title 9. Motor Vehicles § 9-21-8-59).




                                                7
we use other Pokémon GO-related points of play, specifically “Gyms” (where it is

basically impossible for a user to play the game while driving) as placebos.

Assuming that both types of locations experience similar increases in traffic, and

assuming that players do not use their smartphones while driving, there should be

no difference in the change in the number of crashes between the two types of

locations. We compare the change in the number of crashes surrounding the

introduction of Pokémon GO in locations in the vicinity of Gyms with the change

in the number of crashes in locations in the vicinity of PokéStops. Consistent

with the use of smartphones to play the game while driving, we find a

significantly greater increase in the number of crashes in the vicinity of PokéStops

than in the vicinity of Gyms.

       In sum, our analyses indicate that the concern by insurers and others that

the use of smartphone apps by drivers did contribute to increases in vehicular

crashes, injuries, and fatalities is legitimate. In this instance at least, there is an

economic dark side to technological advancement.

1.     Pokémon GO

       Pokémon GO is a location-based augmented reality game, i.e., a

videogame that is played in a real world environment. The game was launched in

the U.S., Australia, and New Zealand, on July 6, 2016, and soon became available

in several other countries. The game was an immediate success, exceeding 100

million worldwide downloads by July 31, 2016, and more than 750 million




                                          8
downloads by June 2017.8 According to Wandera, the median number of daily

“active users” was 24.7 million in July 2016. A fact that we exploit later is that

the number of daily active users dropped to 17.6 million in August 2016 and fell

further to 9.5 million during September through November of the same year.9

          The objective of the game is to capture one of each type of virtual

creature, called Pokémons, of which there were 151 types when the game was

introduced. A Pokémon type is identified by an icon of a virtual creature and a

catchy name such as Bulbasaur, Omanyte, Rhyhorn, Vaporeon, and so on.

          To play the game, a player opens an account, then selects and customizes

her avatar. As the player moves within her real world surroundings (e.g., walks or

drives along a street), her avatar travels along a virtual map that parallels the

actual route being traveled by the game player. The virtual map appears on the

player’s mobile device. The game employs the GPS radio navigation system that

is built into the player’s mobile device to locate the player and to position the

player’s avatar on the virtual map.

          Pokémons can “pop up” at any time and at any location on the player’s

virtual map. Capture of a Pokémon is accomplished by “throwing” a Poké Ball at

the “popped up” icon. Capturing the creature often requires multiple “throws” as

the Pokémon can escape even after being hit with a Poké Ball. Throwing Poké

Balls reduces a player’s stock of ammunition. A game player can reload her
8
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pok%C3%A9mon_Go
9
    https://www.wandera.com/blog/Pokemon-go-data-analysis-popular-game




                                              9
stockpile of Poké Balls without a fee only in the vicinity of specific locations

called PokéStops.10 As a player approaches a PokéStop, in order to reload, the

player must tap the icon of the PokéStop on the mobile device’s screen, then

swipe the screen. Thus, collecting Poké Balls can be accomplished as a player

drives within the circle encompassed by the PokéStops. (Of course, a player need

not be driving to collect Poké Balls.) The circle has a radius of roughly 50

meters.      Driving at a moderate speed, for example at 50 kilometers

(approximately 30 miles) per hour, a driver would pass through the area in which

Poké Balls can be collected in approximately 7 seconds.

          To play the game, a player must first activate the app. Activation requires

approximately 30 seconds. Thus, driving at a speed of 50 kilometers per hour, a

player who had not previously activated the app must begin to activate the game

when she is at least 415 meters from the PokéStop.                  If the game has been

previously activated, the player needs to unlock her phone to play the game.

Unlocking the phone requires approximately 6 seconds. Ergo, a player who had

previously activated the app must unlock her phone when she is approximately 85

or more meters from the PokéStop. In sum, the activity associated with playing

the game is likely to be concentrated within a circle of approximately 100 meters

around the PokéStops. Activation of the game can extend beyond that perimeter

but activity is likely to become more intense as the player approaches this circle.
10
  Poké Balls can be purchased anywhere. PokéStops also enable players to collect, also for free,
other items such as incense to lure Pokémons or berries to cure wounded Pokémons.




                                              10
       In addition to PokéStops, the game features a second set of locations

called Gyms in which battles between Pokémons take place. Victory in battle

gives the player Gym Badges and PokéCoins that can be used to purchase Poké

Balls and other items used in the game. To complete a battle, a player must

remain in the vicinity of the Gym for the entirety of the fight. The vicinity of a

Gym encompasses a territory of the same dimensions as that of a PokéStop.

Completion of a battle typically requires several minutes. Thus, it is virtually

impossible for a player to complete a battle while driving, even while driving at

an extremely moderate speed.

       To address the question of whether the introduction of Pokémon GO

resulted in a disproportionate increase in crashes, damage to vehicles, injuries to

vehicle occupants, and fatalities in the vicinity of PokéStops, we employ data on

vehicular crashes from police reports and data on the location of PokéStops from

CyanSub. The next section describes these and other data sources in detail.

2.     Data

2.1.   Police Accident Reports

       The Lafayette Police Department, the West Lafayette Police Department,

the Purdue University Police Department, and the Tippecanoe County Sheriff’s

Office provided to us data on all vehicular crashes reported to the police that

occurred in Tippecanoe County, Indiana, during March 1, 2015, through

November 30, 2016.      In general, police accident reports are available upon




                                        11
request. The person filing a request must specify the date and location of the

crash and the names of the parties involved in the crash and pay a fee of $8-$12

per crash. For our study, the reports were provided free of charge.

       The data include the date and time of each crash, the location of each

crash by projected x,y coordinates and by street name and municipality, an

estimated range of the dollar value of damage to the vehicles, the number of

people injured, the number of fatalities, the condition of the roads, and the

primary and secondary cause of the crash.

       Various descriptive statistics are given in Table 1. The database includes

12,267 crashes of which x,y coordinates (that locate the crashes within

Tippecanoe County) are available for 11,355. We employ the x,y coordinates to

characterize the geographic location of each crash.        Henceforth, the terms

“geographic location” or “location” refer to a pair of x,y coordinates at which a

crash occurred. We conduct our primary analysis with this set of crashes. Of

these, 8,505 crashes occurred before July 6, 2016, and 2,850 crashes occurred

between July 6, 2016, and November 30, 2016. Prior to July 6, 2016, the number

of crashes per day was 17.25. Commencing with July 6, 2016, and afterward, the

number of crashes per day was 19.26. Table 1 also shows that the average

estimated damage to the vehicles involved in a crash increased from $4,370 prior

to July 6, 2016, to $4,726 on or after that date and the number of persons injured

per crash increased from 0.196 to 0.217. What fractions, if any, of these increases




                                        12
are attributable to the introduction of Pokémon GO are the questions that we

address in this study.

        The 11,355 crashes in the sample can be traced to 4,708 distinct

geographic locations. In our analyses, the unit of observation is a geographic

location/date pair where the geographic location is the location of at least one

crash that occurred during the 641 day sample period. The dates are every day in

the sample period. This results in 3,017,828 observations.

2.2.    PokéStops and Gyms

        Data on the latitude, longitude, and the names of all PokéStops and Gyms

in Tippecanoe County were provided by Stuart Graham, the web director of

CyanSub, an Edinburgh, Scotland, based website developer who developed and

maintains the website www.pokemongomap.info.11 As of October 18, 2017, the

website covered 5,160,767 PokéStop and Gym locations worldwide. As of July

21, 2017, the sample encompassed 615 PokéStops and 147 Gyms spread across

503 square miles in Tippecanoe County.

        We use Earth Point’s (http://www.earthpoint.us/StatePlane.aspx) “State

Plane” Indiana West (i.e., FIPS 1302) coordinate system to convert latitudes and

longitudes into projected x,y coordinates. We use these data to measure the

distance of each geographic location of a crash to the nearest PokéStop and Gym.


11
   The www.pokemongomap.info website is, according to their web page, an unofficial website
that is not affiliated with either Niantic (i.e. the developer of Pokémon GO) or Nintendo. We
thank Stuart Graham for providing the data free of charge.




                                             13
19.75% of the locations of crashes are within 100 meters of a PokéStop, and

7.29% are within 100 meters of a Gym.

3.           Empirical Analyses

3.1.         Overview

             To examine whether the number of vehicular crashes increased

disproportionately in the vicinity of PokéStops after the introduction of Pokémon

GO, we estimate OLS panel regressions as

     y   ,
                        ∙ PokéStop ∙ Post         ∙ Controls   ,      ∙ Location              (1)

                                        ∙ Date        ,


where y       ,
                  is the outcome of interest (e.g., the Number of Crashes that occurred at

location L during day T). PokéStopL is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for

location L if location L is within a given number of meters of a PokéStop, and 0

otherwise. Post is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on

July 6, 2016 and ending on November 30, 2016, and 0 for the period that precedes

the introduction of Pokémon GO (i.e., March 1, 2015, through July 5, 2016).12

The interaction term PokéStop ∙ Post is the independent variable of interest. Its

coefficient is the incremental change (i.e., the difference in differences) in the

outcome variable (e.g., the number of crashes at a given location on a given day)

12
   Using a relatively lengthy time period prior to July 6, 2016, offers two major benefits. First,
doing so increases the precision of our estimations since the weight of each single day-location
decreases as more days are added to the sample. Second, it allows capturing more locations that
have experienced crashes (including locations that have experienced crashes only prior to the
introduction of the game.)




                                                 14
at locations in the vicinity of PokéStops relative to locations not in the vicinity of

PokéStops following the introduction of Pokémon GO.

       Controls   ,   are a set of time-varying location-specific control variables.

The location fixed effects, Location , account for any time-invariant

characteristics that are location specific. The location fixed effects account for

whether the location is in the vicinity of a PokéStop or any other location-specific

time-invariant characteristic that may correlate with the frequency or severity of

the crashes. For example, in Tippecanoe County the most common locations for

PokéStops are cemeteries, churches, memorials, and parks. If these happen to be

high traffic areas, the location fixed effects account for that pattern. The date

fixed effects, Date , account for any location-invariant characteristics that

correlate with the frequency or severity of crashes. For example, a date might

follow the introduction of Pokémon GO, coincide with adverse weather

conditions, or coincide with high traffic. The virtue of the fixed effects is that

they preclude the necessity of specifying and quantifying these or any other time-

or location-invariant sources of confounding variation.

       One of the control variables in each regression is the interaction of

University Break and PokéStop . This variable accounts for the possibility that

vehicular traffic is lower during university breaks with a consequential decline in

crashes. This shift in traffic might be especially pronounced in the vicinity of




                                          15
PokéStops if university students tend to drive, for any reason, in those areas.

University Breaks are identified from the Purdue University calendars.

         In each of the regression estimations that follow, the standard errors are

double clustered at the geographic location and date levels to account for serial

and cross-sectional correlations (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004),

Petersen (2009)).13

3.2.     Number of Crashes

         Our discussion of the results that follow focuses on the point estimates of

the coefficients, each of which is encompassed by an unstated confidence interval.

The results of the first regression are given in the first column of Table 2. The

dependent variable is the total number of crashes at a given location on a given

day.     The independent variable of interest is the interaction of Post and

PokéStop100 where PokéStop100 denotes locations that are within 100 meters of

a PokéStop. The coefficient of this interaction term, 0.00097, is positive and

statistically significant (p-value < 0.001). The coefficient is the point estimate of

the differential increase in the number of crashes per day within 100 meters of a

PokéStop relative to locations that are not within 100 meters of a PokéStop.

         The second column of Table 2 shows the results of a regression in which

the date fixed effects are replaced with Post and University Break. The regression


13
  As an alternative to account for serial correlation, Bertrand et al. propose collapsing the data for
the pre and post time periods. We also collapse the data and replicate the analysis of the first
column of Table 2. The coefficient of the PokeStop100 x Post is 0.00099 with a p-value of 0.009.




                                                 16
does not include any interactions of PokéStop100 with Post or PokéStop100 with

University Break. The purpose of this regression is to determine the county-wide

change in the number of crashes from before to after the introduction of the game

taking into account the occurrence of university breaks. As shown in the second

column, the coefficient of Post is 0.00041 with a p-value of 0.002 indicating that

the number of crashes per location per day increased significantly in the period

that followed the introduction of Pokémon GO. This equates to a county-wide

increase of 286 crashes over the 148 days from July 6 to November 30, 2016 after

taking into account the occurrence of university breaks (i.e., 0.00041 crashes per

day per location x 4,708 geographic locations x 148 days = 286 crashes).

According to our analysis, 134 of these crashes are incremental crashes

attributable to Pokémon GO users playing the game while driving in the vicinity

of PokéStops (i.e., 0.00097 crashes per location per day x 930 locations within

100 meters of a PokéStop x 148 days = 134 crashes). Based on our analysis,

these 134 crashes would not have occurred had Pokémon GO not been

introduced.

       As we noted above, the daily number of active users peaked in July 2016,

dropped off a bit in August, and fell further in September at which point the

median number of active users stabilized at 9.5 million per day for the following

two months. The third column of Table 2 exploits this discontinuity in the

intensity of play to explore whether the number of crashes varies with the number




                                       17
of game players by splitting the post-July 6 interval into the subperiods of July 6–

July 31, August 1–August 31, and September 1–November 30. To do this, the

regression includes interactions between PokéStop100 and indicator variables

denoting the three subperiods. The coefficients of the interaction terms decrease

as time proceeds from July to August to September–November with values of

0.00164, 0.00117, and 0.00069 with associated p-values increasing from 0.004 to

0.033 to 0.047. These results further support our interpretation of Pokémon GO

being the cause of the incremental change in the number of crashes.

        To refine our identification strategy, we focus on the weeks immediately

following the introduction of the game, July 6–July 31, 2016, in comparison with

the same time period in the prior year.14 The benefit of doing so is that by

narrowing the time interval of analysis, we reduce the possibility that a

confounding event gives rise to the results. Two deficiencies of this approach are

(1) a small number of crashes and/or confounding events could have a

disproportionate impact on the coefficient estimates and (2) the small number of

days (i.e., 52) in the sample period substantially reduces the power of the test.

Nevertheless, as shown in the fourth column of Table 2, the coefficient of the




14
  As we discuss in Section 5.4, beta testing of the game started as early as May 2016. Using the
same time period in the prior year eliminates the possibility that the beta testing gave rise to an
increase in crashes prior to the official introduction of the game. Such an increase would
downward bias the estimate of the incremental impact of the introduction of Pokémon GO on
vehicular crashes.




                                                18
variable of interest, Post interacted with PokéStop100, is positive and statistically

significant with a value of 0.00167 (p-value = 0.020).

       To refine the identification strategy even further, we focus our analysis on

the first week following introduction of the game, July 6–July 12, 2016, by

comparing the number of crashes per location per day during this period with the

equivalent number during the same dates in 2015. We use this particular time

interval so as to exclude the Fourth of July holiday that may be peculiar with

respect to vehicular traffic. The results are given in the fifth column of Table 2.

The coefficient is statistically significant (p-value = 0.095) and its value is further

increased when we restrict the time interval of analysis. These further illustrate

the connection between the introduction of the game and the increase in the

number of crashes. As we noted earlier, because these tests employ very narrow

time periods, it is increasingly unlikely that a shock other than the introduction of

Pokémon GO gave rise to the results.

3.3.   Number of Crashes as Distance from PokéStops Increases

       As we described above, the level of activity associated with collecting

Poké Balls increases as players approach PokéStops.           To further investigate

whether the explanation for the increase in crashes is the introduction of Pokémon

GO, we estimate regressions in which we redefine the key independent variable to

reflect differences in proximity of each location to the nearest PokéStop. These

variables   are    denoted    PokéStop50,      PokéStop100,      PokéStop250,      and




                                          19
PokéStop500, where the numerals indicate that the location is within a given

number of meters of a PokéStop. The results of the four regressions are given in

Table 3. Consistent with users playing the game while driving being the cause of

the increase in crashes, the coefficients of the interaction variables of interest

decline monotonically from 0.00124 to 0.00027 as the distance of the locations

from the nearest PokéStop increases from 50 to 500 meters.

4.     Incremental Economic and Human Cost of Crashes

4.1.   Overview

       The total incremental economic and human cost associated with crashes is

a function of the incremental number of crashes and any change in the cost per

crash. The analyses above calculate the increase in the number of crashes after

controlling for other factors. In Table 4, we combine the increase in the number

of crashes with the change in the severity of crashes to calculate the incremental

costs associated with users playing the game while driving in the vicinity of

PokéStops.

4.2.   Vehicular Damage

       To calculate incremental vehicular damage, we first compute the total

damage to the vehicles involved across all crashes that occurred at a given

location on a given day. For most location/day pairs, this number is zero because

at most locations and for most days no crash occurred. With this measure as the

dependent variable, we estimate a regression as in equation (1). The regression




                                       20
isolates the incremental damage due to the incremental crashes that occur in the

vicinity of PokéStops following the introduction of the game. The results are

reported in the first column of Table 4.

       The coefficient of the key interaction term of PokéStop100 and Post is

positive and statistically significant with a value of $3.62225 (p-value = 0.060).

This coefficient is the difference in the change in the damage to the vehicles per

location per day at locations within 100 meters of a PokéStop versus locations

that are not within 100 meters of a PokéStop. The coefficient implies incremental

aggregate damage to vehicles of $498,567 due to crashes that occurred within 100

meters of PokéStops over the 148 days of July 6 to November 30, 2016 (i.e.,

$3.62225 per location per day x 930 locations within 100 meters of a PokéStop x

148 days = $498,567). Thus, our analysis shows that $498,567 of vehicular

damage would not have occurred had the game not been introduced.

       As a benchmark for comparison, we calculate the county-wide increase in

vehicular damage from before to after introduction of the game. To do this, we

estimate a regression in which the dependent variable is the same as in the

previous regression, but the independent variables are Post and University Break.

The regression does not include date fixed effects or interaction terms. As shown

in the second regression of Table 4, Tippecanoe County experienced a significant

increase of $3.25748 in vehicular damage per location per day in the period that

followed the introduction of Pokémon GO relative to the prior period. This




                                           21
equates to $2,269,760 over the 148 days from July 6 to November 30, 2016 (i.e.,

$3.25748 per location per day x 4,708 geographic locations x 148 days =

$2,269,760).   Based on these analyses, the incremental aggregate damage to

vehicles attributable to Pokémon GO users playing the game while driving in the

vicinity of PokéStops accounts for 22% of the increase in the incremental county-

wide vehicular damage experienced over the 148 days that followed introduction

of Pokémon GO (i.e., $498,567/$2,269,760).

4.3.   Cost of Bodily Injuries

       To calculate the incremental number of persons injured, we first determine

the total number of persons injured across all crashes at a given location on a

given day. With this as the dependent variable, we estimate a regression as in

equation (1). The regression isolates the incremental number of persons injured

in crashes that occurred in the vicinity of PokéStops following the introduction of

Pokémon GO. The third column of Table 4 gives the results.

       The coefficient of the key interaction term is positive, 0.000222, but not

quite statistically significant at conventional levels (p-value of 0.106).    This

coefficient is the difference in the change in the number of persons injured in

crashes per location per day at locations within 100 meters of a PokéStop versus

locations that are not within 100 meters of a PokéStop.         The value of the

coefficient implies an incremental change of 31 in the number of persons injured

during the 148 days from July 6 to November 30, 2016, due to crashes that




                                        22
occurred within 100 meters of PokéStops (i.e., 0.000222 incremental persons

injured per location per day x 930 locations x 148 days). Based on our analysis,

31 fewer persons would have been injured over this period in vehicular crashes

had Pokémon GO not been introduced.

       To provide a basis for comparison, the fourth regression isolates the

change in the number of county-wide injuries in the period that followed the

introduction of the game. The coefficient of Post shows a statistically significant

increase of 0.000176 (p-value < 0.001) in the number of persons injured in

vehicular crashes per geographic location per day in the period that followed the

introduction of Pokémon GO. This implies that 123 additional persons were

injured over the 148 days from July 6 to November 30, 2016, relative to the

period prior to the introduction of the game (i.e., 0.000176 persons injured per

location per day x 4,708 geographic locations x 148 days). The incremental

number of people injured attributable to Pokémon GO users playing the game

while driving in the vicinity of PokéStops accounts for 25% of the county-wide

increase in the number of persons injured over the 148 days that followed the

introduction of the game (i.e., 31/123 persons injured).

       We use two approaches to assess the incremental cost of injuries to drivers

and passengers. In the first, we use the dollar value of insurance claims. In the

second, we use the value of a statistical injury from Viscusi and Gentry (2015).




                                        23
           The dollar value of insurance claims comprises two components: the claim

for bodily injuries and the claim for lost lifetime income. According to the

Insurance Information Institute (https://www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-

auto-insurance), the average claim for bodily injuries due to vehicular crashes in

the U.S. during 2015–2016 was $16,427. To calculate the lifetime income loss

due to lost time at work, we use data from the Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention         (CDC,       https://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/crash-injuries/index.html).

According to the CDC, total lifetime work lost in the U.S. in 2012 due to

vehicular crash injuries was $33 billion. According to the NHTSA (2013), there

were 2.134 million traffic crash injuries in 2012.15 These statistics imply an

average lifetime income loss of $15,464 per injury. Given the 31 incremental

injuries in Tippecanoe County due to Pokémon GO users playing the game while

driving in the vicinity of PokéStops, the estimated total incremental insurance

claims for injuries is $988,621 (i.e., ($16,427 + $15,464) x 31 incremental

injuries).

           According to Viscusi and Gentry (2015), the value of a statistical injury

for transportation-related events ranges from $70,000 to $210,000. Using the

mid-point of this range as the cost per injured person, the total incremental cost of

injuries is $4.34 million due to users playing the game while driving in the

vicinity of PokéStops in Tippecanoe County over the 148 days following the

15
     https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/812032




                                                 24
introduction of the game (i.e., 31 injured persons x $140,000 per injury). Table 5

summarizes the estimated incremental costs of human injuries.

        The more conservative calculations imply an incremental cost of $9.86 per

year-round county resident of age 15 or older over the 148 days following

introduction of Pokémon GO (i.e., ($498,567 + $988,621)/150,825 Tippecanoe

County year-round residents of age 15 or older.)16 According to the National

Association of Insurance Commissioners (2017), the average annual automobile

insurance premium for the state of Indiana was $728.93 for the year 2014. Pro

rating the $728.93 to a 148 day period, the implied increase in the insurance

premium is 3.34% assuming that every year-round resident of the county of age

15 or older is an insured driver.

4.4.    Value of Human Lives Lost

        To calculate the incremental number of human lives lost, we first

determine the total number of lives lost across all crashes that occurred at a given

location on a given day. The fifth regression in Table 4 uses this as the dependent

variable. The coefficient of the key interaction term, PokéStop100 x Post, is

positive and statistically significant with a value of 0.000017 (p-value = 0.041).

The value of the coefficient implies an incremental increase of two fatalities

during the 148 days from July 6 to November 30, 2016, due to crashes that



16
  We use the cut-off of 15 years or older because the census does not give a category of 16 years
of age or older.




                                               25
occurred within 100 meters of PokéStops (i.e., 0.000017 fatalities per location per

day x 930 locations x 148 days = 2.3 fatalities).

           The sixth regression provides a benchmark by showing that Tippecanoe

County experienced a decline of one fatality related to vehicular crashes per

geographic location per day in the period that followed the introduction of the

game (coefficient = -0.00000074) relative to the pre-Pokémon GO period. Thus,

our analyses indicate that in the absence of the introduction of Pokémon GO,

fatalities would have declined by three rather than one, for a net of two lives that

would not have been lost.

           Attaching a value to a human life is always problematic. We use two

approaches. In the first, we compute lifetime income lost. In the second we use

the value of a statistical life from Viscusi and Gentry (2015).

           To calculate lifetime income lost per fatality, we multiply the annual

income per capita of full-time employees in the cities of Lafayette and West

Lafayette, Indiana, from the American Community Survey Public Use Microdata

Sample files produced by the Census Bureau17 by the difference between average

life expectancy in the US and the median age of persons who died in vehicular

crashes in our sample. To calculate the total lost income, we multiply the loss of

income per fatality by the number of fatalities. The calculation yields a total of

$3,760,000 in lost income due to drivers playing Pokémon GO in the vicinity of

17
     https://datausa.io/profile/geo/tippecanoe-county-in/




                                                   26
PokéStops (2 fatalities x $47,000 per fatality x (80 years - 40 years)). This

number aligns with the estimate from Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004) who

calculate an upper bound of $1.54 million as the value of a statistical life based on

hours of work saved due to a change in the speed limits on rural interstate roads.

       Viscusi and Gentry (2015) report an estimated range of $6.9 to $13.8

million for the value of a statistical life based on transportation related fatalities.

Using the mid-point of the range reported by Viscusi and Gentry, the incremental

value of lives lost due to users playing the game while driving in the proximity of

PokéStops is $20.7 million ($10.35 million x 2 lives lost). Table 5 summarizes

the estimated value of the incremental lives lost.

       Using the more conservative estimate of the value of incremental lives

lost, and assuming that every year-round resident of the county of age 15 or older

is an insured driver, the implied increase in insurance premiums is 11.77% for the

148 days that follow the introduction of the game.

4.5.   Commentary

       Clearly, regardless of how the number is calculated, the value of human

lives lost swamps all other costs. Holding aside that cost, our estimate of other

costs is likely to be downward biased in that we do not include such items as the

costs of police, firefighters, ambulances, road assistance, rental cars, and damage

to other property. Additionally, our total reflects only the incremental cost of

users playing Pokémon GO while driving in the proximity of PokéStops. It does




                                          27
not include any cost due to crashes related to players attempting to capture

Pokémons while driving not in the vicinity of PokéStops. It also does not include

the costs of crashes not reported to the police that are attributable to the drivers

playing the game.

       Regardless of how they are calculated, the incremental economic and

human costs of users playing Pokémon GO while driving are significant.

5.     Robustness Tests

5.1.   Alternative Interpretations: Traffic

       A possible alternative explanation of the results is that the increase in

crashes near PokéStops reflects an increase in traffic due to players driving to

PokéStops, parking their vehicles then playing the game. Thus, while the increase

in crashes near PokéStops is attributable to the introduction of Pokémon GO, it is

not due to users playing the game while driving. To address that possibility, we

conduct three tests, the third of which is reported in an internet appendix.

       First, we use Gyms as a placebo. As we noted, Gyms are locations in

which Pokémon GO related activities take place, but these activities cannot take

place while the player is driving. If the alternative explanation, that the increase

in crashes near PokéStops is the result of an increase in traffic is correct, it

follows that an increase in crashes should also occur in the vicinity of Gyms. To

investigate that possibility, we estimate a regression similar to the baseline

regression in the first column of Table 2, with the only difference being that




                                         28
instead of comparing locations in the proximity of PokéStops to locations not in

the proximity of PokéStops, we compare locations in the proximity of PokéStops

with locations in the proximity of Gyms that are not in the proximity of

PokéStops. The number of locations included in this regression is 1,053. Those

1,053 locations include 930 locations that are within 100 meters of a PokéStop

while 123 are within 100 meters of a Gym and not also within 100 meters of a

PokéStop.

       The results of the regression are given in first column of Table 6. If the

alternative explanation is correct, the coefficient of the interaction between

PokéStop100 and Post would be statistically indistinguishable from zero. Instead,

the coefficient is positive and statistically significant (p-value = 0.026) and even

greater in magnitude than the coefficient in the baseline regression. These results

are inconsistent with the alternative explanation.

       In the second test, we estimate a regression similar to the baseline

regression except that we add the change in the number crashes in the circle (of a

500 meters radius) that surrounds each geographic location as an additional

control variable. By doing so, we recognize that if traffic increased in the circle

surrounding a location, crashes would also increase in that circle. Importantly, we

assume that for traffic to increase at locations in the proximity of PokéStops (as

players drive to those locations), traffic also must increase along the route that

takes players to such locations - - if players were walking to locations in the




                                         29
proximity of PokéStops, vehicular traffic and traffic-related crashes would not

increase.

       To compute the change in the number of daily crashes within the circle

surrounding each location, we exclude crashes at the location in question and

crashes (within the circle) that are within 100 meters of a PokéStop. The first are

excluded because they are the dependent variable; the second are excluded

because those crashes may be attributable to users playing the game while

driving. To capture changes in traffic, we compute the average daily total number

of crashes in the 500 meter circle for the period that follows the introduction of

Pokémon GO, as well as for the period that precedes the introduction of the game.

Because of the inclusion of location fixed effects in the regression, the variable

No. of Crashes within 500 Meters of Location L captures the change in vehicular

crashes in the period that follows the introduction of Pokémon GO relative to the

period that precedes the introduction of the game.

       Contrary to the notion that an increase in traffic gives rise to our results,

the proxy for the change in traffic in the area surrounding a location is

insignificantly related to the change in crashes at the location in question (p-value

= 0.620).   More importantly, the coefficient of the key interaction between

PokéStop100 and Post remains statistically significant (p-value < 0.001).




                                         30
5.2.   Alternative Interpretations: Pedestrians

       Our sample includes 42 instances in which an action(s) by pedestrians is

given in the police report as being the primary cause of the crash. Of these, four

occurred after the introduction of Pokémon GO. To rule out the possibility that

the increase in crashes is due to pedestrians playing the game, we omit these

observations from the sample and re-estimate the baseline regression. The results

are shown in the third column of Table 6. The coefficient of PokéStop100 x Post

is 0.00095 (p-value < 0.001). Thus, the increase in crashes in the proximity of

PokéStops following the introduction of the game is not due to pedestrians.

5.3.   Cause of Crashes Given in the Police Reports

       The sample includes 213 crashes where the “primary cause” given in the

police accident reports is either “Cell Phone Usage” (N=24), “Driver Asleep or

Fatigued” (N=54), or “Driver Distracted” (N=135). We label these “distracted

driver” crashes. It is commonly believed that police accident reports understate

(perhaps by a great margin) the number of crashes due to driver distraction (e.g.,

NHTSA (2009), National Safety Council (2013)). We re-estimate the baseline

regression of Table 2 using the number of distracted driver crashes as the

dependent variable. The results of this regression are reported in the fourth

column of Table 6.      The coefficient of PokéStop100 x Post indicates that

distracted driver crashes as given in the police reports increase disproportionately

in the vicinity of PokéStops following the introduction of Pokémon GO.




                                        31
Although these results are based on a relatively small sample of crashes involving

(presumably) self-reported driver distraction, they do corroborate a link between

PokéStop locations and crashes attributed to distracted drivers.

5.4.   Other Confounding Events

       On November 15, 2012, Niantic launched the augmented reality game

Ingress. The game was also location based, but was much less popular, even at its

peak of popularity, than Pokémon GO. Nevertheless, many of the points of play

of the two games overlap. It is possible that some of the users of Pokémon GO

were not new users of a location-based game. If so, it is possible that some of the

Pokémon GO players were merely substituting one game for the other. In any

event, our estimates of the incremental effect of playing Pokémon GO while

driving are still unbiased.

       Further, on May 16, 2016, Niantic began field testing Pokémon GO in the

U.S. Game-players could apply to enroll in the beta testing and begin playing the

game prior to its official launch. To the extent that such activity increased crashes

in the vicinity of PokéStops prior to July 6, 2016, certain of our estimates of the

incremental increase in crashes due to introduction of the game would be

downward biased. However, the tests in which the frequency of crashes in the

vicinity of PokéStops in the week or month after the introduction of the game is

compared with the frequency of crashes in the vicinity of PokéStops in the same

week or month of the prior year cannot suffer from this bias.




                                         32
5.5.   Identifying Assumptions

       The results in the paper are based on a difference-in-differences

methodology.    A clear benefit of this approach is its simplicity and, thus,

transparency.   It is, however, important to recognize that the methodology

crucially relies on two assumptions: (1) the exogeneity of the timing of the

introduction of Pokémon GO and (2) the comparability of the locations in the

proximity of PokéStops and of locations not in the proximity of PokéStops.

5.5.1. Exogeneity of the Timing of the Introduction of Pokémon GO

       A number of tests in the earlier sections validate the exogeneity of the

timing of the introduction of Pokémon GO. Importantly, we show that the results

are robust to using a short time interval that includes a sharp discontinuity

represented by the introduction of the game. We also document that, following

the introduction of the game, the magnitude of the results varied as the number of

players changed over time.       Thus, the results are concentrated around the

introduction of the game and vary depending on the intensity of play. These

results support the presumption that the date of the introduction of the game is

exogenous.

5.5.2. Comparability of the Locations

       The comparability of locations in the proximity of PokéStops and

locations not in the proximity of PokéStops relies on the assumption that, absent

the introduction of the game, the average change in the number of crashes over




                                        33
time would have been the same for the two sets of locations. We refer to this as

the parallel trends assumption.

       To test whether the data satisfy the parallel trends assumption, we estimate

a regression in which the dependent variable is the number of crashes per location

per day. The key independent variables are interactions between PokéStop100

and an indicator for each month over the sample period excluding the months of

October and November 2015. We exclude two months so as to have a benchmark

for comparison.    We exclude October and November 2015 as they are the

midpoint of the pre-Pokémon GO time period. Further, these months are not an

unreasonable benchmark because the difference in the number of crashes at

locations in the vicinity of PokéStops in these months and locations not in the

vicinity of PokéStops during these months is representative of the typical

difference during the pre-Pokémon GO period. The other independent variables

are date and location fixed effects and the interaction between University Break

and PokéStop100.

       The parallel trends assumption is supported if the coefficients of the

month and PokéStop100 interaction variables do not indicate a trend through time

prior to July 6, 2016. Figure 1 is a plot of the coefficients by month over the

entire sample period. As the figure shows, there is no trend in the coefficients

over the months that precede the introduction of the game, thereby, supporting the

parallel trends assumption.       Equally important, the figure evidences a sharp




                                          34
discontinuity starting the month of the introduction of Pokémon GO.             The

coefficient of the interaction term is positive in each of the following months and

statistically significant for the intervals of July 6, 2016, through July 31, 2016,

and the months of August and October. In line with Table 2, the coefficient of the

interaction term declines in the months that follow the introduction of the game,

in line with the decline in the number of active players. These results confirm the

connection between the introduction of the game and the increase in crashes in the

proximity of PokéStops. These results validate the use of the difference-in-

differences methodology.

6.     Conclusion

       Based on detailed police accident reports for Tippecanoe County, Indiana,

we determine that users playing the augmented reality game Pokémon GO while

driving gave rise to a disproportionate increase in vehicular crashes, injuries, and

fatalities in the vicinity of PokéStops over the 148 days following the introduction

of the game. In total, the estimated incremental costs associated with these

crashes range from $5.2 million to $25.5 million with the variability in the range

being largely attributable to the value assigned to the two incremental lives lost.

Regardless of how they are measured, the costs are significant, as are the implied

increases in vehicular insurance premiums.

       Extrapolation of our results to a state-wide or nation-wide total is

speculative, and may be especially so given that the playing of games on mobile




                                        35
phones while driving is legal in in the state of Indiana but not in all other states.

With that in mind, as a point of reference, if the increases in crashes associated

with Tippecanoe County are applied to the national totals, the increase in crashes

attributable to the introduction of Pokémon GO is 145,632 with an associated

increase in the number of injuries of 29,370 and an associated increase in the

number of fatalities of 256 over the period of July 6, 2016, through November 30,

2016.18 The implied nation-wide economic cost of users playing the game while

driving in the vicinity of PokéStops ranges from $2 billion to $7.3 billion over the

148 days following introduction of the game with equally large implied increases

in insurance premiums.

        Using these numbers as a basis for policy recommendations is tempting.

The immediate impulse is to recommend further bans on the use of smartphones

while driving. The cautions associated with such a recommendation are three-

fold. First, in response to concerns about potential crashes due to users playing

the game while driving, in an update of the game, Niantic added a pop up

message saying “You’re going too fast! Pokémon GO should not be played while


18
  The increase in the number of crashes nation-wide, 145,632, is calculated as 6,296,000 crashes x
134/5,793, where 6,296,000 is the total number of vehicular crashes in the U.S. in 2015 (NHTSA,
2016), 134 is the number of incremental crashes attributable to Pokémon GO during the time
interval of July 6, 2016, through November 30, 2016 (from Table 2), and 5,793 is the county-wide
number        of      vehicular     crashes     in     Tippecanoe       Country       in      2015
(http://bikewalkgreaterlafayette.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/2015_Tippecanoe-
County_Crash-Report.pdf). The increase in the number of nation-wide injuries, 29,370, is
computed as 145,632 x 0.20167 persons injured per crash (from Table 1). The increase in the
number of nation-wide fatalities, 256, is computed as 145,632 x 0.00176 fatalities per crash (from
Table 1).




                                               36
driving.” This message pops up when the game detects the player to be in a

rapidly moving vehicle. A message further asks the player to confirm that she is a

passenger. Thus, in an effort at self-regulation, the game cautions users against

playing the game while driving.       Second, policy recommendations require a

consideration of both costs and benefits and we have made no attempt to calculate

the economic benefits of using mobile devices while driving. We acknowledge,

though, that identifying any economic benefits of playing Pokémon GO while

driving stretches our imaginations. Third, as concluded by Abouk and Adams

(2013), the Highway Loss Data Institute (2010), and Lim and Chi (2013), the

effect, if any, of bans on the usage of mobile phones (including texting) while

driving appears to be short-lived or limited to specific subsets of drivers.




                                         37
References
Abouk, Rahi, and Scott Adams, 2013, Texting and Fatal Accidents on Roadways:
  Do they Work? Or do Drivers Just React to Announcements of Bans, American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 5(2), 179-199.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Michael Greenstone, 2004, Using Mandated Speed Limits
  to Measure the Value of a Statistical Life, Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
  112(1), 226-267.
Aspin, Chris, 1995, The First Industrial Society: Lancashire 1750–1850,
  Carnegie Publishing.
Ayers, John W., Eric C. Leas, Mark Dredze, Jon-Patrick Allem, Jurek G.
  Grabowski, and Linda Hill, 2016, Pokémon GO—A New Distraction for
  Drivers and Pedestrians, JAMA Internal Medicine, Vol. 176 (12), 1865-1866.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004, How Much
  Should We Trust Differences-In-Differences Estimates? The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, Vol. 119 (1), 249-275.
Bhargava, Saurabh, and Vikram S. Pathania, 2013, Driving under the (Cellular)
  Influence, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 5(3), 92-125.
Cohen, Joshua T., and John D. Graham, 2003, A Revised Economic Analysis of
  Restrictions on the Use of Cell Phones While Driving, Risk Analysis, Vol.
  23(1), 5-17.
Hahn, Robert W., and James E. Prieger, 2014, The Impact of Driver Cell Phone
  Use on Accidents, AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies,
  Working paper 04-14.
Highway Loss Data Institute, 2010, Texting Laws and Collision Claim
  Frequencies. Highway Loss Data Institute Bulletin, Vol. 27(11). Arlington,
  Virginia
Kolko, Jed D., 2009, The Effects of Mobile Phone and Hands-Free Laws on
  Traffic Fatalities, B. E. Journal of Economic Analysis and & Policy, Vol. 9(1),




                                      38
  Article 10.
Lim, Siew Hoon, and Junwook Chi, 2013, Cellphone Bans and Fatal Motor
  Vehicle Crash Rates in the United States, Journal of Public Health Policy, Vol.
  34(2), 197-212.
McCartt, Anne T., David G. Kidd, and Eric R. Teoh, 2014, Driver Cellphone and
  Texting Bans in the United States: Evidence of Effectiveness, Annals of
  Advances in Automotive Medicine, Vol. 58, 99-114.
National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 2017, Auto Insurance
  Database Report 2013/2014.
National Safety Council, 2013, Crashes Involving Cell Phones. Challenges of
  Collecting and Reporting Reliable Crash Data. Itasca, Illinois.
NHTSA, 2009, An Examination of Driver Distraction as Recorded in NHTSA
  Databases, U.S. Department of Transportation.
NHTSA, 2010, Traffic Safety Facts 2008, U.S. Department of Transportation.
NHTSA, various years, Motor Vehicle Crashes: Overview, U.S. Department of
  Transportation.
Peltzman, Sam, 1975, The Effects of Automobile Safety Regulation, Journal of
  Political Economy, Vol. 83(4), 677-726.
Petersen, Mitchell A., 2009, Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data
  Sets: Comparing Approaches, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 22(1),
  435-480.
Redelmeir, Donald A, and Robert J. Tibshirani, 1997, Association between
  Cellular-Telephone Calls and Motor Vehicle Collisions, The New England
  Journal of Medicine, Vol. 336(7), 453-458.
Viscusi, W. Kip, and Elissa Philip Gentry, 2015, The Value of a Statistical Life
  for Transportation Regulations: A Test of the Benefits Transfer Methodology,
  The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 51(1), 53-77.




                                       39
                                Table 1. Descriptive Statistics.
    The dataset includes 11,355 crashes for which x,y coordinates (that locate the crashes
    within Tippecanoe County) are available in the police accident reports. For these
    crashes, Panel A tabulates the estimated average damage to the vehicles, the number of
    persons injured per crash, and the number of fatalities per crash. The sample period is
    split into two subperiods: The 493-day period that precedes the introduction of Pokémon
    GO (i.e., March 1, 2015, through July 5, 2016), and the 148-day period that follows the
    introduction of the game (i.e., July 6, 2016, through November 30, 2106). The number of
    crashes per day is the ratio of the total number of crashes divided by the number of days.
    The number of crashes per location per day (No. of CrashesL,T ) is the ratio of the number
    of crashes per day divided by the number of geographic locations. The sample consists
    of 4,708 distinct geographic locations, i.e., pairs of x,y coordinates at which at least one
    crash occurred during March 1, 2015, through November 30, 2016. The Pokémon GO-
    related data in Panel B are from CyanSub. Panel C gives summary statistics at the
    location/date level for the variables used in the regression analyses. PokéStop100 is an
    indicator variable that takes the value of 1 for location L if location L is within 100
    meters of a PokéStop, and 0 otherwise. Gym100 is an indicator variable that takes the
    value of 1 for location L if location L is within 100 meters of a Gym, and 0 otherwise.
    Post is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on July 6, 2016 and
    ending on November 30, 2016, and zero 0 for the period that precedes the introduction of
    Pokémon GO. University Break is an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the date in
    question is a university break date, and 0 otherwise. The sample period includes three
    university breaks: the 2015 summer break [5/10/2015-8/23/2016], the 2015/2016 winter
    break [12/20/2015-1/10/2016], and the 2016 summer break [5/8/2016-8/21/2016].
    Estimated Damage to the Vehicles is the (range mid-point) dollar value of the total
    damage to the vehicles involved in crashes that occurred at location L on day D. No. of
    Persons Injured is the number of persons injured in crashes that occurred at location L on
    day D. No. of Fatalities is the number of persons who lost their lives in crashes that
    occurred at location L on day D.

                                                             Before On July 6, 2016,
Panel A: Police Accident Reports Data      No. of Obs. July 6, 2016         or Later
Total No. of Crashes                           11,355         8,505            2,850
Estimated Damage to the Vehicles per Crash     $4,459        $4,370          $4,726
No. of Persons Injured per Crash              0.20167      0.19647          0.21719
No. of Fatalities per Crash                   0.00176      0.00188          0.00140

No. of Days                                                641              493                 148
No. of Crashes per Day                                   17.71            17.25                19.26




                                                40
No. of (X,Y) Geographic Locations                 4,708      4,708        4,708
No. of CrashesL,T per Location per Day         0.00376    0.00366      0.00409

Panel B: Pokémon-GO Related Data          No. of Obs.
No. of PokéStops                                  615
No. of Gyms                                      147


Panel C: Merged Data
(At the Location/Day Level)      No. of Obs.     Mean Std. Dev. Min       Max
No. of CrashesL,T                 3,017,828    0.00376  0.06217   0          3
PokéStop100                       3,017,828    0.19754  0.39814   0          1
Gym100                            3,017,828    0.07285  0.25990   0          1
Post                              3,017,828    0.23089  0.42140   0          1
University Break                  3,017,828    0.36505  0.48145   0          1
Estimated Damage to the Vehicles  3,017,828     $16.73   $479.3  $0   $100,001
No. of Persons Injured            3,017,828    0.00076  0.03584   0          8
No. of Fatalities                 3,017,828    0.00001  0.00257   0          1




                                         41
                            Table 2. Number of Crashes at Any Given Location on Any Given Day.
This table reports regressions in which the dependent variable, No. of Crashes, is the number of crashes at any given location on any given day.
The sample consists of 4,708 distinct geographic locations (i.e., distinct pairs of projected x,y coordinates on which a crash occurred) and 641
days in the sample period. PokéStop100 is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 for location L if location L is within 100 meters of a
PokéStop, and 0 otherwise. Post is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on July 6, 2016 and ending on November 30,
2016, and zero 0 for the period that precedes the introduction of Pokémon GO. PokéStop100 x Post[July 6–July 12] is an indicator that takes
the value of 1 for the period starting on July 6, 2016 and ending on July 12, 2016, and zero otherwise. PokéStop100 x Post[July 6–July 31] is
an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on July 6, 2016 (i.e., the day on which Pokémon GO was introduced) and ending on
July 31, 2016, and zero otherwise. PokéStop100 x Post [Aug 1–Aug 31] is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on
August 1, 2016 and ending on August 31, 2016, and zero otherwise. PokéStop100 x Post[Sep 1–Nov 30] is an indicator that takes the value of
1 for the period starting on September 1, 2016 and ending on November 30, 2016, and zero otherwise. University Break is an indicator that
takes the value of 1 if the date in question is a university break date, and 0 otherwise. The sample period includes three university breaks: the
2015 summer break [5/10/2015-8/23/2016], the 2015/2016 winter break [12/20/2015-1/10/2016], and the 2016 summer break [5/8/2016-
8/21/2016]. In the first, second, and third regressions the treatment period is July 6, 2016 through November 30, 2016, and the control period
is March 1, 2015, through July 5, 2016. In the fourth regression, the treatment period is July 6, 2016, through July 31, 2016, and the control
period is July 6, 2015, through July 31, 2015. In the fifth regression, the treatment period is July 6, 2016, through July 12, 2016, and the
control period is July 6, 2015, through July 12, 2015. The numbers in parentheses are standard errors double clustered at the geographic
location and date levels.
                                                               No. of           No. of            No. of           No. of            No. of
                                                               Crashes          Crashes           Crashes          Crashes           Crashes
PokéStop100 x Post                                             0.00097
                                                              (0.00028)
PokéStop100 x Post[July 6–July 31]                                                                0.00164          0.00167
                                                                                                 (0.00056)        (0.00070)
PokéStop100 x Post [Aug 1–Aug 31]                                                                 0.00117
                                                                                                 (0.00055)
PokéStop100 x Post[Sep 1–Nov 30]                                                                  0.00069
                                                                                                 (0.00035)
PokéStop100 x Post[July 6–July 12]                                                                                                   0.00242
                                                                                                                                    (0.00134)




                                                                       42
Post                                                             0.00041
                                                               (0.00013)
University Break                                                -0.00024
                                                               (0.00011)
PokéStop100 x University Break                     -0.00036                -0.00051
                                                   (0.00023)               (0.00023)
No. of Observations                                3,017,828   3,017,828   3,017,828   244,816   65,912
Geographic Location Fixed Effects                     Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
Date Fixed Effects                                    Yes         No          Yes        Yes       Yes
No. of Geographic Locations                          4,708       4,708       4,708      4,708     4,708
No. of Days                                           641         641         641        52         14
% of Locations within 100 Meters of a PokéStop      19.75%      19.75%      19.75%     19.75%    19.75%
No. of Locations within 100 Meters of a PokéStop      930         930         930        930       930
Adjusted R2                                          0.010       0.010       0.010      0.009     0.008




                                                         43
                            Table 3. Number of Crashes at Any Given Location on Any Given Day.
This table reports regressions in which the dependent variable, No. of Crashes, is the number of crashes at any given location on any given day.
The sample consists of 4,708 distinct geographic locations (i.e., distinct pairs of projected x,y coordinates on which a crash occurred) and 641
days in the sample period. PokéStop is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for location L if location L is within M meters of a PokéStop,
and 0 otherwise. Post is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on July 6, 2016, and ending on November 30, 2016, and
zero 0 for the period that precedes the introduction of Pokémon GO. University Break is an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the date in
question is a university break date, and 0 otherwise. The sample period includes three university breaks: the 2015 summer break [5/10/2015-
8/23/2016], the 2015/2016 winter break [12/20/2015-1/10/2016], and the 2016 summer break [5/8/2016-8/21/2016]. The numbers in
parentheses are standard errors double clustered at the geographic location and date levels.
                                                                          No. of            No. of             No. of             No. of
                                                                         Crashes            Crashes            Crashes            Crashes
PokéStop50 x Post                                                        0.00124
                                                                        (0.00043)
PokéStop100 x Post                                                                          0.00097
                                                                                           (0.00028)
PokéStop250 x Post                                                                                             0.00051
                                                                                                              (0.00019)
PokéStop500 x Post                                                                                                                0.00027
                                                                                                                                 (0.00019)
PokéStop100 x University Break                                           -0.00039          -0.00036           -0.00040           -0.00041
                                                                        (0.00023)          (0.00023)          (0.00023)          (0.00023)
No. of Observations                                                     3,017,828          3,017,828          3,017,828          3,017,828
Geographic Location Fixed Effects                                           Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
Date Fixed Effects                                                          Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
No. of Geographic Locations                                                4,708             4,708              4,708              4,708
No. of Days                                                                 641               641                641                641




                                                                      44
% of Locations within M Meters of a PokéStop          8.69%   19.75%   47.45%   73.02%
No. of Locations within M Meters of a PokéStop         409      930     2,234    3,438
Adjusted R2                                           0.010    0.010    0.010    0.010




                                                 45
                                                    Table 4. Severity of the Crashes.
This table reports regressions in which the dependent variables are the estimated damage to the vehicles involved in traffic crashes, the number
of persons injured, and the number of fatalities in traffic crashes. Estimated Damage to the Vehicles is the (range mid-point) dollar value of the
total damage to the vehicles involved in crashes that occurred at location L on day D, as reported in the police accident reports. No. of Persons
Injured is the number of persons injured in crashes that occurred at location L on day D. No. of Fatalities is the number of persons who lost
their lives in crashes that occurred at location L on day D. PokéStop100 is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 for location L if
location L is within 100 meters of a PokéStop, and 0 otherwise. Post is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on July 6,
2016, and ending on November 30, 2016, and 0 for the period that precedes the introduction of Pokémon GO. University Break is an indicator
that takes the value of 1 if the date in question is a university break date, and 0 otherwise. The sample period includes three university breaks:
the 2015 summer break [5/10/2015-8/23/2016], the 2015/2016 winter break [12/20/2015-1/10/2016], and the 2016 summer break [5/8/2016-
8/21/2016]. The numbers in parentheses are standard errors double clustered at the geographic location and date levels.
                                              Estimated           Estimated           No. of          No. of
                                               Damage              Damage            Persons         Persons        No. of            No. of
                                           to the Vehicles     to the Vehicles        Injured        Injured       Fatalities        Fatalities
PokéStop100 x Post                             3.62225                              0.000222                       0.000017
                                              (1.91972)                            (0.000137)                     (0.000008)
PokéStop100 x University Break                 -1.33860                             -0.000237                      0.000001
                                              (1.61882)                            (0.000102)                     (0.000010)
Post                                                               3.25748                          0.000176                       -0.00000074
                                                                  (0.85854)                        (0.000054)                     (0.00000370)
University Break                                                   -0.54364                         0.000123                        0.00000668
                                                                  (0.71052)                        (0.000045)                     (0.00000370)
No. of Observations                           3,017,828           3,017,828         3,017,828       3,017,828      3,017,828         3,017,828
Geographic Location Fixed Effects                Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes
Date Fixed Effects                               Yes                  No               Yes             No             Yes               No
Adjusted R2                                     0.004                0.004            0.002           0.002          0.000             0.000




                                                                       46
                                          Table 5. Economic Costs of Users Playing Pokémon GO while Driving.
    This table summarizes the calculation of the economic costs of users playing Pokémon GO while driving. The number of incremental crashes is from the first
    regression in Table 2. The total incremental aggregate damage to the vehicles is from the first regression in Table 4. The number of incremental injuries is from
    the third regression in Table 4. The average claim for bodily injuries is from the Insurance Information Institute. The lifetime income loss due to lost time at
    work is based on data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The value of a statistical injury is from Viscusi and Gentry (2015). The lifetime
    income lost (per fatality) is the annual income per capita of full-time employees in the cities of Lafayette and West Lafayette, Indiana, from the Census Bureau,
    multiplied by the difference between average life expectancy in the US and the median age of persons who died in vehicular crashes in our sample. The value of
    a statistical life is from Viscusi and Gentry (2015). In Approach 1, the incremental cost of injuries is based on the dollar value of insurance claims, and the value
    of a human life is based on the lifetime income lost. In Approach 2, the incremental cost of injuries is based on the value of a statistical injury from Viscusi and
    Gentry (2015), and the value of a human life is based on the value of a statistical life from Viscusi and Gentry (2015).

                                                                          No.      $ per Person      Approach 1        Approach 1            $ per Person        Approach 2
Number of incremental crashes                                             134
Total incremental aggregate damages to the vehicles                                                                       $498,567                                 $498,567
Number of incremental injuries                                    31
Average claim for bodily injuries                                                         $16,427
Total incremental claims for bodily injuries                                                            $509,237
Lifetime income loss due to lost time at work                                             $15,464
Total incremental claims for income loss due to lost time at work                                       $479,384
Value of a statistical injury                                                                                                                   $140,000
Total incremental cost of injuries                                                                                        $988,621                               $4,340,000
Number of incremental fatalities                                   2
Lifetime income lost                                                                $1,880,000
Value of a statistical life                                                                                                                  $10,350,000
Incremental total value of lives lost                                                                                   $3,760,000                              $20,700,000
Total incremental cost of users playing Pokémon GO while driving                                                        $5,247,188                              $25,538,567




                                                                                     47
                                            Table 6. Placebo Tests and Alternative Explanations.
This table reports regressions in which the dependent variable, No. of Crashes, is the number of crashes at any given location on any given day.
The sample consists of 4,708 distinct geographic locations (i.e., distinct pairs of projected x,y coordinates on which a crash occurred) and 641 days
in the sample period. PokéStop100 is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 for location L if location L is within 100 meters of a PokéStop,
and 0 otherwise. Post is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on July 6, 2016, and ending on November 30, 2016, and zero 0
for the period that precedes the introduction of Pokémon GO. University Break is an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the date in question is a
university break date, and 0 otherwise. The sample period includes three university breaks: the 2015 summer break [5/10/2015-8/23/2016], the
2015/2016 winter break [12/20/2015-1/10/2016], and the 2016 summer break [5/8/2016-8/21/2016]. No. of Crashes within 500 Meters of
Location L is the average number of crashes across all locations within the 500 meter radius circle that surrounds location L, excluding location L
itself and any other location in the circle that is within 100 meters of a PokéStop. The average is computed during July 6, 2016, through
November 30, 2016, for dates in the post-Pokémon period, and during March 1, 2015, through July 5, 2016, for dates in the pre-Pokémon period.
No. of Crashes (Excluding Crashes Involving Pedestrians) is the number of crashes at any given location on any given day, excluding instances in
which an action(s) by pedestrians is given in the police report as being the primary cause of the crash. No. of Distracted Driver Crashes is the
number of crashes at any given location on any given day where the “primary cause” listed in the police accident report is either “Cell Phone
Usage,” “Driver Asleep or Fatigued,” or “Driver Distracted.” The numbers in parentheses are standard errors double clustered at the geographic
location and date levels.




                                                                         48
                                                                    Locations within
                                             Locations within 100   100 Meters of a     No. of Crashes
                         Treatment Group:    Meters of a PokéStop      PokéStop           (Excluding            No. of
                                                                                       Crashes Involving   Distracted Driver
                                             Locations within 100      All Other         Pedestrians)           Crashes
                            Control Group:    Meters of a Gym          Locations
PokéStop100 x Post                                  0.00114             0.00097            0.00095            0.0000588
                                                  (0.00051)            (0.00028)          (0.00028)          (0.0000356)
PokéStop100 x University Break                     -0.00073            -0.00036           -0.00035             -0.00004
                                                  (0.00047)            (0.00023)          (0.00023)           (0.00002)
No. of Crashes within 500 Meters of                                    -0.00151
Location L                                                             (0.00305)
No. of Observations                                674,973             3,017,828          3,017,828           3,017,828
No. of Geographic Locations                         1,053                4,708              4,708               4,708
 within 100 Meters of a PokéStop                     930                  930                 930                930
 with no PokéStops within 100 Meters                 123                 3,778               3,778              3,778
No. of Days                                          641                  641                641                 641
Geographic Location Fixed Effects                    Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
Date Fixed Effects                                   Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
Adjusted R2                                         0.012                0.010               0.01                0.00




                                                              49
             Figure 1. Differences in the Number of Crashes at Locations in the Proximity of PokéStops vs Other Locations.
This figure plots the coefficients of a difference-in-differences regression in which the number of crashes at any given geographic location on any given day is
the dependent variable and the independent variables are interactions between PokéStop100 and indicators for each month (with the exception of October and
November, 2015) during the sample period, an interaction between University Break and PokéStop100, and date and location fixed effects. The months of
October and November, 2015, serve as the benchmark. The horizontal bars are the coefficients of the interaction terms between PokéStop100 and the indicator
denoting the month in question. The vertical bars represent the 90% confidence intervals. The red squared icons indicate that the average difference for the
month in question is significantly different from the difference during October and November, 2015.
                           Y = No. of Crashes per Location per Day                                                                                                                                Post Pokémon GO
                           Pokéstop100 = 1 vs Pokéstop100 = 0
                      0.003000


                      0.002000


                      0.001000


                      0.000000


                     -0.001000                                                                                                                                           Pokémon GO
                                                                                                                                                                          beta testing
                                                                                                                                        Dec-2015
                                                                                                                  Oct-2015
                                     Mar-2015


                                                           May-2015
                                                Apr-2015


                                                                      Jun-2015
                                                                                 Jul-2015
                                                                                            Aug-2015
                                                                                                       Sep-2015


                                                                                                                             Nov-2015


                                                                                                                                                   Jan-2016
                                                                                                                                                              Feb-2016
                                                                                                                                                                         Mar-2016


                                                                                                                                                                                               May-2016
                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr-2016


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jun-2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jul-2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug-2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sep-2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oct-2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nov-2016
                     -0.002000




                                                                                                                                    50
                                           DEATH BY POKÉMON GO:

            THE ECONOMIC AND HUMAN COST OF USING APPS WHILE DRIVING



                                                  Internet Appendix



           This appendix presents additional robustness tests.

A.1.       Alternative Interpretations: Traffic

           In Section 5.1. we present two tests of the alternative hypothesis that the increase in

crashes is due to an increase in traffic as opposed to users playing Pokémon GO while driving.

In a third test of this alternative hypothesis that we present here, we estimate a regression similar

to the baseline regression in Table 2 (first column) except that we add an interaction variable to

account for the possibility that locations with a different number of crashes prior to the

introduction of Pokémon GO are differently affected by the introduction of the game. The

underlying premise is that the number of crashes prior to the introduction of the game is a proxy

for the level of traffic.19 If the alternative explanation is correct, the coefficient of the interaction

of No. of Crashes at Location L before Pokémon GO with Post would be statistically significant.

As shown in the first column of Table A1, it is not. Additionally, the key interaction of interest,

PokéStop100 x Post, is, as before, positive and statistically significant (p-value < 0.001). These

results are also inconsistent with the alternative explanation.

A.2.       Alternative Interpretations: Passengers

           Another possibility is that some crashes in the vicinity of PokéStops are attributable to

distraction associated with the game, but it is a passenger rather than the driver who is playing


19
     Ideally, of course, we would use actual traffic levels. Unfortunately such data are not available.

                                                             51
the game. To rule out those cases, we omit from the sample observations in which the police

reports indicate that the vehicle of the driver causing the crash had more than one occupant. We

then re-estimate the baseline regression. The results are reported in the second column of Table

A1. The coefficient of PokéStop100 x Post is 0.00087 with a p-value of 0.001 implying that 120

of the 134 incremental crashes are certainly not due to a passenger playing the game (i.e.,

0.00087 incremental crashes per location per day x 930 locations x 148 days = 120 incremental

crashes).

A.3.    Censoring of Locations: Analyses Based on Intersections

        The units of analysis in the tests in the paper are the geographic locations that

experienced at least one crash during March 1, 2015, through November 30, 2016. We impose

no requirement as to whether the crashes occurred prior to or subsequent to the introduction of

Pokémon GO. The sample is nevertheless censored in that locations that did not experience

crashes are not included. Mathematically, there is an infinity of such locations, e.g., points in a

road.

        In this section, we address the concern that such censoring may introduce a bias in our

estimation. We address this concern by identifying locations in an alternative way. Specifically,

we conduct the tests using street intersections in Tippecanoe County as the unit of analysis. We

identify 4,745 intersections from OpenStreetMap. Importantly, as we noted earlier, the majority

of these intersections experienced no crashes during the sample period.

        Intersections          are           identified           from            OpenStreetMap

(https://www.openstreetmap.org/#map=14/40.4239/-86.8928) using a parsing program.              The

boundaries of Tippecanoe County and the various cities’ limits are identified from

https://osm.wno-edv-service.de/boundaries.     Each intersection is defined by the intersecting



                                                52
street names, latitude and longitude. The parsing program identifies 4,745 intersections. We use

the street names and municipalities to merge the data. Of the 8,951 crashes that occurred at

intersections, we are able to match 85.22% with an intersection identified from the maps.

36.38% of the intersections experienced at least one crash and 63.62% of the intersections

experienced no crashes during the sample period.

       The unit of observation is each intersection/date pair of which there are 3,041,545. We

use these data to address questions of whether the frequency and severity of crashes increased

disproportionately at intersections in the vicinity of PokéStops following the introduction of

Pokémon GO. At intersections in the vicinity of PokéStops, the number of crashes per day

increased from 0.005989 before to 0.007667 after the introduction of the game. In comparison,

at intersections that are not in the vicinity of PokéStops, the number of crashes per day increased

from 0.002015 to 0.002155.

       Table A2 presents the results of regression analyses of the number and severity of crashes

using the intersection/day pair as the unit of analysis. The coefficients of the key interaction

term PokéStop100 x Post are positive in all four regressions and are statistically significant in

three of the four with p-values of 0.002, 0.032, 0.054, and 0.180, respectively. Furthermore,

contrary to the concern that the coefficients in the regressions based on geographic locations are

inflated due to censoring of locations, in all four regressions reported in Table A2, the

coefficients are larger than their equivalents in Tables 2 and 4.

       These results are consistent with our prior findings and with our interpretation that the

significant increase in crashes in the vicinity of PokéStops is due to Pokémon GO participants

playing the game while driving.




                                                 53
                         Table A1. Placebo Tests and Alternative Explanations.
This table reports regressions in which the dependent variable, No. of Crashes, is the number of crashes at any given
location on any given day. The sample consists of 4,708 distinct geographic locations (i.e., distinct pairs of
projected x,y coordinates on which a crash occurred) and 641 days in the sample period. PokéStop100 is an
indicator variable that takes the value of 1 for location L if location L is within 100 meters of a PokéStop, and 0
otherwise. Post is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period starting on July 6, 2016, and ending on
November 30, 2016, and zero 0 for the period that precedes the introduction of Pokémon GO. University Break is
an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the date in question is a university break date, and 0 otherwise. The sample
period includes three university breaks: the 2015 summer break [5/10/2015-8/23/2016], the 2015/2016 winter break
[12/20/2015-1/10/2016], and the 2016 summer break [5/8/2016-8/21/2016]. No. of Crashes at Location L before
Pokémon GO is the average number of daily crashes at location L in the period prior to the introduction of Pokémon
GO. No. of Crashes (Excluding Crashes Involving Vehicles with Multiple Occupants) is the number of crashes at
any given location on any given day, excluding instances in which the vehicle of the driver causing the crash had
more than one occupant according to the police report. The numbers in parentheses are standard errors double
clustered at the geographic location and date levels.

                                                         Locations within 100                No. of Crashes
                              Treatment Group:                                             (Excluding Crashes
                                                         Meters of a PokéStop
                                                                                         Involving Vehicles with
                                 Control Group:           All Other Locations              Multiple Occupants)
PokéStop100 x Post                                               0.00104                          0.00087
                                                               (0.00028)                         (0.00027)
PokéStop100 x University Break                                  -0.00036                         -0.00029
                                                               (0.00023)                         (0.00022)
No. of Crashes at Location L before                            -0.08670
Pokémon GO x Post                                              (0.06464)
No. of Observations                                            3,017,828                         3,017,828
No. of Geographic Locations                                       4,708                            4,708
 within 100 Meters of a PokéStop                                    930                              930
 with no PokéStops within 100 Meters                               3,778                            3,778
No. of Days                                                        641                              641
Geographic Location Fixed Effects                                  Yes                              Yes
Date Fixed Effects                                                 Yes                              Yes
Adjusted R2                                                       0.010                            0.007




                                                         54
                                Table A2. Crashes and Severity of the Crashes: Results at the Intersection Level.
This table reports regressions in which the dependent variables are the number of crashes, the estimated damage to the vehicles involved in crashes, the number
of persons injured, and the number of fatalities in traffic crashes. No. of Crashes is the number of crashes at any given intersection on any given day. Estimated
Damage to the Vehicles is the (range mid-point) dollar value of the total damage to the vehicles involved in crashes that occurred at any given intersection on any
given day. No. of Persons Injured is the number of persons injured in crashes that occurred at any given intersection on any given day. No. of Fatalities is the
number of persons who lost their lives in crashes that occurred at any given intersection on any given day. PokéStop100 is an indicator variable that takes the
value of 1 for intersection I if intersection I is within 100 meters of a PokéStop, and 0 otherwise. Post is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the period
starting on July 6, 2016, and ending on November 30, 2016, and zero 0 for the period that precedes the introduction of Pokémon GO. University Break is an
indicator that takes the value of 1 if the date in question is a university break date, and 0 otherwise. The sample period includes three university breaks: the 2015
summer break [5/10/2015-8/23/2016], the 2015/2016 winter break [12/20/2015-1/10/2016], and the 2016 summer break [5/8/2016-8/21/2016]. The numbers in
parentheses are standard errors double clustered at the intersection and date levels.

                                                                                No. of          Estimated Damage             No. of Persons            No. of
                                                                                Crashes          to the Vehicles                 Injured              Fatalities
PokéStop100 x Post                                                             0.00147                6.44088                   0.00047              0.0000218
                                                                              (0.00047)             (3.00391)                  (0.00024)            (0.0000162)
PokéStop100 x University Break                                                 -0.00104              -6.43036                   -0.00031              0.00000
                                                                              (0.00037)             (2.42280)                  (0.00017)             (0.00002)
No. of Observations                                                           3,041,545             3,041,545                 3,041,545              3,041,545
Intersection Fixed Effects                                                        Yes                   Yes                        Yes                   Yes
Date Fixed Effects                                                                Yes                   Yes                        Yes                   Yes
No. of Intersections                                                             4,745                 4,745                      4,745                 4,745
No. of Days                                                                       641                   641                        641                   641
No. of Intersections within 100 Meters of a PokéStop                              505                   505                        505                   505
Adjusted R2                                                                      0.027                 0.009                      0.004                0.000




                                                                                 55
