                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  STRONG EMPLOYERS AND WEAK EMPLOYEES:
              HOW DOES EMPLOYER CONCENTRATION AFFECT WAGES?

                                       Efraim Benmelech
                                        Nittai Bergman
                                        Hyunseob Kim

                                      Working Paper 24307
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24307


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




We thank Eric Kim for research assistance, Bert Grider at the TRFSRDC for helping with data
and clearance requests, and Evan Buntrock at the NYFSRDC (Cornell) for administrative
assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to
ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, and Hyunseob Kim. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Strong Employers and Weak Employees: How Does Employer Concentration Affect Wages?
Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, and Hyunseob Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 24307
February 2018
JEL No. E24,J21,J23,J31,J42

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze the effect of local-level labor market concentration on wages. Using Census data over
the period 1977–2009, we find that: (1) local-level employer concentration exhibits substantial
cross-sectional and time-series variation and increases over time; (2) consistent with labor market
monopsony power, there is a negative relation between local-level employer concentration and
wages that is more pronounced at high levels of concentration and increases over time; (3) the
negative relation between labor market concentration and wages is stronger when unionization
rates are low; (4) the link between productivity growth and wage growth is stronger when labor
markets are less concentrated; and (5) exposure to greater import competition from China (the
“China Shock”) is associated with more concentrated labor markets. These five results emphasize
the role of local-level labor market monopsonies in influencing firm wage-setting behavior and
can potentially explain some of the stagnation of wages in the United States over the past several
decades.

Efraim Benmelech                                 Hyunseob Kim
Kellogg School of Management                     Cornell University
Northwestern University                          Johnson Graduate School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road                               321 Sage Hall
Evanston, IL 60208                               114 East Avenue
and NBER                                         Ithaca, NY 14853
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu             hk722@cornell.edu

Nittai Bergman
Coller School of Management
 and Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv-Yafo
Israel
nbergman@tauex.tau.ac.il
                                       I. INTRODUCTION
Wages in the United States have exhibited puzzling behavior in recent decades. Real wage
growth has slowed since the early 1970s, particularly at lower values of the wage distribution
(Acemoglu and Autor 2011). Although productivity growth has also diminished somewhat, the
link between productivity growth and real increases in hourly compensation appears to have
declined since the early 1980s (see, e.g., Mishel 2012; Bivens and Mishel 2015; and Uguccioni,
2016). Consistent with these trends, the labor share of national income in the United States has
diminished, particularly since the early 2000s (e.g., Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014).
   Many economists have sought to understand these phenomena. A number of potential—and
nonmutually exclusive—explanations for the stagnation in wages and the decline in the labor
income-share are proposed in the literature. Among these are increased globalization, with an
emphasis on increased trade and competition with China (e.g., Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013;
and Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin 2013); changes in technology and the relative cost of capital goods,
particularly when stemming from increased industrial automation (see, e.g., Karabarbounis and
Neiman 2014; Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014; and Acemoglu and Restrepo 2016); and an
increase in rents flowing to landowners as opposed to labor (Rognlie 2015). Another important
avenue of research in understanding the behavior of labor income focuses on secular changes in
the industrial composition of firms within the United States, with an emphasis on the increase in
market concentration within the corporate sector in the United States since 1997 (see, e.g.,
Barkai 2016; and Autor et al. 2017).
   In the spirit of this literature on market concentration, we use micro-level Census data to
analyze how monopsony power in local labor markets affects wage behavior. Whereas much
prior work on the labor income share focuses on the decrease in competition within the product
market—that is, on firms’ ability to exploit market power to increase prices and markups,
thereby extracting rents (see, e.g., Barkai 2016; Grullon, Larkin, and Michaely 2016; Autor et al.
2017; and De Locker and Eeckhout 2017)—we focus on concentration within the market for
labor: that is, the ability of monopsonist employers in the corporate sector to exploit their market
power to reduce wages. Further, because the relevant market associated with job searching is
largely local—U.S. labor mobility has declined significantly and job switches often occur
between positions in the same area (Moretti 2011; Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak 2014)—our



                                                 2
analysis emphasizes the importance of measuring labor market concentration within relatively
localized geographic areas.
   Our analysis combines two main sources of data from the U.S. Census Bureau over the
sample period 1977–2009. First, to measure local-level labor market concentration, we use the
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) to construct the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of
firm employment at the county-industry-year level: HHI is calculated at the local industry level
under the plausible assumption that employees’ specific human capital and mobility costs
constrain their job searches toward firms within the same industry and geographical area. These
HHI measures of employer concentration are then related to measures of average wages and
productivity at the establishment level constructed from the Census of Manufacturers (CMF) and
the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM).
   We achieve five main results. First, local-level employer concentration exhibits significant
cross-sectional and time series variation. During 1977–2009, the standard deviation of local-level
employer HHI (defined at the 4-digit SIC-level) was 0.334. Further, the data show that local-
level employer concentration has increased considerably over time, with the employment-
weighted mean four-digit county-level HHI increasing by 5.8%, from 0.698 during 1977–1981 to
0.756 during 2002–2009.
   Our second result establishes our baseline finding: there is a negative relation between the
local-level HHI measures of employer concentration and wages. Employers operating in areas
with more concentrated labor markets thus appear able to exploit monopsony power in order to
reduce employee wages. One important concern regarding local-level HHI as a measure of local
employer concentration is that it may be correlated with other observable and unobservable
differences across plants, industries, and local areas (see, e.g., Boal and Ransom 1997). To
mitigate this concern, we show that these results continue to hold after controlling for a host of
observables likely to affect wages, including establishment-level labor productivity and local
labor market size, as well as firm-by-year fixed effects. Identification is thus achieved using
within firm-year variation in which (after controlling for such observables as productivity and
market size), within a given year, two establishments belonging to the same firm but located in
areas with varying levels of labor market concentration are compared. The baseline finding is




                                                3
also robust to the use of industry-by-year fixed effects together with firm-by-year fixed effects.5
This battery of controls removes any cross-industry variation within firms, thereby alleviating
cross-industry heterogeneity as an alternative channel that drives wage differences. Furthermore,
our baseline results continue to hold in a subsample of firms that operate multiple plants in only
one industry segment. Using this subsample in conjunction with firm-by-year fixed effects, we
largely sidestep cross-industry heterogeneity as an alternative explanation.
    The economic magnitude of the baseline negative relation between employer concentration
and wages effect is significant over the sample period, a one standard deviation increase in the
HHI measure of local employer concentration reduces wages by between 1% and 2%, depending
on the specification. Importantly, we show that this baseline relation is highly nonlinear and
convex, with labor market concentration at high levels of employer HHI exhibiting a particularly
strong effect on wages—plausibly due to reduced worker bargaining power at these levels of
concentration. Further, our results indicate that the negative relation between employer
concentration and wages doubles in magnitude over the sample period: during 1997–2001, a one
standard deviation in local-level concentration is associated with a 1.37% wage reduction,
whereas the equivalent effect in 1977–1981 is only 0.63%. This strengthening of the sensitivity
of wages to employer concentration is strongly consistent with a secular decline in worker
bargaining power over time, as would be predicted by the reduction in labor mobility in the
United States (constraining the choice set of workers as they search for employment and
negotiate over compensation) or by the drop in unionization rates within the United States
beginning in the 1970s (Card 1992).
    Our third finding concerns the impact of unionization on the relation between employer
concentration and wages. We hypothesize that by improving employee bargaining power,
unionization may diminish the ability of employers to lower wages in concentrated labor
markets, and indeed, the data bear this out. The negative relation between the HHI labor market
concentration measure and wages is significantly weaker among plants in industries with high
unionization rates. For example, when measuring local labor market concentration at the three-
digit SIC code level, at one standard deviation of the unionization rate above its mean, there is no
statistically significant effect of labor market concentration on wages.


5
  We obtain identification of both industry-by-year as well as firm-by-year fixed effects because multi-establishment
firms may operate establishments in more than one industry.

                                                         4
    Fourth, we investigate how local-level labor market concentration affects the transmission of
productivity growth into higher wages. We hypothesize that high levels of employer
concentration impede the translation of productivity growth to wage increases, as employers use
their monopsony power to prevent wage increases. In contrast, when labor markets are more
competitive, productivity increases should give rise to wage growth as employers compete for
workers. Put another way, productivity growth should translate into a rise in wages when
employee bargaining power is sufficiently high.
    Measuring labor productivity at the establishment level using Census data, we first confirm
an annual link between wage growth and productivity growth (see, e.g., Stansbury and Summers
2017). Importantly, consistent with our hypothesis on the role of monopsony power in labor
markets, we find that the link between wage growth and productivity growth is significantly
larger when local-level employer concentration is small. Decreasing the employer-based HHI
measure of concentration by one standard deviation is associated with an increase in the
elasticity of wages to productivity from 0.38% to 0.47%.6
    Last, we investigate the impact of increased trade with China—the “China Shock”—on the
level of local labor market concentration. As such, in contrast to our prior findings, we are
interested here in the determinants, rather than the effects, of labor market concentration. We
hypothesize that increased import competition from China may lead to an increase in local labor
market concentration by causing employers to shutter their operations. The data indeed confirm
that a rise in industry-level import competition from China is associated with increased employer
concentration in the local labor market. Aside from labor displacement and an associated decline
in wages due to a reduced demand for labor, then, increased import competition from China may
also have the effect of reducing wages of nondisplaced workers due to an increase in employer
concentration.
    Our article relates to a growing literature dealing with monopsony in labor markets.7
However, most prior empirical work on monopsony power in labor markets and firms’ ability to
control wages is indirect. Examples include anecdotal evidence on lawsuits against employer
collusion using antipoaching agreements (U.S. Department of Justice Office of Public Affairs


6
   In related work, Benmelech, Bergman, and Kim (2017) show that the relation between wage growth and
productivity growth is increasing in unionization rates. As with the results above, when worker bargaining power
rises, increased productivity translates into wage growth.
7
  For reviews, see Boal and Ransom (1997) and Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief (2016).

                                                       5
2014; Whitney 2015) and studies beginning with Card and Krueger (1994) showing that
minimum wage increases are not followed by reductions in employment—consistent with
nonperfectly competitive labor markets. Other studies show that the propensity of workers to
leave their jobs after wage declines is smaller than would be expected in competitive markets,
suggestive of employers’ wage-setting ability (Dube, Lester, and Reich 2010, 2016).
   In contrast to these studies, we provide a direct measure of the degree of local-level labor
market competition and relate it to wage behavior on a host of margins. As such, our article is
most closely related to Azar, Marinescu, and Steinbaum (2017), which uses online job postings
from the website CareerBuilder.com to construct a local-level measure of employer
concentration based on commuting zones and occupations. Azar et al.’s chief finding is that
increased local-level labor market concentration within a given occupation and commuting zone
predicts lower online wage postings. Though similar, our article is differentiated along a number
of dimensions. We use actual wages (at the establishment level) as taken from the Census
Bureau, whereas Azar et al. analyze wage postings offered by firms. Our study uses a series of
data that spans more than three decades and covers the entire manufacturing sector, whereas
Azar et al. examine online wage posting within CareerBuilder.com (that is, not solely focused on
manufacturing) over a relatively short time (preceding the 2008–2009 crisis). Further, our study
focuses on manufacturing, so we can control directly for productivity—an important covariate
when analyzing wages—and indeed we do so at the establishment-year level. Last, we provide
evidence on the time-series evolution of employer concentration, the impact of unionization on
the relation between local employer concentration and wages, how labor market concentration
affects the transmission of productivity changes into wage growth, and the effect of the “China
Shock” on local employer concentration. Interestingly, we also find that the negative relation
between concentration and wages is convex and more pronounced in a setting that approaches
textbook-like monopsony—that is, when the local HHI employer concentration measure
approaches one. In contrast, Azar et al. show that the negative relation in their setting is not
driven by monopsony.
   The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section II presents the data and summary
statistics. Section III presents the empirical analysis, and Section IV concludes.


                                II. DATA AND KEY VARIABLES

                                                 6
II.A. Data Sources and Sample Construction
1. Plant-Level Data. We obtain data on manufacturing establishments (“plants”) from the Census
of Manufacturers (CMF) and the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM) maintained by the
U.S. Census Bureau to construct measures of wages and labor productivity. The CMF covers all
manufacturing plants in the United States for years ending in 2 and 7 (“Census years”), resulting
in roughly 300,000 plants in each Census. The ASM covers about 50,000 plants for “non-Census
years.” The ASM includes all plants with more than the applicable number of employees, which
increases from 250 to 1,000 during our sample period;8 those with fewer employees are sampled
randomly, with the probability of inclusion increasing in size. Although the ASM is called a
survey, reporting is mandatory if the plant is selected, and misreporting is subject to legal
penalties and fines. Both databases provide operating information at the plant level, including the
total value of shipments, wages, labor hours, and material and energy costs. A key advantage of
the CMF and ASM data over standard firm-level databases of public firms such as Compustat is
that they comprise both privately and publicly owned plants, covering a significant fraction of
U.S. workers. We also use the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) to construct measures of
concentration of firms’ employment within a county-industry. The LBD is a comprehensive data
set of manufacturing and nonmanufacturing establishments in the United States, tracking more
than 5 million establishments every year. The database provides variables for the number of
employees, annual payroll, industry classifications, and geographical location (i.e., counties and
states).


2. Union Coverage Data. We obtain data on collective bargaining coverage from the Union
Membership and Coverage Database.9 This database provides private- and public-sector labor
union membership, coverage, and density estimates computed from the monthly household
Current Population Survey (CPS) using methods that the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
employs to calculate union statistics at the national level. Prior research on financial and labor
economics uses the database to estimate industry-level collective bargaining coverage (e.g.,
Matsa 2010; and Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin 2013). Hirsch and Macpherson (2003) provide



8
    The thresholds are 250 employees before 1999, 500 from 1999 to 2003, and 1,000 after 2003.
9
    The database is available at www.unionstats.com.

                                                          7
detailed information on the construction of the union data set. Below we give a detailed account
of the data source and construction of the data that are relevant for our empirical analysis.
        The Hirsch-Macpherson database provides union coverage estimates by Census detailed
industry code (CIC) beginning in 1983 (aggregate-level coverage is available from 1973).10 In
order to match the union coverage data with Census plant-level data sets, we make the following
adjustments. First, we use the Census Bureau concordances between the CIC and Standard
Industry Classification (SIC) codes for the years 1983–2002. For 2003–2009, during which the
CIC is based on a NAICS classification (as opposed to SIC), we use the Census Bureau
crosswalk between the 1990 and 2000 CIC codes to match the 2000 CIC to SIC codes. Second,
we impute missing industry-level collective bargaining coverages before 1983 using the
information from the 1983 CPS. Third, we lag the union coverage information by one year
relative to plant-year observations. For the majority of industries, the matching between the CIC
and SIC codes results in linkages at the three-digit SIC level, and less frequently at the two- or
four-digit levels.
        We focus on manufacturing plant-year observations in the CMF and ASM from 1977 to
2009 (the first and last years of data coverage). Given that the starting year of the union coverage
database by detailed industry (1983) is later than 1977, we impute the rate of collective
bargaining coverage using the 1983 information for years between 1977 and 1982. We require
each plant observation to have the variables necessary to estimate average wages and labor
productivity, including the SIC code,11 total value of shipments, production-worker equivalent
hours, total wages, and number of employees (both production and nonproduction). Given that
our identification strategy relies on within-firm variation in wages and employer concentration
across plants, we require that firm-years have at least two plants under their ownership. In
addition, we require that each plant-year have a one-year lagged observation, which is needed to
compute changes in average wages and productivity in part of our analysis. This selection
procedure yields approximately 656,000 plant-years in our sample.12


II.B. Measuring Employer Concentration and Wages


10
   They use the 1980 CIC (based on SIC codes) from 1983 to 1991, the 1990 CIC from 1992 to 2002 (based on SIC
codes), and the 2000 CIC (based on NAICS codes) from 2003 and on.
11
   The ASM and CMF provide SIC codes until 2002 and NAICS codes thereafter. We impute SIC codes after 2002.
12
   The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

                                                        8
       We construct HHI of employment by firms at the county-industry-year level as our main
measures of employer concentration using the LBD data. Specifically, we measure the
                                                                                            !"#!,!,!,!
employment share of every firm in a given county-industry-year cell as: 𝑠!,!,!,! =         ! !"#             ,
                                                                                           !!!     !,!,!,!

where emp represents total employment and f represents a firm that operates in industry j and
county c in year t. We next calculate HHI at the county-industry-year level as the sum of the
                                                                              !    !
squared employment shares in the country-industry-year level: 𝐻𝐻𝐼!,!,! =      !!! 𝑠!,!,!,! .   We define
two variants of HHI using either of the three- or four-digit SIC codes.
       Given that we are interested in understanding the effect of employer concentration on
wages, we use the log of average wages per worker at the plant-year level as our dependent
variable. We compute the average wages at the plant-year level as total wage bills divided by the
number of workers. We also use labor productivity (per hour) as a control variable, defined as
output divided by total labor hours. Output is computed as the sum of the total value of
shipments (TVS) and the net increase in inventories of finished goods and works in progress. To
account for industry-level changes in output price, we divide output by the four-digit SIC-level
output price deflator from the NBER-CES manufacturing industry database constructed by
Bartelsman, Becker, and Gray (2000). In addition, we use “production-worker equivalent hours”
as our measure of total labor hours (Lichtenberg 1992; Kovenock and Phillips 1997).
Specifically, total labor hours are constructed as the total production-worker hours multiplied by
total wages divided by wages for production (“blue-collar”) workers. The underlying assumption
in constructing this measure of labor hours is that the relative wages for production and
nonproduction workers represent the ratio of their marginal products. We winsorize all
potentially unbounded variables at the 1% tails.


II.C. Descriptive Statistics
        Table I reports descriptive statistics for the characteristics of the plant observations over
the period 1977–2009. The average plant in the sample has $96 million in total value of
shipments (“sales”) and 349 employees. Focusing on the measures of employer concentration—
the mean HHI defined at the three-digit SIC level is 0.545 with a standard deviation of 0.350,
while the mean four-digit SIC-based HHI is 0.682 with a standard deviation of 0.334. We also
define dummy variables that take the value of one in counties in which HHI equals one, and zero
otherwise. These HHI-based dummy variables are designed to capture counties with an absolute
                                                   9
monopsony power of one large employer. As Table I shows, 22.7% of plant-year observations
are in counties in which there is only one employer in a given three-digit SIC industry. The
concentration of employer power is even stronger when we define industries at the four-digit SIC
level. For example, 37.9% of plant-year observations are in counties with only one employer in
the four-digit SIC industry.
         The average worker in these plants earns wages of $41,840 per year, and the average log
labor productivity is 4.61. The average log employment of a given county-industry is 6.24 (5.66)
when the industry is defined at the three-digit (four-digit) level. The average union coverage rate
for the manufacturing plants in the sample is 22.8%, which is higher than the average coverage
rate across all industries during a similar period. Segment and firm size are measured by the log
number of plants in a given industry segment of a given firm and the log number of all plants of
a given firm, respectively. The average plant in the sample has approximately 10 and 30 plants
(including itself) within the segment-firm and firm it is associated with. Plant age is defined as
the number of years since a plant’s inception—identified by the flag for plant inception in the
LBD—or its first appearance in the CMF or ASM database, whichever is the earliest. The
starting year is censored in 1972, when the coverage of the Census databases begins. The
average age of plants in the sample is 17.1 years. This set of control variables is standard among
research that analyzes plant-level data using the CMF and ASM data (e.g., Schoar 2002; Giroud
2013).
         Figure I plots trends in local-level employer concentration, which exhibits considerable
time-series variation from 1977 to 2009. During 1977–1981, the employment-weighted mean
local-level employer HHI (defined at the four-digit SIC level) is 0.698, but the mean four-digit
county-level HHI increases by 5.8 percentage points to 0.756 during 2002–2009. This upward
trend in local employer HHI is consistent with increasing concentration and power of firms in the
labor market in the U.S. over the past few decades.


                                  III. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
III.A. Relation between Employer Concentration and Wages
         We begin by investigating a reduced-form baseline relation between employer
concentration and wages. To this end, we run the following regression:



                                                10
        log(avg. wages)pfjt = β0 + β1HHIjct−1+ β2Xpfjt + β3Zjct−1 +δjt + µ                  ft   + εpfjt,
(1)
where log(avg. wages)pfjt is log average wage per worker. The subscripts are plant p, in firm f,
within industry j, in year t. HHIjct−1 is one-year lagged employment-based measure of
concentration at either the three- or four-digit SIC level in county j, Xpijt is a vector of plant-level
control variables comprising the log of labor productivity, the log of the number of plants per
segment within the firm, the log of the number of plants per firm, and plant age, Zjct−1 is the one-
year lagged log number of employment at the county-industry level, δjt is a vector of industry by
year fixed effects, and µft is a vector of firm-by-year fixed effects. All standard errors are
clustered at the county level.
        Panel A of Table II provides the results from estimating regression (1) using three-digit
SIC industries to compute employment concentration. As column (1) of Table II shows, the
coefficient estimate for log(employment) is 0.042 and is statistically significant at the 1% level,
suggesting that wages are higher in local labor markets with more workers. This finding is
consistent with economic forces related to agglomeration (e.g., Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr 2010;
and Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti 2010). The coefficient on log labor productivity is 0.156
and significant at the 1% level, suggesting that workers’ wages are higher when the plant is more
productive, plausibly due to rent sharing between the employer and workers (e.g., Nickell and
Wadhwani 1990; and Benmelech, Bergman, and Kim 2017).
        Turning to our main variable of interest—namely, employer concentration—column (1),
which includes year fixed effects as a control in addition to log employment at the three-digit
industry-county level and plant-level labor productivity, shows that log average wage is
negatively associated with HHI. This relation is statistically significant at the 1% level, and the
economic magnitude is sizable—a one standard deviation increase in employer concentration
(0.35) is associated with a 0.88% decrease (= 0.35 × −0.025) in average wages. Similarly, the
relation between log average wages and employer concentration is statistically and economically
significant when other plant-level controls are added (column (2)) and industry fixed effects are
included (column (3)). In particular, by including industry fixed effects, we exploit within-
industry variation of employer concentration to identify the effect. Thus, the estimates in column
(3) are based off of variation in employer concentration across different local labor markets,
instead of variation of concentration of firms in the national market across industries.

                                                  11
       Furthermore, we also include firm or firm-by-year fixed effects in the last two columns of
the table, which enables us to identify off of variation within firms across plants that are located
in counties and industries with different employer concentration. Our plant-level explanatory
variables—in particular, log(labor productivity) and plant age—control for plant-level
productivity, alleviating the concern that our results are driven by productivity differences across
plants within a firm. With the inclusion of firm fixed effects in column (4), the semi-elasticity of
wages to employer concentration is −0.028. Thus, increasing HHI by 0.35, the sample standard
deviation, decreases wages by 0.98% (= 0.35 × −0.028). With the addition of firm-by-year fixed
effects, this semi-elasticity becomes −0.023 (column (5)). Wages thus appear to be negatively
correlated with employer concentration, consistent with the prediction that concentration of
employers in the local labor market gives firms monopsony power that they use to exploit
workers in the form of lower wages.
       While the analyses in columns (4) and (5) mitigate the concern that lower wages in more
concentrated labor markets are due to heterogeneity across firms, a remaining concern is that a
given firm may pay different levels of wages to employees across industries and locations due to
other omitted variables, such as product market competition and productivity differences. To
address this concern, we include industry-by-year fixed effects, which control for time-varying
differences across industries, in addition to firm-by-year fixed effects. In this analysis, the
identifying variation comes from plants in the same industry and the same firm but that are
located in counties with different employer concentration. Including these industry-by-year fixed
effects, column (6) shows that the semi-elasticity of wages to employer concentration is −0.049,
which is more than twice the effect without controlling for time-varying industry shocks in
column (5). This result suggests that once we compare plants in the same industry and firm,
those located in a more concentrated local labor market pay significantly lower wages. In
conjunction with later results in Table IV, which limits the analysis to firm-years that operate in
one industry segment, results in this table suggest that industry-level heterogeneity (in
productivity in particular) is unlikely to drive the association between employer concentration
and wages.
       Panel B of Table II repeats the analysis in Panel A using four-digit SIC industries to
compute HHI of employer concentration at the county level. The negative relation between
concentration and employee wages is evident in this panel as well. The economic magnitude of

                                                12
the effect is larger than that in Panel A, with a semi-elasticity ranging from −0.038 to −0.063
relative to −0.023 to −0.049 in Panel A. In sum, the results in Table II exhibit a statistically and
economically significant relation between wages and employer concentration, suggesting that
employer concentration results in lower wages.
       One concern about the negative relation between employer concentration and wages
presented in Table II is that our local measure of HHI is correlated with labor productivity,
which could mean that the results capture the effect of low productivity rather than employer
concentration on wages. Even though all of our regressions in Table II also control for log(labor
productivity), defined as the natural log of output scaled by labor hours, it might be measured
with error and thus is likely an imperfect control for labor productivity. To address this concern,
in Table III we add a control variable for labor productivity—namely, value added (VA) by
labor, defined as the total value of shipments plus the net increase in inventories of finished
goods and works in progress minus material and energy costs scaled by total labor hours—in the
regression. All the components of the variable are deflated using four-digit SIC industry-level
deflators available from the NBER-CES manufacturing database. One key difference of “labor
VA” relative to “labor productivity” is that it nets out intermediate inputs (i.e., material and
energy), which are presumably not affected by labor input.
       Table III, Panel A, shows that the coefficient on log(labor VA) is positive and significant
at the 1% level except for columns (4) and (5), which include firm and year and firm-by-year
fixed effects, consistent with the notion that employees of plants who add more value per labor
hour are paid more. However, the coefficients on HHI remain statistically significant and their
magnitudes are almost identical, suggesting that the baseline relation between HHI and wages is
unlikely to be driven by omitted controls for value added by workers or labor productivity. Panel
B, which uses an industry based on the four-digit SIC level, shows similar results—that the
coefficient on local employment concentration is largely unaffected by adding a control for value
added by labor.
       Among the specifications we employ in Table II, the inclusion of firm-by-year fixed
effects in column (5) identifies the effect of local employer concentration on wages off of
variation within firms in a given year. Although this specification with the detailed fixed effects
likely provides a tighter identification, a remaining concern is that the negative association
between local employer concentration and wages is driven by omitted differences across

                                                 13
different industries even within firms in a given year. For example, a firm may have a more
productive industry segment (e.g., machinery) in a less concentrated local labor market, and a
less productive segment (e.g., chemical) in a more concentrated market, which may lead to a
spurious correlation between concentration and wages due to a difference in productivity.
          We address this concern in two ways. First, in addition to firm-by-year fixed effects, we
include industry-by-year fixed effects in Table II, column (6), to absorb time-varying industry-
level shocks in market concentration, wages, and other omitted variables (such as productivity).
Second, we focus our estimation on a subsample of firms that operate multiple plants in only one
industry segment (defined at either the three- or four-digit SIC level). Combined with firm-by-
year fixed effects, use of this subsample removes any cross-industry variation within firms,
thereby sidestepping cross-industry heterogeneity as an alternative channel that drives wage
differences.
          Table IV presents the results from estimating equation (1) using a subsample of firms that
operate multiple plants within one industry segment, defined at the three- (Panel A) or four-digit
SIC level (Panel B). As Table IV illustrates, across all columns the coefficient on HHI is
negative and significant at the 1% level, consistent with the baseline result in Table II. In terms
of economic magnitudes, the coefficients are approximately twice larger than those in Table II
(e.g., −0.061 and −0.023 in column (5), which includes firm-by-year fixed effects), indicating
that the effect is larger for the subset of firms that are unlikely to be affected by cross-industry
heterogeneity in productivity and wages. Panel B, which uses four-digit SIC industries, shows a
qualitatively similar result, with economic magnitudes being again larger than those in Panel B
of Table II. In sum, our results are robust to the inclusion of various measures of labor
productivity and hold in firms that operate multiple plants within one industry, which we believe
alleviates concerns that an omitted productivity variable could be driving our HHI results.


III.B. Subsample Periods
          We next investigate how the relation between wages and employer concentration evolves
over the sample period. To this end, Table V divides the full sample from 1977 to 2011 into five-
year subperiods and reruns the wage regressions in equation (1), which includes HHI of
employers (i.e., firms) at the county-industry level as a key independent variable.13 Our five-year

13
     The final subperiod is 2002–2009.

                                                 14
subperiods in Table V match the subperiods in Figure I, which illustrates that local-level
employer concentration increases over time. As shown in Panel A, the coefficient on HHI—
defined at the three-digit SIC level—increases over time. In the first two subsamples, 1977–1981
and 1982–1986, the coefficients on HHI are −0.018 (with a t-statistic of −2.75) and −0.012 (with
a t-statistic of −1.78), respectively. This coefficient increases to −0.031 in 1992–1996 (with a t-
statistic of 4.59) and −0.039 in 1997–2001 (with a t-statistic of 5.31). In the final subsample, the
coefficient is −0.029 and is statistically significant at the 1% level. The lower wages in highly
concentrated local labor markets are thus clustered in the later part of the sample period. In Panel
B, which uses four-digit SIC industries to compute HHI, the increasing pattern is muted,
although the effect of concentration on wages is the greatest between 1992 and 2001 (−0.044 to
−0.047).
       A potential explanation for the increasing effect over time of employer concentration is
that labor mobility declines over the sample period across both economic sectors and
geographical areas (see, e.g., Murphy and Topel 1987; and Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak 2014).
The effect of labor market monopsony hinges on a lack of labor mobility across markets (for a
review, see Boal and Ransom 1997). Thus, to the extent that workers have become less mobile in
the United States over the past few decades, our definition of local labor markets using counties
and industries is more likely to bind for them in recent decades relative to such earlier periods as
1977–1981 and 1982–1986.


III.C. Employer Concentration, Unions, and Wages
       While their monopsony power may lead employers to pay lower wages, unionization
strengthens labor’s bargaining position and enables employees to diminish employers’
monopsony power. We next empirically test whether unionization mitigates the ability of firms
to reduce wages in concentrated markets. More specifically, we interact our local measure of
employer concentration (HHI) with the degree of unionization at the industry level, as in the
following regression:
       log(avg. wages)pfjt = β0 + β1HHIjct−1+ β2HHIjct−1 × Unionjt−1 + β3Unionjt−1 + β4Xpfjt +
       β5Zjct1 +δjt +µft + εpfjt ,                                                          (2)
where Unionjt−1 is the unionization rate for industry j in which plant i operates in year t−1, and
the other variables are defined in equation (1). The main coefficient of interest in this regression

                                                15
is β2, which measures the degree to which unionization rates affect the marginal effect of
employer concentration on wages.
         Table VI presents estimates of regression (2) using plant-level data from 1977 to 2009.14
Columns (1) and (2) in Panel A show that, as in Table II, controlling for year fixed effects, and
plant-level and county-industry-level controls, average workers’ wages at manufacturing plants
are lower when the local labor market (defined at the county level) is more concentrated in a
given three-digit SIC industry. More importantly, this negative effect of employer concentration
on wages is mitigated for plants that operate in industries with higher unionization rates. For
example, the regression estimates in column (2) suggest that a one standard deviation increase in
unionization rates (12.9%) from the average (22.8%) would reduce the semi-elasticity of wages
to HHI from −0.061 (= −0.153 + 0.228 × 0.402) to −0.009 (= −0.153 + (0.228 + 0.129) × 0.402).
This result is consistent with unions giving workers bargaining power in wage negotiations,
mitigating a negative effect of local labor market concentration on wages.
         Columns (3)–(5) further include industry, firm, and firm-by-year fixed effects. The
results are consistent with those in columns (1) and (2)—the negative effect of employer
concentration is mitigated by high unionization rates at the industry level. In terms of economic
magnitude, estimates in column (5) indicate that a one standard deviation increase in
unionization rates (12.9%) from the average (22.8%) would reduce the semi-elasticity of wages
to HHI from −0.035 (= −0.087 + 0.228 × 0.228) to −0.005 (= −0.087 + (0.228 + 0.129) × 0.228).
Column (6) further includes industry-by-year fixed effects to control for time-varying industry
shocks, and finds consistent evidence that the presence of union bargaining power mitigates a
negative association between employer concentration and wages.
         In Panel B of Table VI we repeat the analysis in Panel A using four-digit SIC industries
to compute HHI of employer concentration at the county level.15 The results reported in Panel B
are similar to those found in Panel A—we find that labor unions mitigate the effect of employer
concentration on wages. The economic magnitudes of the effects are somewhat smaller than
those documented in Panel A. For example, the estimates in column (5) suggest that a one
standard deviation increase in unionization rates (12.9%) from the average rates (22.8%) would

14
   As explained in Section II.A, data on industry-level unionization rates are available from 1983 only. Thus, we
impute the unionization rates before 1983 (i.e., 1977–1982) using values for corresponding industries in 1983.
15
   In Panel B and throughout the article in which we use four-digit SIC industries to compute employer
concentration, we use the same industry-level of unionization rates, which are based on CIC (see Section II.A), as in
the case of using three-digit SIC industries.

                                                         16
reduce the semi-elasticity of wages to HHI from −0.046 (= −0.080 + 0.228 × 0.151) to −0.026 (=
−0.080 + (0.228 + 0.129) × 0.151). Nevertheless, as our calculation above shows, a one standard
deviation in unionization rate reduces the negative effect of employer concentration on wages by
42% relative to the mean.


III.D. Employer Concentration and Rent Sharing
       The analysis thus far has focused on the association between employer concentration in
the local labor market and wages. In addition to wage levels, concentration of employers may
also affect the transmission of productivity growth into wage changes. Previous research on rent
sharing suggests that workers’ bargaining power increases the portion of productivity growth that
they gain in the form of increased wages (e.g., Stansbury and Summers 2017). Thus, we
empirically test whether high levels of employer concentration impede the translation of
productivity growth to wage increases, as employers use their monopsony power to avoid wage
hikes. More specifically, we examine whether sensitivities of wage growth to productivity
growth are affected by our local measure of employer concentration (HHI) using the following
regression:
       ∆log(avg. wages)pfjt = β0 + β1HHIjct−1 + β2∆log(labor productivity)pfjt + β3HHIjct−1 ×
       ∆log(labor productivity)pfjt +β4Xpfjt + β5Zjct1 + δjt + µft + εpfjt,                 (3)
where ∆log(avg. wages)pfjt is the growth rate of average wages, and ∆log(labor productivity)pfjt is
the growth rate of labor productivity of plant p in industry j, county c, and year t; the other
variables are defined in equation (1).
       Table VII reports estimation results. Across columns in Panel A of Table VII, the
coefficient on ∆log(labor productivity) is positive and significant at the 1% level, confirming that
there is a positive association between wage growth and productivity growth at the plant level
(see, e.g., Stansbury and Summers 2017). Importantly, consistent with our prediction regarding
the role of monopsony power in labor markets, the coefficient on HHI×∆log(labor productivity)
is negative and significant at the 10% level. In terms of economic magnitude, estimates in
column (5) suggest that a one standard deviation decrease in HHI from its mean would increase
the elasticity of wages to productivity from 0.38% (= 0.005 − 0.002 × 0.544) to 0.47% (= 0.005
− 0.002 × (0.544 − 0.350)). This finding is consistent with our prediction that when labor



                                                   17
markets are more competitive, productivity increases should give rise to wage growth, as
employers compete for workers.


III.E. Robustness Tests
1. Nonlinear Effect of Employer Concentration on Wages. Regressions in equations (1) and (2)
assume a linear effect of employer concentration, measured by HHI, on average wages. Is the
effect concentrated among county-industries that are highly concentrated by few firms or among
those that are close to competitive local labor markets with many employers? Table I shows that
there is indeed a significant fraction of manufacturing plants that are located in these counties
with extreme concentration—namely, 22.7% and 37.9% of plant-year observations based on
three-digit and four-digit SIC industries, respectively. We examine this question by including a
dummy variable that is equal to one for county-industries that have only one firm, and thus HHI
is equal to one in the following regression:
       log(avg. wages)pfjt = β0 + β1HHIjct−1+ β2HHIjct−1 × Unionjt−1 + β3Unionjt−1 +
       β4D(HHI=1)jct−1 + β51(HHI=1)jct−1 × Unionjt−1+ β6Xpfjt + β7Zjct1 + δjt + µft + εpfjt,
               (4)
where D(HHI=1)jct−1 is a dummy variable equal to one if HHI of industry j in county c in year
t−1 is equal to one, and zero otherwise; the other variables are defined in equation (1). Given
that we include firm-by-year fixed effects (µft), interpretation of the coefficients on β4 is the
effect of absolute monopsony power of one large employer on wages within firms and across
different local labor markets.
       Table VIII reports estimation results. Column (1) includes the dummy variable but
excludes the baseline continuous variable for HHI, as well as interaction terms with unionization
rates. The coefficient on the dummy is −0.017, suggesting that relative to other plants in
nonperfectly concentrated local labor markets, plants in perfectly monopsonistic labor markets
pay 1.7% lower wages, controlling for plant- and county-industry-level determinants of wages.
Column (2) includes the continuous variable HHI, in addition to the dummy, and shows that
employer concentration has an additional negative effect on wages (−0.011) when HHI increases
to one, in addition to the general effect of HHI (−0.013). These results suggest that the negative
effect of employer concentration on wages is more pronounced when the local labor market is
close to monopsony (i.e., one employer in a given market).

                                                18
       Next, in column (3), we exclude the continuous variable HHI but interact the dummy for
HHI equals to one with industry-level unionization rates. Consistent with previous estimates in
Table VI, the column shows that unionized labor significantly mitigates the negative effect of
local market monopsony. At the average rate of unionization in the sample (22.8%), local labor
markets with perfect concentration would have wages that are 2.5% lower (= −0.062 + 0.162 ×
0.228) than otherwise similar markets within firms. But a one standard deviation increase in
unionization rates would lead to a reduction in the semi-elasticity to a mere −0.4%, an 84%
reduction (in absolute magnitude) from the average effect.
       In Panel B, we compute employer concentration using four-digit SIC industries and find
results that are consistent with those in Panel A—local labor markets with only one firm would
pay wages that are 3.1% lower than otherwise similar plants within firms (column (1)).
Moreover, estimates in column (2) suggest that the bulk of the effect of employer concentration
on wages is at the margin around complete monopsony-like labor markets: the continuous
variable HHI is not significant, while the dummy for HHI equals to one is −0.029 and significant
at the 1% level. Column (3) in Panel B tells a similar story to that in Panel A—at the average rate
of unionization in the sample (22.8%), local labor markets with perfect concentration would have
wages that are 3.5% lower (= −0.058 + 0.101 × 0.228) than otherwise similar markets within
firms. And a one standard deviation increase in unionization rates would reduce this semi-
elasticity to −2.2%, a 37% reduction from the average effect. Overall, results in Table VIII
suggest that the effect of employer concentration in local labor markets is more pronounced
among those closest to the textbook notion of labor market monopsony (i.e., only one employer
in a given market).


2. Controlling for National Trends in Employer Concentration. We measure labor market
concentration at the local (i.e., county) level. The premise of this approach is that relevant labor
markets for manufacturing workers are “local” due to the costs of moving across geographical
areas (e.g., Moretti 2011; and Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak 2014). Meanwhile, Autor et al.
(2017) show that product markets in the United States have become more concentrated in the
past few decades, giving rise to “superstar firms” that are highly productive yet have lower labor
shares in a given industry. They argue that this trend can account for declining labor shares
documented by previous research (e.g., Elsby, Hobjin, and Şahin 2013; and Karabarbounis and

                                                19
Neiman 2014). One concern about our results related to Autor et al.’s finding is that if product
market (which is usually defined at the national level for “traded sectors” like manufacturing)
and local labor market concentrations are positively correlated, then the negative association
between local employment concentration and wages may merely reflect a negative relation
between (national) product market concentration and labor shares.
       We control for this effect by constructing HHI at the national level as follows. We first
                                                                                            !"#!,!,!
measure the employment share of every firm in a given industry-year cell as: 𝑠!,!,! =      ! !"#           ,
                                                                                           !!!     !,!,!

where emp represents total employment and f represents a firm that operates in industry j and
year t. We next calculate the industry-year HHI as the sum of the squared employment shares in
                                    !    !
the industry-year level: 𝐻𝐻𝐼!,! =   !!! 𝑠!,!,! .   As with the local-level HHI, we define two variants
of the national-level HHI using either of the three- or four-digit SIC codes. Then we include the
national-level HHI as a control for product market concentration in the regression in equation
(1).
       Table IX, Panel A, shows that the coefficient on HHI (SIC3-year) is significantly positive
for the most part (except for column (3), in which it is slightly negative but insignificant), which
is inconsistent with the story that national-level product market concentration is associated with
lower wages. Importantly, even with the inclusion of national HHI, the coefficient on local HHI
remains positive and the magnitudes are sizable. For example, the coefficients on HHI (SIC3-
county-year) are −0.023 and −0.043, respectively, in Tables II and IX, Panel A, column (5),
which use the same set of controls. This result is inconsistent with an alternative mechanism that
emphasizes concentration in the product market, as opposed to the labor market, which tends to
be more local. Panel B, which uses the four-digit SIC level as the definition of industry, shows a
similar result that the coefficient on HHI does not change much when national HHI is added as a
control.


III.F. Wages, Market Concentration, and the China Shock
       One concern about our findings is that they are driven by the well-documented “China
Shock,” in which import penetration from China has led to declining employment and wages in
the U.S. manufacturing sector. For example, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Autor et al.
(2014) find that local labor markets that are more affected by import competition from China
exhibit higher unemployment, lower labor-force participation, and reduced wages. In this
                                                     20
subsection, we examine the possibility that import penetration from China is driving our results
in two ways. First, we control directly for a China effect by adding a control variable that
captures the degree of import penetration from China at the industry-by-year level to our
regression specification.
        Second, we show that even though our results are not directly driven by import
penetration, there is an interesting interaction among import penetration, employer concentration,
and wages. More specifically, we examine whether import penetration from China has an
indirect effect on wages by increasing employer concentration in U.S. local labor markets. That
is, imports from China not only curtail the local demand for labor but also lead to increased
market power of U.S. firms, which results in even lower wages.
        For these two types of analyses, we construct a measure of import competition from
China. We measure import exposures from China to the United States at the industry by year
level as the industry-level dollar value of imports scaled by the total value of shipments in the
industry.16    More     specifically,     we        define   import    competition    from    China     as:
                         !"#$%&  !"#$  !!!"#!,!
𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑎  𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒!,! =        ! !!!"#$%&'           , in which import from China represents the dollar value
                            !!!         !,!,!

of imports from China to the United States, shipments represents the total value of shipments
(TVS), and i represents a plant that operates in industry j and year t. For the analysis of China
import exposure only, we limit our analysis to the plant-years 1992–2008, given that the import
penetration data employed are available from 1991 to 2007 and that we use lagged China
exposure as an independent variable.
        We address the concern that our measure of employer concentration is capturing direct
exposure to Chinese imports by including China exposure as an additional control in equation
(1). Table X, Panel A, presents the results and shows that the coefficient on China exposure
measured at the three-digit SIC level is negative and significant at the 1% level, consistent with
existing research documenting negative consequences of the China shock on labor market
outcomes. The economic magnitude of the effect is sizable as well—a one standard deviation
increase in China exposure is associated with a 0.95% (= −0.001 × 9.508) reduction in average
wages. Importantly, however, including this direct control for the China exposure does not
significantly affect our estimates for HHI—the coefficient on HHI remains negative and

16
  The data sources for the import and total value of shipment data are U.N. Comtrade and the ASM and CMF. We
thank David Dorn for making the import penetration data available on his website.

                                                        21
significant at the 1% level. Panel B, which uses four-digit SIC codes as the definition of industry,
shows a similar result—that controlling for the China shock does not alter the baseline result.
           We now turn to analyzing the indirect effect of the China shock on wages through
increased employer concentration. We begin by regressing HHI on our measure of competition
from China. Specifically, we run the following regression:
           HHIjct = β0 + β1China exposurejt+ β2Xpfjt + β3Zjct1 +δjt +µft + εpfjt ,         (5)
where HHIjct is an employment-based measure of concentration at either the three-digit or four-
digit SIC level in county c, China exposurejt is defined as the total value of imports from China
to the United States scaled by the total value of shipments for industry j in year t, and the other
variables are defined in equation (1).
           Panel A of Table XI presents the results for estimating equation (5) using three-digit SIC
industries. We find that the coefficient on China exposure is significantly positive at the 1%
level, suggesting that industry-level import competition is associated with increased
concentration of employers in the local labor market. In terms of economic magnitude, estimates
in column (4), which includes firm-by-year fixed effects, suggest that a one standard deviation
increase in Chinese import competition leads to a 0.018 (= 0.002 × 9.508) increase in HHI,
which is sizable relative to the mean HHI of 0.544. We obtain similar results when we define
industries based on the four-digit SIC level.17
           Having shown that local employer concentration is higher in industries that are more
exposed to imports from China, it appears natural to assume that such exposure to Chinese
imports will have an indirect effect on wages through increased concentration. However, it is
empirically challenging to disentangle the direct and indirect effects of China exposure in the
same specification. Nevertheless, we use an instrumental-variables (IV) approach in which we
instrument HHI using import competition from China as in the following regression:
           log(avg. wages)pfjt = β0 +𝛽! 𝐻𝐻𝐼!"#!! + β2Xpfjt + β3Zjct1 +δjt +µft + εpfjt ,         (6)
where China exposurejt is defined as the total value of imports from China to the United States
scaled by the total value of shipments, 𝐻𝐻𝐼!"#!! is the instrumented HHI using China exposure
in industry j, county c, and year t, and the other variables are as in equation (5).
           The chief caveat with the estimates in (6) is that the “instrument” China exposure does
not meet the exclusion restriction in that it may also affect wages directly through a decline in

17
     We omit these results for brevity.

                                                      22
demand for labor, for example. Nevertheless, we present results from the second-stage regression
(6) to illustrate the magnitude of the indirect effect of the China shock on wages. However, given
the concerns about the exclusion restriction in equation (6), we are wary of drawing a causal
interpretation from this analysis on the indirect effect of competition from China on wages in the
United States through an employer concentration channel.
       Panel B presents the results for estimating the second-stage regression in equation (6) and
shows that HHI instrumented using the China import exposure is indeed significantly (at the 1%
level) negatively associated with average wages. This finding is consistent with our argument
that import competition from China leads to increased concentration of employers in a local
labor market (presumably due to the departure or closure of existing firms), which in turn gives
remaining firms in the market more power to reduce wages. The economic magnitude of the
second-stage estimates is much larger than that of the baseline estimates—for example, the
coefficient on HHI is −0.567 in Table XI, Panel B, column (4), while the comparable coefficient
in Table II, Panel A, column (5) is −0.023. However, we interpret these relative magnitudes with
caution, given that the second-stage estimates might also be affected by lower labor demand
caused by import penetration from China. We also find consistent results using the four-digit SIC
level as the definition of industries (unreported).


                                        IV. CONCLUSION
We use manufacturing plant-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau from 1977 to 2009 to
provide evidence that wages are significantly lower in local labor markets in which employers
are more concentrated. In particular, the negative effect of employer concentration on wages
appears to be concentrated in a labor market that resembles a monopsonistic market—one in
which there is one significant employer of a given set of workers. We also show that this
sensitivity of wages to employer concentration increases in the later years of our sample, such as
1997–2001. We argue that the results are consistent with firms exploiting workers in the form of
lower wages (than a competitive market level) in monopsonistic labor markets, particularly when
labor bargaining power is weak and worker mobility is limited. We suggest that the decline in
U.S. unionization and labor mobility during the 1980s and 1990s is important in explaining the
stagnation in wages. In addition, we show how higher employer concentration impairs the
transmission of productivity growth into wage increases. Finally, we document an indirect China

                                                  23
effect in which competition with Chinese exporters leads to a higher concentration of employers,
resulting in even lower worker wages.




                                              24
                                       REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, and David H. Autor, “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
      Employment and Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B, David Card and
      Orley Ashenfelter, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011), 1043–1171.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo, “The Race between Machine and Man: Implications of
      Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment,” NBER Working Paper 22252,
      2016.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local labor
      Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review,
      103 (2013), 2121–2168.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Jae Song, “Trade Adjustment: Worker-
      Level Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (2014), 1799–1860.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen, “The
      Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms,” Working Paper, 2017.
Azar, Jose, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall I. Steinbaum, “Labor Market Concentration,” NBER
      Working Paper 24147, 2017.
Barkai, Simcha, “Declining Labor and Capital Shares,” Stigler Center for the Study of the
      Economy and the State, New Working Paper Series, 2016.
Bartelsman, Eric, Randy Becker, and Wayne Gray, “NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry
      Database,” National Bureau of Economic Research, 2000.
Benmelech, Efraim, Nittai Bergman, and Hyunseob Kim, “Why Did Rent-Sharing Vanish in the
      United States?,” Working Paper, 2017.
Bivens, Josh, and Lawrence Mishel, “Understanding the Historic Divergence between
      Productivity and a Typical Worker’s Pay,” EPI Briefing Papers 406, 2015.
Boal, William M., and Michael R. Ransom, 1997, “Monopsony in the Labor Market,” Journal of
      Economic Literature, 35 (1997), 86–112.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and
      Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (New York: W. W. Norton, 2014).
Card, David, “The Effect of Unions on the Distribution of Wages: Redistribution or
      Relabelling?,” NBER Working Paper 4195, 1992.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger, “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the

                                              25
       Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania,” American Economic Review, 84
       (1994), 772–793.
Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief, “Labor Market Monopsony: Trends, Consequences,
       and Policy Responses,” 2016.
De Locker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout, “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic
       Implications,” Princeton University, working paper, 2017.
Dube, Arindrajit, William T. Lester, and Michael Reich, “Minimum Wage Effects across State
       Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92
       (2010), 945–964.
———, “Minimum Wage Shocks, Employment Flows and Labor Market Frictions,” Journal of
       Labor Economics, 34 (2016), 663–704.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward L. Glaeser, and William R. Kerr, “What Causes Industry
       Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns,” American Economic Review,
       100 (2010), 1195–1213.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin, “The Decline of the U.S. Labor Share,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2013), 1–52.
Giroud, Xavier, “Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 128 (2013), 861–915.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti, “Identifying Agglomeration
       Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 118 (2010), 536–598.
Grullon, Gustavo, Yelena Larkin, and Roni Michaely, “Are US Industries Becoming More
       Concentrated?,” Working Paper, 2016.
Hirsch, Barry T., and David A. Macpherson, “Union Membership and Coverage Database from
       the Current Population Survey: Note,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56 (2003),
       349–354.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman, “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 129 (2014), 61–103.
Kovenock, Dan, and Gordon Phillips, “Capital Structure and Product Market Behavior: An
       Examination of Plant Exit and Investment Decisions,” Review of Financial Studies, 10
       (1997), 767–803.

                                              26
Lichtenberg, Frank, Corporate Takeovers and Productivity (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992).
Matsa, David, “Capital Structure as a Strategic Variable: Evidence from Collective Bargaining,”
       Journal of Finance, 65 (2010), 1197–1232.
Mishel, Lawrence, “The Wedges between Productivity and Median Compensation Growth,”
       Issue Brief, Economic Policy Institute, 2012.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak, “Declining Migration within the
       U.S.: The Role of the Labor Market,” NBER Working Paper 20065, 2014.
Moretti, Enrico, 2011, “Local Labor Markets,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B, David
       Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011), 1237–1313.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel, “The Evolution of Unemployment in the United States:
       1968–1985,” NBER Macroeconomic Annual (1987), 11–57.
Nickell, Stephen J., and Sushil Wadhwani, “Insider Forces and Wage Determination,” Economic
       Journal, 100 (1990), 496–509.
Rognlie, Matthew, “Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share: Accumulation or
       Scarcity?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2015.
Schoar, Antoinette, “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity,” Journal of Finance,
       57 (2002), 2379–2403.
Stansbury, Anna, and Lawrence Summers, “Productivity and Pay: Is the Link Broken?,”
       Working Paper, 2017.
Uguccioni, James, “Decomposing the Productivity-Wage Nexus in Selected OECD Countries,
       1986–2013,” CSLS Research Report, 2016.
U.S. Department of Justice Office of Public Affairs, “Justice Department Requires eBay to End
       Anticompetitive ‘No Poach’” Hiring Agreements,” 2014.
Whitney, Lance, “Apple, Google, Others Settle Antipoaching Lawsuit for $415 Million,”
       CNET.com, September 3, 2015.




                                               27
      Figure I: Trends in Average Local-Level Employment Concentration, 1977–2009

This figure plots trends in the employment-weighted average of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of
employment by firms computed at the county-three-digit industry-year level. The computed HHI is averaged across
county-three-digit industry-year cells within each of the five-year periods (the last period includes eight years,
2002–2009) using the number of employees in each cell as the weight. Thus, the average HHI represents the degree
of employer concentration the average worker faces in the labor market.


       0.760
       0.750
       0.740
       0.730
       0.720
       0.710
       0.700
       0.690
       0.680
       0.670
       0.660
                 1977-1981      1982-1986      1987-1991      1992-1996      1997-2001      2002-2009




                                                       28
    Table I: Summary Statistics on Plant Observations from the CMF and ASM Sample

This table presents descriptive statistics on the manufacturing plant-year observations used in the analysis from the
CMF and ASM databases for the period 1977–2009. We require each observation in the sample to have all variables
necessary to compute labor productivity (and lagged value) and value added per worker (and lagged value). “Total
value of shipments” is TVS in the CMF and ASM databases and a measure of sales from plants in million dollars;
“Total wage” is the sum of wages for production and nonproduction workers in million dollars; “Total employees”
is the number of total employees; “Total labor hours” is the production worker equivalent man hours in thousands;
“HHI (SIC3 or 4-county-year)” is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of employment by firms at the county-
industry (three- or four-digit)-year level; “Dummy HHI (SIC3 or 4-county-year) = 1” is a dummy variable equal to
one if HHI = 1, and zero otherwise; “HHI (SIC3 or 4- year)” is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of
employment by firms at the industry (three- or four-digit)-year level; “log(employment, SIC3 or 4-county-year)” is
the log number of employees at the county-industry (three- or four-digit)-year level; “Labor productivity” is defined
as output divided by total labor hours (a quantity-based measure of labor productivity); “Average wage” is
computed as total wage divided by total employees (in thousand dollars); “log(employment, SIC3 or 4-county-
year)” is the log number of employment at the county-industry (three- or four-digit)-year level; “Plants per segment”
is the number of plants in a given three-digit SIC industry segment of a given firm; “Plants per firm” is the total
number of plants of a given firm; “Plant age” is the number of years since a plant’s birth, which is proxied either by
the flag for plant birth in the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) or by its first appearance in the CMF or ASM
database, whichever is earliest; and “Unionization rate” is the percentage of the workforce covered by collective
bargaining collected by Hirsch and Macpherson (2003). The number of observations is rounded to the nearest
thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

                                                                        Mean            STD
                    Total value of shipment ($m)                          95.95          379.45
                    Total wage ($m)                                       16.51           50.63
                    Total employees                                      348.56          816.68
                    Total labor hours (000)                              817.25         3955.94
                    HHI (SIC3-county-year)                                0.545           0.350
                    HHI (SIC4-county-year)                                0.682           0.334
                    Dummy HHI (SIC3-county-year) = 1                      0.227           0.419
                    Dummy HHI (SIC4-county-year) = 1                      0.379           0.485
                    HHI (SIC3-year)                                       0.022           0.029
                    HHI (SIC4-year)                                       0.044           0.048
                    Log labor productivity                                 4.61            0.94
                    Average wage ($000)                                   41.84           14.24
                    Log average wage ($000)                                3.67            0.35
                    log(employment, SIC3-county-year)                      6.24            1.68
                    log(employment, SIC4-county-year)                      5.66            1.76
                    Plants per segment (SIC3)                              9.85           15.20
                    Plants per firm                                       31.89           39.14
                    Plant age                                             17.09            8.99
                    Unionization rate                                     0.228           0.129
                    Observations (plant-years)                          656,000              —




                                                         29
                                              Table II: Local Employer Concentration and Wages

 This table examines the basic effects of employer concentration in a local labor market on the wages of plants. The dependent variable is the log of average
 wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI” and “log(employment)” are lagged by one year. Panels A and B present estimates using three- and four-digit SIC
 industries to compute HHI. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the county level are reported below the coefficient
 estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

 Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                 (1)                 (2)                 (3)               (4)                  (5)                 (6)
            Dep. Var.                                                                       Log avg. wages
HHI (SIC3-county-year)                         −0.025              −0.044              −0.037           −0.028                −0.023              −0.049
                                               −2.87               −5.41               −5.29             −5.64                −4.31               −9.41
log(employment, SIC3-county-year)               0.042               0.039               0.036            0.026                 0.027               0.026
                                                19.08               17.16               21.62            26.99                 26.74               27.28
log(labor productivity)                         0.156               0.155               0.102            0.095                 0.094               0.065
                                                47.19               46.31               55.77            49.09                 44.94               36.78
log(plant per segment)                            —                −0.042              −0.015           −0.017                −0.020              −0.008
                                                  —                −19.20              −10.68           −11.26                −11.42              −5.08
log(plant per firm)                               —                 0.041               0.021           −0.016                   —                 0.000
                                                  —                 26.63               19.28            −8.96                   —                 0.00
Plant age (/100)                                  —                 0.422               0.425            0.405                 0.412               0.358
                                                  —                 17.61               24.27            23.23                 23.31               21.94
Year fixed effects                                Y                   Y                   Y                 Y
Industry fixed effects                                                                    Y
Industry-year fixed effects                                                                                                                          Y
Firm fixed effects                                                                                           Y
Firm-year fixed effects                                                                                                         Y                   Y
Observations                                  656,000             656,000             656,000             656,000            656,000             656,000
R2                                             20.45%             22.56%              43.90%              54.99%              62.55%             67.18%
 Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                      (1)      (2)            (3)               (4)     (5)       (6)
            Dep. Var.                                            Log avg. wages
HHI (SIC4-county-year)              −0.042    −0.063        −0.054           −0.043   −0.038    −0.055
                                    −4.21     −6.51         −8.24             −8.34   −6.90     −10.73
log(employment, SIC4-county-year)    0.034     0.031         0.026            0.020    0.021     0.019
                                     18.93     17.36         27.84            25.25    24.82     28.54
log(labor productivity)              0.152     0.151         0.090            0.094    0.093     0.060
                                     43.24     43.51         53.47            47.27    43.40     35.08
log(plant per segment)                 —      −0.036        −0.013           −0.015   −0.017    −0.007
                                       —      −18.51        −11.16           −11.01   −11.13    −5.01
log(plant per firm)                    —       0.034         0.018           −0.019    0.000     0.000
                                       —       24.81         18.03           −11.21    0.00      0.00
Plant age (/100)                       —       0.423         0.430            0.414    0.421     0.374
                                       —       17.30         26.31            23.67    23.60     23.32
Year fixed effects                     Y         Y             Y                 Y
Industry fixed effects                                         Y                                  Y
Firm fixed effects                                                               Y
Firm-year fixed effects                                                                  Y         Y
Observations                        656,000   656000        656,000         656000    656,000   656,000
R2                                  19.44%    21.28%        48.37%          54.67%    62.23%    69.22%




                                                       31
                       Table III: Local Employer Concentration and Wages Controlling for Labor Value-Added

This table examines the effects of employer concentration in a local labor market on the wages of plants including an additional control for labor productivity—
valued added (total value of shipments + net increase in inventories of finished goods and works in progress—material and energy costs) scaled by labor hours.
The dependent variable is the log of average wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI” and “log(employment)” are lagged by one year. Panels A and B
present estimates using three- and four-digit SIC industries to compute HHI. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the county
level are reported below the coefficient estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure
rules.

Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)              (4)                     (5)                 (6)
           Dep. Var.                                                                         Log avg. wages
HHI (SIC3-county-year)                          −0.025              −0.044              −0.038           −0.028                 −0.023              −0.049
                                                −2.91               −5.45               −5.37            −5.61                  −4.29               −9.47
log(employment, SIC3-county-year)                0.041               0.038               0.036            0.027                  0.027               0.026
                                                 17.95               16.16               21.30            26.99                  26.74               27.10
log(labor productivity)                          0.144               0.144               0.098            0.097                  0.096               0.061
                                                 43.59               43.70               48.87            45.73                  41.63               30.01
log(labor VA)                                    0.016               0.015               0.005           −0.002                 −0.001               0.004
                                                 9.86                9.14                5.26            −2.65                  −1.49                5.35
log(plant per segment)                             —                −0.041              −0.014           −0.017                 −0.020              −0.007
                                                   —                −19.01              −10.57           −11.32                 −11.46              −5.03
log(plant per firm)                                —                 0.041               0.021           −0.016                    —                   —
                                                   —                 26.65               19.27           −8.91                     —                   —
Plant age (/100)                                   —                 0.424               0.424            0.405                  0.413               0.357
                                                   —                 17.64               24.23            23.25                  23.34               21.93
Year fixed effects                                 Y                   Y                   Y                Y
Industry fixed effects                                                                     Y
Industry-year fixed effects                                                                                                                            Y
Firm fixed effects                                                                                             Y
Firm-year fixed effects                                                                                                            Y                   Y
Observations                                   656,000             656,000              656,000             656,000             656,000             656,000


                                                                               32
R2                                  20.67%    22.74%         43.92%         55.00%     62.55%    67.19%
Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                      (1)       (2)            (3)              (4)      (5)       (6)
           Dep. Var.                                              Log avg. wages
HHI (SIC4-county-year)              −0.042    −0.063         −0.055           −0.043   −0.038    −0.055
                                    −4.28     −6.58          −8.36            −8.33    −6.90     −10.82
log(employment, SIC4-county-year)    0.033     0.030          0.026            0.020    0.021     0.019
                                     17.77     16.24          27.42            25.21    24.77     28.22
log(labor productivity)              0.139     0.138          0.082            0.095    0.094     0.054
                                     38.94     39.93          39.99            43.71    39.83     26.51
log(labor VA)                        0.019     0.018          0.009           −0.001   −0.001     0.006
                                     11.08     10.57          10.04           −1.59    −0.60      7.93
log(plant per segment)                 —      −0.035         −0.013           −0.015   −0.017    −0.007
                                       —      −18.14         −11.14           −11.07   −11.16    −5.01
log(plant per firm)                    —       0.034          0.018           −0.019      —         —
                                       —       24.89          18.09           −11.17      —         —
Plant age (/100)                       —       0.425          0.428            0.414    0.421     0.372
                                       —       17.36          26.19            23.69    23.62     23.30
Year fixed effects                     Y         Y              Y                Y
Industry fixed effects                                          Y
Industry-year fixed effects                                                                        Y
Firm fixed effects                                                             Y
Firm-year fixed effects                                                                   Y         Y
Observations                        656,000   656,000        656,000         656,000   656,000   656,000
R2                                  19.73%    21.53%         48.41%          54.67%    62.23%    69.24%




                                                        33
                            Table IV: Subsample of Firms with One Industry Segment across Multiple Plants

This table examines the effects of employer concentration in a local labor market on the wages of plants using a subsample of plants owned by firms that have
multiple plants in only one industry segment. The dependent variable is the log of average wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI” and
“log(employment)” are lagged by one year. Panels A and B present estimates using three- and four-digit SIC industries to compute HHI. The t-statistics based on
standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the county level are reported below the coefficient estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the
nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)                  (5)                 (6)
             Dep. Var.                                                                      Log avg. wages
  HHI (SIC3-county-year)                         −0.065             −0.080             −0.071           −0.058               −0.061             −0.070
                                                 −5.29              −6.58              −6.90            −7.14                −5.48              −6.59
  log(employment, SIC3-county-year)               0.034              0.032              0.025            0.019                0.019              0.018
                                                  14.81              13.81              12.79            13.88                10.88              10.70
  log(labor productivity)                         0.147              0.142              0.110            0.094                0.097              0.076
                                                  37.06              35.74              32.87            30.28                22.31              16.83
  log(plant per firm)                               —                0.031              0.022           −0.014                  —                  —
                                                    —                14.13              12.49           −3.91                   —                  —
  Plant age (/100)                                  —                0.288              0.327            0.333                0.353              0.335
                                                    —                7.19               10.18            9.26                 6.98               7.04
  Year fixed effects                                Y                  Y                  Y                Y
  Industry fixed effects                                                                  Y
  Industry-year fixed effects                                                                                                                      Y
  Firm fixed effects                                                                                         Y
  Firm-year fixed effects                                                                                                       Y                  Y
  Observations                                  110,000            110,000            110,000            110,000             110,000            110,000
  R2                                            18.77%             20.13%              38.09%             56.32%             72.42%             77.58%




                                                                              34
Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                       (1)       (2)            (3)              (4)      (5)       (6)
            Dep. Var.                                              Log avg. wages
 HHI (SIC4-county-year)              −0.080    −0.096         −0.078           −0.069   −0.071    −0.078
                                     −5.70     −6.82          −8.39            −8.03    −6.74     −8.07
 log(employment, SIC4-county-year)    0.026     0.024          0.019            0.014    0.014     0.013
                                      15.30     14.02          17.17            13.44    10.75     11.27
 log(labor productivity)              0.140     0.135          0.103            0.092    0.093     0.074
                                      33.28     32.16          34.56            28.96    23.57     19.04
 log(plant per firm)                    —       0.030          0.019           −0.015      —         —
                                        —       15.55          13.14           −4.63       —         —
 Plant age (/100)                       —       0.323          0.366            0.346    0.351     0.319
                                        —       8.63           13.12            10.53    8.36      8.16
 Year fixed effects                     Y         Y              Y                Y
 Industry fixed effects                                          Y
 Industry-year fixed effects                                                                        Y
 Firm fixed effects                                                             Y
 Firm-year fixed effects                                                                   Y         Y
 Observations                        154,000   154,000        154,000        154,000    154,000   154,000
     2
 R                                   17.12%    18.61%         43.24%          55.03%    68.79%    77.54%




                                                         35
                                   Table V: Employer Concentration and Wages by Five-Year Time Period

 This table examines the basic effects of employer concentration in a local labor market on the wages of plants by five-year period from 1977 to 2009. The
 dependent variable is the log of average wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI” and “log(employment)” are lagged by one year. Panels A and B present
 estimates using three- and four-digit SIC industries to compute HHI. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the county level
 are reported below the coefficient estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

 Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                (1)                 (2)                   (3)                (4)                  (5)                  (6)
        Subsample period:                    1977–1981           1982–1986            1987–1991         1992–1996              1997–2001            2002–2009
           Dep. Var.:                                                                         Log avg. wages
HHI (SIC3-county-year)                        −0.018                −0.012              −0.015            −0.031                 −0.039               −0.029
                                               −2.75                −1.78               −1.95              −4.59                  −5.31                −4.18
log(employment, SIC3-county-year)              0.029                 0.031               0.030             0.025                  0.021                0.023
                                               24.35                 23.09               20.38             16.45                  10.98                11.75
log(labor productivity)                        0.122                 0.109               0.095             0.089                  0.072                0.080
                                               40.09                 36.56               30.13             29.30                  23.02                29.07
log(plant per segment)                        −0.009                −0.014              −0.024            −0.028                 −0.020               −0.025
                                               −3.87                −5.32               −10.36            −11.70                  −8.37               −10.21
Plant age (/100)                               1.681                 0.971               0.591             0.514                  0.473                0.267
                                               16.24                 16.31               12.85             18.37                  18.71                14.48
Firm-year fixed effects                          Y                     Y                   Y                  Y                     Y                    Y
Observations                                  114,000               87,000             101,000            110,000                102,000              143,000
R2                                             66.02%              65.65%               62.84%               62.30%              56.36%               60.87%




                                                                                36
 Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                       (1)         (2)               (3)                (4)       (5)         (6)
        Subsample period:           1977–1981   1982–1986        1987–1991         1992–1996   1997–2001   2002–2009
           Dep. Var.:                                                    Log avg. wages
HHI (SIC4-county-year)               −0.044      −0.038            −0.031            −0.044     −0.047      −0.033
                                      −6.87      −5.51             −3.88              −6.08      −6.15       −4.67
log(employment, SIC4-county-year)     0.022       0.022             0.024             0.018      0.017       0.021
                                      21.97       18.87             18.10             13.78      10.05       11.81
log(labor productivity)               0.121       0.107             0.093             0.088      0.072       0.080
                                      40.01       35.11             28.54             27.87      22.61       28.92
log(plant per segment)               −0.008      −0.012            −0.023            −0.024     −0.017      −0.021
                                      −3.63      −5.34             −10.42            −10.67      −7.42       −8.40
Plant age (/100)                      1.728       1.001             0.603             0.538      0.476       0.264
                                      16.59       16.44             12.78             19.09      18.71       14.32
Firm-year fixed effects                 Y           Y                 Y                  Y         Y           Y
Observations                         114,000     87,000           101,000            110,000    102,000     143,000
R2                                   65.70%      65.24%           62.51%           61.91%       56.12%      60.70%




                                                            37
                                        Table VI: Local Employer Concentration, Unions, and Wages

This table examines the interactive effects of employer concentration in a local labor market and industry unionization rates on the wages of plants. The
dependent variable is the log of average wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI,” “log(employment),” and “Union” are lagged by one year. Panels A and
B present estimates using three- and four-digit SIC industries to compute HHI. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the
county level are reported below the coefficient estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s
disclosure rules.

Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)                   (5)                 (6)
           Dep. Var.                                                                      Log avg. wages
HHI (SIC3-county-year)                        −0.135              −0.153             −0.070           −0.094                −0.087              −0.079
                                              −8.05               −9.40              −6.41            −11.62                −10.39              −9.86
log(employment, SIC3-county-year)              0.039               0.036              0.036            0.025                 0.025               0.026
                                               17.68               15.92              21.86            25.31                 25.09               27.63
log(labor productivity)                        0.148               0.148              0.102            0.092                 0.092               0.065
                                               48.73               48.21              55.77            49.09                 44.90               36.81
Union                                          0.108               0.109              0.136            0.097                 0.109               0.169
                                               2.14                2.15               4.96             4.47                  4.78                1.45
HHI x Union                                    0.407               0.402              0.145            0.237                 0.228               0.131
                                               7.29                7.20               4.09             8.99                  8.59                5.59
log(plant per segment)                           —                −0.044             −0.015           −0.018                −0.020              −0.008
                                                 —                −19.97             −10.82           −11.98                −11.98              −5.14
log(plant per firm)                              —                 0.040              0.021           −0.016                   —                   —
                                                 —                 26.85              19.28           −8.79                    —                   —
Plant age (/100)                                 —                 0.408              0.427            0.397                 0.405               0.358
                                                 —                 17.45              24.58            22.88                 22.86               21.88
Year fixed effects                               Y                   Y                  Y                Y
Industry fixed effects                                                                  Y
Industry-year fixed effects                                                                                                                       Y
Firm fixed effects                                                                                         Y
Firm-year fixed effects                                                                                                        Y                  Y
Observations                                  656,000            656,000             656,000            656,000             656,000            656,000


                                                                             38
R2   21.89%   23.98%        43.98%   55.37%   62.88%   67.20%




                       39
Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                      (1)       (2)            (3)              (4)      (5)       (6)
           Dep. Var.                                              Log avg. wages
HHI (SIC4-county-year)              −0.111    −0.131         −0.072           −0.086   −0.080    −0.074
                                    −5.40     −6.52          −6.50            −9.07    −8.41     −8.21
log(employment, SIC4-county-year)    0.031     0.029          0.026            0.019    0.020     0.019
                                     17.23     15.75          28.03            23.29    22.86     28.41
log(labor productivity)              0.145     0.144          0.090            0.091    0.091     0.060
                                     44.23     44.66          53.28            46.90    43.04     34.98
Union                                0.160     0.162          0.145            0.116    0.127       —
                                     2.52      2.58           4.67             4.36     4.71        —
HHI × Union                          0.253     0.251          0.078            0.156    0.151     0.084
                                     3.84      3.84           2.10             5.25     5.18      3.16
log(plant per segment)                 —      −0.038         −0.013           −0.017   −0.019    −0.007
                                       —      −19.74         −11.16           −12.08   −12.02    −5.01
log(plant per firm)                    —       0.033          0.018           −0.018      —         —
                                       —       25.00          17.99           −10.75      —         —
Plant age (/100)                       —       0.405          0.431            0.406    0.414     0.373
                                       —       16.87          26.44            23.32    23.18     23.24
Year fixed effects                     Y         Y              Y                Y
Industry fixed effects                                          Y
Industry-year fixed effects                                                                        Y
Firm fixed effects                                                             Y
Firm-year fixed effects                                                                   Y         Y
Observations                        656,000   656,000        656,000         656,000   656,000   656,000
R2                                  20.60%    23.98%         43.98%          55.37%    62.88%    62.51%




                                                        40
                   Table VII: Employer Concentration and Sensitivities of Wage Changes to Productivity Changes

This table examines how employer concentration shapes sensitivities of changes in wages to changes in labor productivity. The dependent variable is the log
change in average wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI” is lagged by one year. Panels A and B present estimates using three- and four-digit SIC
industries to compute HHI. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the county level are reported below the coefficient
estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)             (4)                   (5)                (6)
             Dep. Var.                                                                    ΔLog avg. wages
HHI (SIC3-county-year)                            0.006              0.006             0.006           0.005                 0.005              0.005
                                                  10.40              10.99             10.99           10.59                 9.56               9.81
Δlog(labor productivity)                          0.002              0.002             0.002           0.002                 0.002              0.003
                                                  2.50               2.63              3.22            2.47                  2.64               3.42
HHI × Δlog(labor productivity)                   −0.002             −0.002            −0.002          −0.002                −0.002             −0.002
                                                 −1.70              −1.82             −1.73            −1.72                −1.96              −1.90
log(plant per segment)                              —               −0.001            −0.001           0.000                 0.000              0.000
                                                    —               −3.13             −2.62            −0.88                −1.34              −0.84
log(plant per firm)                                 —                0.000             0.000           0.000                   —                  —
                                                    —                1.47              1.95            −0.61                   —                  —
Plant age (/100)                                    —               −0.033            −0.032          −0.030                −0.029             −0.028
                                                    —               −10.98            −10.56           −9.81                −8.62              −7.87
Year fixed effects                                  Y                  Y                 Y               Y
Industry fixed effects                                                                   Y
Industry-year fixed effects                                                                                                                       Y
Firm fixed effects                                                                                          Y
Firm-year fixed effects                                                                                                        Y                  Y
Observations                                    656,000            656,000            656,000            656,000            656,000            656,000
    2
R                                                0.98%              1.00%              1.05%              3.80%             24.36%             25.18%




                                                                             41
Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                    (1)       (2)           (3)             (4)      (5)       (6)
             Dep. Var.                                        ΔLog avg. wages
HHI (SIC4-county-year)             0.007     0.007         0.007           0.006    0.005     0.005
                                   10.98     11.16         9.74            10.08    8.46      8.52
Δlog(labor productivity)           0.003     0.003         0.003           0.003    0.003     0.004
                                   2.63      2.75          3.38            2.52     2.65      3.43
HHI × Δlog(labor productivity)    −0.003    −0.003        −0.003          −0.003   −0.003    −0.003
                                  −2.04     −2.14         −2.05            −1.94   −2.13     −2.11
log(plant per segment)               —      −0.001         0.000           0.000    0.000     0.000
                                     —      −3.56         −0.55            −1.32   −1.47     −0.41
log(plant per firm)                  —       0.000         0.000           0.000      —         —
                                     —       1.43          1.38            −0.54      —         —
Plant age (/100)                     —      −0.033        −0.032          −0.030   −0.029    −0.027
                                     —      −10.95        −10.73           −9.81   −8.62     −7.72
Year fixed effects                   Y         Y             Y               Y
Industry fixed effects                                       Y
Industry-year fixed effects                                                                    Y
Firm fixed effects                                                          Y
Firm-year fixed effects                                                               Y         Y
Observations                      656,000   656,000       656,000        656,000   656,000   656,000
R2                                0.99%     1.00%         1.10%           3.79%    24.36%    26.74%




                                                     42
                                 Table VIII: Nonlinear Effect of Local Employer Concentration on Wages

This table examines nonlinear effects of employer concentration in a local labor market on the wages of plants. The dependent variable is the log of average
wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI,” “log(employment),” and “Union” are lagged by one year. “Dummy HHI (SIC3 or 4-county-year) = 1” is equal to
one if HHI based on three- or four-digit SIC industries is equal to one, and zero otherwise. Panels A and B present estimates using three- and four-digit SIC
industries to compute HHI. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the county level are reported below the coefficient
estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)
                                     Dep. Var.                                                Log avg. wages
                        Dummy HHI (SIC3-county-year) = 1                      −0.017              −0.011               −0.062
                                                                               −5.19              −2.79                −11.59
                        HHI (SIC3-county-year)                                   —                −0.013                  —
                                                                                 —                −1.99                   —
                        log(employment, SIC3-county-year)                      0.028               0.027                0.027
                                                                               26.12               26.47                24.63
                        log(labor productivity)                                0.094               0.094                0.092
                                                                               44.86               44.88                44.64
                        Union                                                    —                   —                  0.196
                                                                                 —                   —                  11.81
                        HHI × Union                                              —                   —                  0.162
                                                                                 —                   —                  9.23
                        log(plant per segment)                                −0.020              −0.020               −0.020
                                                                              −11.59              −11.55               −12.00
                        Plant age (/100)                                       0.409               0.412                0.399
                                                                               23.29               23.25                22.73
                        Firm-year fixed effects                                  Y                   Y                    Y
                        Observations                                          656,000            656,000               656,000
                        R2                                                    62.55%              62.55%               62.87%




                                                                             43
Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                                              (1)         (2)          (3)
                                  Dep. Var.                         Log avg. wages
                     Dummy HHI (SIC4-county-year) = 1    −0.031         −0.029       −0.058
                                                          −9.74         −7.43        −10.94
                     HHI (SIC4-county-year)                 —           −0.006          —
                                                            —           −0.78           —
                     log(employment, SIC4-county-year)    0.021          0.021        0.020
                                                          22.34          23.15        20.24
                     log(labor productivity)              0.093          0.093        0.091
                                                          43.27          43.23        42.85
                     Union                                  —              —          0.186
                                                            —              —          10.08
                     HHI × Union                            —              —          0.101
                                                            —              —          6.08
                     log(plant per segment)              −0.018         −0.018       −0.020
                                                         −11.35         −11.34       −12.19
                     Plant age (/100)                     0.419          0.419        0.408
                                                          23.39          23.5         22.87
                     Firm-year fixed effects                Y              Y            Y
                     Observations                        656,000       656,000       656,000
                     R2                                  62.28%        62.28%        62.56%




                                                         44
                     Table IX: Local Employer Concentration and Wages Controlling for National Concentration

This table examines the effects of employer concentration in a local labor market on the wages of plants, including an additional control for employer
concentration at the national level. The dependent variable is the log of average wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI” and “log(employment)” are
lagged by one year. Panels A and B present estimates using three- and four-digit SIC industries to compute HHI. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted
for sample clustering at the county level are reported below the coefficient estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand to follow
the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                            (1)                 (2)                (3)                   (4)                 (5)
                    Dep. Var.                                                                Log avg. wages
         HHI (SIC3-county-year)                          −0.069               −0.088             −0.037                −0.047              −0.043
                                                         −7.88                −10.40             −5.27                 −9.39               −7.90
         HHI (SIC3-year)                                  1.556                1.527             −0.055                 0.940               0.995
                                                          24.68                24.44             −0.91                  19.58               17.57
         log(employment, SIC3-county-year)                0.036                0.033              0.036                 0.024               0.025
                                                          16.55                14.82              21.68                 24.21               23.88
         log(labor productivity)                          0.151                0.150              0.102                 0.093               0.092
                                                          46.58                45.89              55.75                 48.31               43.93
         log(plant per segment)                             —                 −0.043             −0.015                −0.019              −0.021
                                                            —                 −19.43             −10.61                −11.89              −11.94
         log(plant per firm)                                —                  0.040              0.021                −0.016               0.000
                                                            —                  26.20              19.32                −8.69                0.00
         Plant age (/100)                                   —                  0.413              0.425                 0.400               0.408
                                                            —                  17.03              24.32                 22.72               22.83
         Year fixed effects                                 Y                    Y                  Y                     Y
         Industry fixed effects                                                                     Y
         Industry-year fixed effects
         Firm fixed effects                                                                                               Y
         Firm-year fixed effects                                                                                                              Y
         Observations                                    656,000             656,000              656,000             656,000              656,000
         R2                                              21.88%              23.94%               43.90%              55.34%               62.88%

                                                                               45
Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                              (1)       (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)
                   Dep. Var.                                    Log avg. wages
        HHI (SIC4-county-year)              −0.092    −0.110        −0.054       −0.060    −0.055
                                            −8.78     −10.75        −8.20        −11.28    −9.67
        HHI (SIC4-year)                      0.994     0.963        −0.157        0.442     0.464
                                             30.62     29.74        −4.65         16.06     14.88
        log(employment, SIC4-county-year)    0.028     0.026         0.026        0.019     0.020
                                             16.87     15.47         27.82        23.86     23.33
        log(labor productivity)              0.146     0.147         0.090        0.092     0.092
                                             42.29     43.25         53.21        46.63     42.43
        log(plant per segment)                 —      −0.038        −0.013       −0.016    −0.019
                                               —      −19.59        −11.00       −11.74    −11.79
        log(plant per firm)                    —       0.031         0.018       −0.018     0.000
                                               —       23.83         18.13       −11.18     0.00
        Plant age (/100)                       —       0.393         0.431        0.405     0.412
                                               —       16.06         26.43        22.96     22.91
        Year fixed effects                     Y         Y             Y            Y
        Industry fixed effects                                         Y
        Industry-year fixed effects
        Firm fixed effects                                                         Y
        Firm-year fixed effects                                                               Y
        Observations                        656,000   656,000      656,000       656,000   656,000
        R2                                  21.07%    22.78%       48.38%        54.88%    62.44%




                                                       46
                             Table X: China Import Penetration, Local Employer Concentration, and Wages

This table examines the effects of employer concentration in a local labor market on wages controlling for the effect of imports from China on wages. The
dependent variable is the log of average wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI” and “log(employment)” are lagged by one year. “China exposure” is
defined as total value of import from China to the U.S. scaled by total value of shipments at the industry by year level. Panels A and B present estimates using
three- and four-digit SIC industries to compute the HHI. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the county level are reported
below the coefficient estimates. The numbers of observations are rounded to the nearest thousands to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

Panel A: 3-digit SIC Industries
                                                        (1)                   (2)                   (3)                     (4)                    (5)
               Dep. Var.                                                                      Log avg. wages
   HHI (SIC3-county-year)                            −0.041                 −0.065                −0.035                  −0.032                −0.043
                                                     −4.36                  −7.25                 −6.39                   −5.31                 −4.93
   China exposure (SIC3-year)                        −0.001                 −0.001                −0.001                  −0.001                −0.001
                                                     −4.01                  −5.96                 −5.01                   −5.01                 −7.22
   log(employment, SIC3-county-year)                  0.039                  0.035                 0.023                   0.024                 0.033
                                                      14.29                  12.14                 17.81                   17.03                 15.63
   log(labor productivity)                            0.138                  0.137                 0.080                   0.082                 0.134
                                                      36.94                  37.33                 36.75                   34.18                 41.29
   log(plant per segment)                               —                   −0.051                −0.023                  −0.025                −0.048
                                                        —                   −24.25                −13.63                  −13.28                −23.96
   log(plant per firm)                                  —                    0.043                −0.011                   0.000                 0.042
                                                        —                    24.47                −4.75                    0.00                  24.61
   Plant age (/100)                                     —                    0.432                 0.384                   0.388                 0.423
                                                        —                    17.79                 21.92                   21.18                 20.04
   Year fixed effects                                   Y                      Y                     Y                                             Y
   Industry fixed effects
   Firm fixed effects                                                                                 Y
   Firm-year fixed effects                                                                                                   Y
   County fixed effects                                                                                                                            Y
   Observations                                      346,000                346,000               346,000                346,000                346,000
   R2                                                15.60%                 18.35%                 54.05%                60.36%                 21.18%

                                                                               47
Panel B: 4-digit SIC Industries
                                        (1)       (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)
              Dep. Var.                                   Log avg. wages
  HHI (SIC4-county-year)              −0.051    −0.076        −0.046       −0.042   −0.046
                                      −4.53     −7.13         −7.69        −6.57    −4.71
  China exposure (SIC4-year)          −0.001    −0.001        −0.001       −0.001   −0.002
                                      −5.76     −7.75         −4.75        −4.56    −9.09
  log(employment, SIC4-county-year)    0.031     0.027         0.018        0.019    0.027
                                       13.88     11.78         16.45        15.59    15.26
  log(labor productivity)              0.134     0.135         0.079        0.081    0.131
                                       34.20     35.04         35.57        33.13    39.55
  log(plant per segment)                 —      −0.044        −0.020       −0.022   −0.041
                                         —      −22.12        −12.28       −11.96   −21.86
  log(plant per firm)                    —       0.034        −0.015        0.000    0.033
                                         —       21.24        −6.38         0.00     21.66
  Plant age (/100)                       —       0.434         0.392        0.395    0.421
                                         —       17.66         22.33        21.47    19.72
  Year fixed effects                     Y         Y             Y                     Y
  Industry fixed effects
  Firm fixed effects                                            Y
  Firm-year fixed effects                                                    Y
  County fixed effects                                                                 Y
  Observations                        346,000   346,000      346,000       346000   346,000
      2
  R                                   14.65%    17.09%       53.73%        60.04%   20.31%




                                                  48
                Table XI: Indirect of Effect of China Import Penetration on Wages through Employer Concentration

This table examines how exposure to China imports indirectly affects wages through employer concentration using an instrumental variables (IV) approach. This
table uses three-digit SIC industries to compute HHI and China exposure. Panels A and B present estimates for the first and second stages. In Panels A and B, the
dependent variables are HHI and the log of average wages per worker as defined in Table I. “HHI” and “log(employment)” are lagged by one year. The t-
statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the county level are reported below the coefficient estimates. The numbers of observations are
rounded to the nearest thousand to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

Panel A: China Exposure and Local Employer Concentration (First Stage)

                                                        (1)                    (2)                 (3)                       (4)                    (5)
                Dep. Var.                                                                 HHI (SIC3-county-year)
   China exposure (SIC3-year)                          0.003                  0.003               0.001                     0.002                  0.003
                                                       11.32                  11.41               5.42                      6.49                   12.39
   log(employment, SIC3-county-year)                  −0.119                 −0.120              −0.130                    −0.132                 −0.104
                                                      −24.59                 −25.15              −37.02                    −35.97                 −48.25
   log(labor productivity)                            −0.009                 −0.011              −0.003                    −0.002                 −0.004
                                                      −2.55                  −3.20                −1.17                    −0.76                  −1.80
   log(plant per segment)                                —                   −0.019              −0.001                     0.000                 −0.020
                                                         —                   −7.45                −0.57                    −0.04                  −9.10
   log(plant per firm)                                   —                    0.021              −0.022                       —                    0.020
                                                         —                    11.30               −8.57                       —                    12.17
   Plant age (/100)                                      —                    0.397               0.270                     0.273                  0.386
                                                         —                    13.82               12.01                     11.23                  15.19
   Year fixed effects                                    Y                      Y                   Y                                                Y
   Firm fixed effects                                                                               Y
   Firm-year fixed effects                                                                                                    Y
   County fixed effects                                                                                                                              Y
   Observations                                      346,000                 346,000                346,000                346,000                346,000
   R2                                                 29.94%                 31.10%                 51.40%                 54.65%                 36.23%




                                                                                49
Panel B: Second Stage

                                        (1)       (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)
                Dep. Var.                                 Log avg. wages
  Inst’d HHI (SIC3-county-year)       −0.327    −0.493        −0.660       −0.567    −0.545
                                      −4.27     −6.07         −3.22        −3.56     −6.97
  log(employment, SIC3-county-year)    0.005    −0.017        −0.058       −0.047    −0.015
                                       0.46     −1.47         −2.20        −2.25     −3.08
  log(labor productivity)              0.135     0.133         0.078        0.080     0.116
                                       33.99     31.48         22.78        23.47     35.58
  log(plant per segment)                 —      −0.059        −0.024       −0.025    −0.050
                                         —      −20.85        −5.01        −5.51     −18.64
  log(plant per firm)                    —       0.051        −0.025          —       0.049
                                         —       19.11        −3.31           —       19.22
  Plant age (/100)                       —       0.602         0.553        0.534     0.564
                                         —       13.62         9.25         10.92     17.34
  Year fixed effects                     Y         Y             Y                      Y
  Firm fixed effects                                             Y
  Firm-year fixed effects                                                    Y
  County fixed effects                                                                  Y
  Observations                        346,000   346,000      346,000       346,000   346,000
      2
  R                                   9.96%     5.86%         3.59%        5.26%     10.29%




                                                  50
