NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC TAX-RETURN DISCLOSURE
Jeffrey L. Hoopes
Leslie Robinson
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 24318
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24318

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jeffrey L. Hoopes, Leslie Robinson, and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Public Tax-Return Disclosure
Jeffrey L. Hoopes, Leslie Robinson, and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 24318
February 2018
JEL No. H25,H26,M4
ABSTRACT
We investigate the consequences of public disclosure of information from company income tax
returns filed in Australia. Supporters of more disclosure argue that increased transparency will
improve tax compliance, while opponents argue that it will divulge sensitive information that is,
in many cases, misunderstood. Our results show that in Australia large private companies
experienced some consumer backlash and, perhaps partly in anticipation, some acted to avoid
disclosure. We detect a small increase (decrease) in tax payments for private (public) firms
subject to disclosure suggesting differential costs of disclosure across firms. Finally, we find that
investors react negatively to anticipated and actual disclosure of tax information, most likely due
to anticipated policy backlash rather than consumer backlash or the revelation of negative
information about cash flows. These findings are important for both managers and policy makers,
as the trend towards increased tax disclosure continues to rise globally.
Jeffrey L. Hoopes
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina
300 Kenan Center Drive
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Jeffrey_Hoopes@kenan-flagler.unc.edu
Leslie Robinson
Dartmouth College
Tuck School of Business
leslie.a.robinson@tuck.dartmouth.edu

Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Room R5396
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

1.

Introduction
There is currently widespread public and political pressure for action to limit perceived

harmful tax practices by businesses. One response to this pressure has been to increase the amount
of information available to taxing authorities for enforcement, while another is to improve
accountability and compliance via mandatory tax disclosure to the public. The latter response is of
particular concern to firm managers fearing that the private costs of tax-related public disclosure
will outweigh the benefits (Graham et al. 2014; Ernst & Young 2011). For instance, it can
potentially create compliance burdens, divulge sensitive information, generate confusion about
company behavior, and impose reputational damage on firms. Although more transparency results
in potential costs that must be weighed against the perceived benefits, policy discussions generally
proceed in a near-absence of evidence about its potential impacts.1
Our paper seeks to fill this void by considering the recent case wherein the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) disclosed firm-level data from Australian company tax returns, including
income and taxes payable, for listed and private firms. We analyze a variety of hypothesized
potential effects, focusing on changes in firm behavior, consumer sentiment, and investor
responses. Our results suggest that private companies took relatively more action to avoid public
disclosure than public companies, and the effect of public disclosure appears to have raised the tax
payments of private companies but lowered the tax payments of public companies, consistent with
differences in disclosure costs among firms. Relatedly, private firms subject to disclosure

1

For example, on July 4, 2017 the European Parliament voted in favor of public country-by-country reporting whereby
limited tax information for MNCs is broken down by taxing jurisdiction. While these reports are designed to aid tax
administrators, policymakers are evaluating the possibility of making this information public. Although making less
political headway in the U.S., several members of Congress wrote a letter to the Financial Accounting Standards Board
on July 18, 2017, urging them to require information from country-by-country reports in financial statement footnote
disclosures. Analysis of the Norwegian and Japanese experience with public tax disclosure has provided what up to
now is known about its consequences. For instance, some attention has been paid to small firms in Norway and Japan
(Bø et al. 2015; Hasegawa et al. 2013) and individuals in Japan (Hasegawa et al. 2013). We discuss this in Section 2.

1

experienced a small decline in consumer sentiment, suggesting that expectations of consumer
backlash may have motivated some private firms to avoid disclosure. Finally, we find a negative
investor reaction to both anticipated and actual disclosure. Cross-sectional tests point to anticipated
policy backlash resulting in adverse changes to the tax code as the likely source of the reaction.
For instance, in the 2016−17 Budget, the Australian government announced that it would introduce
a diverted profits tax, effective on 1 July 2017.2 The momentum for this new law was almost
certainly fueled by public scrutiny of the newly disclosed tax information.
In 2013, the Australian legislature began debating publicizing tax-return data. Proponents
argued that more transparency would encourage companies to pay their “fair share” of tax, improve
accountability, and educate the public about compliance with tax laws (Bradbury 2013).
Opponents argued that disclosure would create compliance burdens, divulge sensitive information
to competitors, generate confusion about company behavior, and impose risks on business owners
(Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand 2015; Hurst 2015). The legislature passed a
bill mandating disclosure for foreign-owned private firms and Australian listed firms reporting
more than 100 AUD million of “total income” on the Australia company tax return.3 Disclosure
occurred on December 17, 2015 for the first year covered by the legislation (2013-2014). The same
policy went into effect for Australian-owned private firms reporting more than 200 AUD million,
with disclosure for this set of companies occurring on March 22, 2016. This generated substantial

2

The new legislation imposes a 40 percent tax on diverted profits. Diverted profits are profits deemed to be reported
outside of Australia by Australian companies that use tax avoidance arrangements between related parties to divert,
or report, profits offshore that do not have economic substance. https://www.ato.gov.au/general/new-legislation/indetail/direct-taxes/income-tax-for-businesses/diverted-profits-tax/?=redirected
3
Total income refers to line 6S (before deductions) on a company income tax return in Australia:
https://www.ato.gov.au/uploadedFiles/Content/MEI/downloads/Company-tax-return-2016.pdf.

2

media attention. For instance, Figure 1 graphs the number of media articles discussing taxpayers
that “paid no tax”, or the ATO generally, illustrating a sharp surge on December 17, 2015.
Hanlon and Heitzman (2010) call for more research on how consumers and investors
perceive corporate tax avoidance, noting that one challenge is the number of divergent and
subjective proxies to measure tax avoidance. Our setting provides an opportunity to examine
consumer and investor reaction to an objective measure of tax avoidance – whether or not a
company remitted any income tax in Australia. As firms subject to disclosure are the largest in
Australia, paying no tax is a signal of potential profit shifting, a particular tax avoidance technique
currently under intense scrutiny. Our focus is also consistent with observed media headlines
highlighting the many firms that were disclosed as having remitted no income tax.
Legislating disclosure of tax-return data has several potential effects that are all interconnected. Chen (2016) uses the Australian setting to examine whether investors value corporate
tax return information. 4 However, one cannot fully understand investor reactions without
considering consumer and firm reactions. Investors, for example, will try to price consumer
responses and firm responses (Hanlon and Slemrod 2009). Moreover, firms’ responses will depend
on managers’ beliefs about consumer and investor reactions (Gallemore et al. 2014). For instance,
firms may try to avoid disclosure because they fear a consumer response, may change their real
behavior as a result of public pressure (Dyreng et al. 2016), or change their disclosure practices
(Kays 2017). Hence, while prior literature focuses on one of these effects, we examine many
effects in the context of a unique piece of legislation.

4

Chen (2016) focuses exclusively on investor reaction and finds a negative reaction around two early legislative dates,
including the April 3, 2013 date that we examine. She finds a positive reaction around two later legislative dates, and
no reaction around the actual disclosure date of December 17, 2015. When we condition on the unexpected taxpaying
status of the firm, we find a small negative reaction to the actual tax disclosure on December 17, 2015.

3

We begin by examining the effects of disclosure on firm behavior. As changes in tax
reporting behavior are of primary interest, we work directly with the ATO to examine aggregated
tax-return data before and after the disclosure. This evidence is useful because consumer and
investor responses are, to some extent, predicated upon firm responses. To determine whether
firms acted to avoid disclosure, we examine the distribution of reported income around the
threshold and find evidence of an increase in the frequency of income just below the threshold,
consistent with some firms adjusting their income to avoid disclosure. In particular, these tests
suggest that at least some private firms anticipate a net cost to disclosure. We also look for changes
in tax payments by firms above and below the disclosure threshold. We detect a small increase
(decrease) in tax payments for private (public) firms. While all firms face public pressure to pay
more tax, listed firms also face pressure from shareholders to pay less tax.
Next, we investigate how Australian consumers responded by analyzing two sources of
consumer sentiment data generated from surveys. Our first source comes from YouGov, a market
research firm that tracks perceptions of relatively well-known global brands, including Australian
public companies and large foreign-owned companies operating in Australia. We find no evidence
of changes in measures of sentiment for these brands after the disclosure, regardless of whether
the disclosure reveals no tax paid. Our second source is a survey we designed and administered
before and after the release of data for Australian-owned private firms. We study responses to
questions about views towards these businesses along five dimensions, and detect a small decline
in sentiment after the disclosure for firms subject to disclosure. Taken together, these results
suggest consumer sentiment is more resilient for relatively global brands of large public firms, and
perhaps slightly more vulnerable (at least in the short term) for smaller domestic brands.

4

Finally, we examine investor reactions by examining market returns around a pivotal
legislative event on April 3, 2013 and the actual disclosure on December 17, 2015. On April 3,
discussion of the legislation included for the first time the specific thresholds determining which
firms would be subject to disclosure. On December 17, the ATO made available on its website
limited tax-return information for 1,538 of the largest companies in Australia. We find a significant
negative market reaction for non-taxpaying firms subject to disclosure on both dates. These results
suggest that the market did anticipate a reduction in firm value arising from a disclosure of no tax
paid in Australia. We explore cross-sectional variation in the disclosure costs to firms anticipated
by investors. Across several measures designed to capture different sources of variation in
anticipated costs such as the potential for confusion from the disclosure, the level of investor
sophistication, and brand recognition of the firms, we conclude that the negative investor reaction
stems from anticipated policy backlash rather than anticipated declines in consumer sentiment or
negative information about cash flows.
Our paper contributes to the literature examining the costs and consequences of public taxreturn information, including how specific implementation rules may affect disclosure outcomes.
Further, our paper contributes to the literature on taxes and reputation. Surveys of tax directors
have found that one pervasive fear associated with tax planning is garnering negative attention
(Graham et al. 2014). Relatedly, several studies have searched for evidence on reputational
consequences associated with tax shelter involvement (Dyreng et al. 2016; Gallemore et al. 2014;
Graham et al. 2014; Hanlon and Slemrod 2009; Dyreng et al. 2017; Austin and Wilson 2017). Our
study shows that there can be costs to disclosure outside of the tax shelter context – i.e., even when
firms may be obeying the law. For instance, we find that disclosure of a zero tax liability without
any context in which to interpret and understand the reason likely leaves some firms who are not

5

avoiding taxes in a situation where they experience negative consumer, investor, or policy
attention. This is important for policymakers to consider in the design of disclosure rules.
2.

Background on tax disclosure and relevant literature
Tax disclosure policies take many forms, with mandatory disclosures made privately by

the taxpayer to the taxing authority the most common. Some countries have introduced policies
that allow for public scrutiny of private tax information, such as Denmark, Sweden, Finland,
Iceland, Norway, and (in the past) Japan and the United States. An important debate regarding
public scrutiny of tax information is currently taking place in both the EU and the U.S. On July 4,
2017 the European Parliament voted in favor of public country-by-country reporting, whereby
limited tax information for MNCs is broken down by taxing jurisdiction. While these reports are
designed to aid tax administrators, policymakers are evaluating the possibility of making this
information public. Although making less political headway in the U.S., several members of
Congress wrote a letter to the Financial Accounting Standards Board on July 18, 2017, urging
them to require information from country-by-country reports in financial statement disclosures. 5
One policy argument in favor of putting more information in the hands of the public is that
the additional scrutiny will improve tax compliance by shaming firms that do not pay tax. Bø et
al. (2015) explore the effect of public tax disclosure of individual taxpayers in Norway, and
observe income changes consistent with public disclosure improving tax compliance of selfemployed individuals. Hasegawa et al. (2013) examine public disclosure in Japan, and find strong
evidence, based on bunching of observations right below the disclosure threshold, that some small
corporate and individual taxpayers actively avoided disclosure, suggesting they viewed the

5

https://thefactcoalition.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/07.18.2017-FASB-Country-by-Country-ReportingLetter.pdf

6

disclosure as costly. However, putting more information in the public eye, particularly information
that is confusing, incomplete, or misleading, could shame firms who are in full compliance with
the law. Empirical research contributing to policy debates such as public country-by-country
reporting is sparse, primarily because so few settings exist in which to examine the effects of
making tax information public.
In order to examine the effects of public tax disclosure, we focus on a recent policy change
in Australia where once-private tax-return information was mandated to be publicly disclosed by
the ATO. Table 1 offers a detailed timeline of the implementation of Australia’s tax disclosure
legislation. On February 4, 2013, the government announced they intended to improve tax
transparency with public disclosure. On April 3, 2013, details of the intended regime were
announced, including the income threshold for being subject to the new rule. On June 29, 2013,
the Tax Laws Amendment Bill 2013 was enacted, applying to all companies reporting total income
of 100 AUD million or more on an Australia company tax return.
Some Australian-owned (i.e., controlled) private firms argued that, because their owners
were often represented by a small number of individuals, as opposed to private companies owned
by foreign corporations or Australian public companies with a widely dispersed shareholder base,
disclosure would inappropriately reveal personal details about a firm owner’s financial situation. 6
Indeed, it was this argument that prompted a draft amendment to be enacted on November 12,
2015 that would exempt Australian-owned private companies from the disclosure regulation.
Reflecting continued disagreement on this issue, the exemption was amended to increase the
disclosure threshold for private firms to 200 AUD million. Pursuant to the legislation, on

6

Much of the media coverage following the disclosure centered on wealthy Australians who controlled disclosed
private firms. For example, Gina Rinehart, chairman of Hancock Prospecting (a private mineral and exploration
company) with estimated personal wealth over 8 billion USD, was covered extensively.

7

December 17, 2015 the ATO released the Corporate Tax Transparency Report (the “ATO report”)
on its website revealing firm-specific total income, taxable income, and tax payable for the tax
year ending June 30, 2014. Due to the late nature of the private-company amendment, the first
report (December, 2015) included 1,538 Australian public and foreign-owned firms, while the
second (March, 2016) included 321 Australian-owned private firms.
Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for the data disclosed in both December and March.
We rely on Orbis data to identify public firms, as Orbis provides both the Australian Business
Number (ABN) from the ATO report and the listing status of firms. The data show that about 36
percent of firms report a zero tax liability, a statistic that featured prominently in the media with
headlines such as “Almost 600 major corporations did not pay tax in 2013-14 financial year, ATO
says.”7 Although the detailed ATO report offers general reasons for a zero tax liability (not on a
firm-by-firm basis), the media did not probe into these reasons, instead noting, for example, that
the data highlight “a number of companies that paid little to no tax, but does not outline how they
minimized their tax bill.”8 However, the median effective tax rate (ETR) disclosed is the statutory
tax rate in Australia of 30 percent.
There is evidence of significant reputational costs of malfeasance accruing to firms in a
range of nontax settings such as accounting fraud (Karpoff et al. 2008), defective products (Garber
et al. 1998) and violation of environmental regulations (Karpoff et al. 2005). Reputational costs in

Interestingly, the ATO also notes in its report that, even for taxpaying entities, the disclosed data “do not themselves
indicate whether an entity is paying a high or low rate of tax. Measuring a company’s ETR requires more information
than that included in the report and comparing ETRs across single entities does not take into account related-party
transactions, the broader economic group, or a number of other factors.” The ATO states that for privacy reasons it
cannot release publicly any of the additional information that would be required to evaluate the tax rates of these
entities and instead subsequently adopted a Voluntary Tax Transparency Code to complement the disclosed data,
whereby firms may voluntarily release information to help interested users better interpret the data. See
http://taxboard.gov.au/consultation/voluntary-tax-transparency-code/ for the Voluntary Tax Transparency Code.
8
E.g., http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-12-17/almost-600-companies-did-not-pay-tax-in-2013-14/7036324
7

8

these studies take many forms, encompassing a variety of ways in which stakeholders form a
perception of the firm that influences the interaction between the firm and its stakeholders. For
instance, firms may experience loss of sales, increased regulatory scrutiny, depressed share
valuations, shareholder lawsuits, negative media attention, employee turnover, or impairment to
brand reputation and consumer interest. Empirical evidence on the reputational costs of tax
avoidance is relatively scarce.
The most comprehensive study to date on the reputational costs of tax avoidance is
Gallemore et al. (2014). Despite a battery of tests, this study finds little evidence of ex post
consequences to the firm – such as media reputation, equity prices, or increased tax payments –
from public scrutiny of tax shelter involvement. This study confirms a finding in Hanlon and
Slemrod (2009) of negative stock returns in consumer-focused firms around the publicity, but
documents that the investor response is short-lived. Despite the lack of broad empirical evidence
of ex post consequences, Graham et al. (2012) find more than half of tax executives agree that
potential harm to their firm’s reputation is an important factor in deciding whether to implement a
tax strategy. Consider the Starbuck’s episode in the United Kingdom. YouGov brand data show
that consumers responded negatively to reports that Starbucks generated £398 million in U.K. sales
in 2012 but remitted no tax.9 Figure 2 shows that Starbuck’s Buzz Score (whether respondents
heard anything positive or negative about a brand) declined substantially around three key dates –
media coverage, regulator questioning, and the decision to remit more tax.
Our setting provides an opportunity to build upon these studies and contribute to an
important policy debate in three important ways. First, the Australia legislation provides an

9

YouGov is an international market research firm based in the U.K.
https://yougov.co.uk/news/2013/06/26/starbucks-uphill-battle-resuscitate-its-brand/.

9

For

more detail, see

objective measure of tax avoidance that received media scrutiny – paying no tax in Australia – but
paying no tax is often a result of legal activity, unlike, for example, involvement in an illegal tax
shelter. This is important because one policy concern is that some firms will suffer reputational
costs from public scrutiny following disclosure even when they are not inappropriately avoiding
taxes. Second, public scrutiny in our settings occurs in a much larger sample of firms than in prior
literature. In our setting, hundreds of firms are being scrutinized simultaneously, which may
generate results that differ from, and are more robust than, findings from settings where a single
firm is scrutinized.10 Finally, in Australia there is a low level of conformity between financial and
tax accounting (Alford et al. 1993). This is important because another policy concern is the extent
to which the tax disclosures reveal new information, and how it might be interpreted if it differs
from available information (e.g., accounting information).
3.

Analysis of behavioral response by firms

3.1

Hypothesis development
Slemrod (1992) notes that, in response to the tax system, firms may respond on multiple

dimensions, including reporting income differently, changing how they classify income, changing
organizational form, retiming transactions and income, or actually changing tax behavior by
allowing tax-related cash flows to change. In our setting, one potential response by firms to the
new legislation is to avoid being subject to the new rules. Firms will generally voluntarily disclose
information if the benefits of such disclosure outweigh the costs, and if firms perceive the
disclosure to be costly, whether as a result of consumer, policy, or investor backlash, they may
try to avoid disclosure altogether (Verrecchia 2001).

10

Hanlon and Slemrod (2009) examine the impact of public scrutiny in 108 firms over a 14-year period, while
Gallemore et al. (2014) study a sample of 118 firms over a 10-year period. These studies caveat small sample size and
low power as a potential reason for not finding a broad set of statistically significant results.

10

While there is a broad literature examining firm responses to mandatory disclosure
requirements and stakeholder responses to voluntary disclosures (e.g., Healy and Palepu 2001;
Beyer et al. 2010), much less has been done to examine corporate attempts to avoid mandatory
disclosure. Gao et al. (2009) find that some firms undertook less investment and paid more cash
to shareholders in order to remain below a threshold of 75 USD million in public float and thereby
avoid full compliance with Sarbanes-Oxley. Firms also appear to manage around thresholds to
avoid requirements mandating both audits and public disclosure (Bernard 2016; Shroff 2016), or
only audits (Kausar et al. 2016), as well as avoiding disclosure in other settings (Verrecchia and
Weber 2006; Leuz et al. 2008). In the tax setting, Hasegawa et al (2013) find that in Japan, small
businesses manipulated their income in order to fall below a mandatory disclosure threshold.
Towery (2017) finds that firms avoid accruing financial statement reserves for uncertain tax
positions to avoid being subject to Schedule UTP reporting requirements. Finally, Dyreng et al.
(2017) find that some firms with significant subsidiary locations in tax havens simply fail to
disclose those subsidiaries despite the legal requirement to do so. We hypothesize that, in response
to a disclosure mandate with an income threshold, some firms will avoid disclosure altogether by
reporting income below the threshold.11
H1a. Some firms will take action to avoid being subject to public disclosure of tax information.
Another possible behavioral response by companies is to alter what will become publicly
disclosed. This is, presumably, the intended response by the politicians who created the disclosure
legislature—to reduce abusive tax avoidance in Australia and thereby collect more tax revenue.

11

For instance, the income threshold is applied to individual entities, not to economic groups, so income thresholds
can be manipulated through complex business structures, which the ATO points out are often observed in private
companies.
See,
for
example,
https://www.ato.gov.au/Business/Large-business/In-detail/Taxtransparency/Corporate-tax-transparency-report-for-the-2013-14-income-year/.

11

This response to the disclosure would constitute a real response of public disclosure, which is
increasingly being documented in the accounting literature. For example, Christensen et al. (2017)
show that in the U.S., when firms were mandated to disclose mine safety records, mine safety
actually increased. Kubick et al. (2016) find firms that received an SEC comment letter requesting
additional tax information, a form of mandatory disclosure, increased their actual cash tax
payments by 1.5 percentage points. In our setting, some firms may opt to increase their tax
remittance in general to avoid being seen as not paying their “fair share.”12 This response is likely
predicated upon the cost of additional tax payments versus the cost of potentially negative tax
information being disclosed about the firm. If firms place a relatively low cost on having the firm
be disclosed as having paid little tax, they may well not change their underlying tax behavior. For
example, Hasegawa et al. (2013) fail to document that, in response to a cessation of mandatory
public tax disclosure, firms changed their underlying tax payments. Motivated by the literature
regarding the real effects of disclosure, we examine the following hypothesis:
H1b. Some firms will change their tax payments in response to public tax-return disclosure.
To properly test these hypotheses, it is necessary to use Australian tax return data for firms
both subject to and not subject to disclosure. However, there is no publicly-available, data source
that would provide total income in Australia reported on line 6S from an Australian Company Tax
Return (around which the disclosure threshold is based) or the level of tax payments to Australia
by all firms. Fortunately, we were able to obtain data assistance from the ATO due to their
understandable interest in the economic effects of this new legislation. In particular, the ATO
provided us with de-identified aggregated data on the total income and tax payments for all

SEC comment letters are a form of mandatory disclosure because the ‘conversation’ between the firm and the SEC
does not constitute enforcement actions per se, but the content of the ‘conversation’ is publicly available.
12

12

companies filing an Australian Company Tax Return in the years 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 – the
first tax return year subject to disclosure. Aggregate data were provided across 19 income
categories (i.e., total income ≥ 95 AUD million and < 100 AUD million), taxpaying status (i.e., a
zero tax liability versus a positive tax liability), and the type of firm (i.e., foreign-owned, Australian
private, Australian public).
While the aggregate nature of the Australian tax return data limits our ability to pursue
some natural statistical tests, the data are nevertheless highly appropriate for examining our
hypotheses. These analyses are also helpful in interpreting our later tests and allow us to explore
some nuances in the tax disclosure setting that researchers have been unable to examine directly
heretofore. For instance, we can examine here separately any changes in the behavior of foreignowned, Australian private, and Australian public firms. Most large private companies in Australia
are foreign-owned, and are thus simply subsidiaries of large, almost always public, companies.
Existing studies have documented that tax avoidance is generally positively valued in public
companies (e.g., Hanlon and Slemrod 2009; Frischmann et al. 2008) and that peer effects provide
incentives in public firms to manage taxes (e.g., Bird et al. 2017). Consequently, increased
transparency could impose a cost (from investor backlash) if public firms are viewed as paying too
much tax rather than too little. Moreover, private companies were the most vocal group arguing
very high costs to disclosure, particularly Australian private companies.
3.2

Avoiding disclosure by reporting income under the threshold
To examine H1a, we look at the distribution of reported total income around the disclosure

threshold. Figure 3, Panels A, B and C show the number of firms in each income bin in the year
prior to disclosure and the year subject to disclosure, separately for each type of firm. The 100

13

AUD million threshold applies to all companies for these tests. 13 In all cases, we observe a jump
in the number of firms reporting just under the threshold, while the number reporting income just
over the threshold holds relatively steady or declines. The excess mass just under the disclosure
threshold is relatively less pronounced for public firms, with an increase of just 33 percent in the
number of firms from 2013 to 2014. In contrast, the number of firms just under the threshold
increased by 65 and 73 percent for private and foreign-owned firms, respectively. This finding
resonates with the argument from private companies that the costs of disclosure are relatively
higher because less information is already in the public domain. 14
In Panel D, we examine in more detail the taxpaying status of firms reporting income just
below the disclosure threshold to learn more about the possible incentives to avoid disclosure.
Some interesting patterns emerge. For foreign-owned and public companies, firms reporting just
under the threshold are generally taxpaying firms, while for Australian private companies, there is
little difference in the composition of firms reporting income under the threshold in terms of
taxpaying status. Why would a public taxpaying firm potentially exert more effort to avoid
disclosure than a non-taxpaying firm? In the public firm setting (with foreign-owned firms as
private subsidiaries of public companies), this resonates with the notion that public firms face
pressure to reduce taxes and to maintain effective tax rates in line with competing firms.
3.3

Changing taxes paid

13

When the legislation was passed on June 29, 2013 for the tax year from July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2014, all companies
filing a tax return in Australia with total income of 100 AUD million (about 75 USD million) or more anticipated
being subject to disclosure. Discussion of an exception for Australian private companies began on June 4, 2015. By
the time the 200 AUD million increased threshold was introduced, the tax return for 2014 was already filed.
14
While we tabulate only 2013 and 2014 and only certain income groups to make the graph more manageable, the
ATO provided us with data from 2011-2014 for many different income categories. The average percentage year to
year change in this time period is 7, 9, and 8%, for foreign, private, and public firms, respectively. The standard
deviation for these percentage changes is 0.26, 0.23, and 0.39. In light of the mean and standard deviation of these
changes, the percentage changes in the 95-100 bin from 2013-2014 suggests the differences are significant.

14

To examine H1b, we look at the taxpaying behavior of firms filing an Australian company
tax return in the years 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014 – the first year subject to disclosure.
Specifically, we focus on any changes in taxpaying behavior in 2014 for firms over the disclosure
threshold, relative to firms under the disclosure threshold. As before, we look separately at foreignowned, Australian private, and Australian public firms. Each panel in Figure 4 considers a different
measure of taxpaying behavior and as above, data are reported in aggregate.
In Panel A, for firms subject to disclosure (i.e., over the threshold) there is a slight increase
in the percentage of firms paying no tax for foreign-owned and public firms, but a slight decrease
for private firms. For firms not subject to disclosure (i.e., under the threshold), there is a sizeable
decline in the percentage of firms paying no tax for public firms, and relatively little change in
foreign-owned and Australian private companies. Whether firms are subject to disclosure or not,
additional regulatory scrutiny by the ATO likely applied some pressure to remit tax for fear of
political backlash. However, in the public company setting, the pressure to reduce tax payments
by shareholders likely tempers that pressure, or even outweighs it, for some public firms subject
to public disclosure. Hence, we observe a pattern consistent with some public companies subject
to disclosure being less likely to start paying tax, rather than more likely.
Panel B examines only taxpaying firms and considers increases in tax payments. We do
not observe strong patterns in the intensive margin of taxpaying firms consistent with procompliance effects of public disclosure. Australian private and public firms appear to be
decreasing and increasing, respectively, tax payments over time, regardless of disclosure. The only
potential effect of disclosure is for foreign-owned companies, where the ratio increases slightly in
2014 for firms not subject to disclosure but decreases for firms subject to disclosure. As foreignowned companies are generally subsidiaries of public companies (e.g., Google Australia), this is

15

again consistent with investor pressure to reduce taxes in the public company setting. These data
patterns are consistent with—although certainly not dispositive of---private companies
anticipating a greater cost to disclosure than public companies precisely because they exhibit a
higher prevalence of both avoiding disclosure and increasing the amount of tax they pay (slightly
more so when they are subject to disclosure).
3.4

Other Changes in Firm Behavior
While firms may avoid mandatory disclosure or may change their underlying tax behavior

so as to change the contents of the mandatory disclosure, in this section, we briefly discuss one
additional behavior firms may take—firms can supplement confusing mandatory disclosure with
clarifying voluntary disclosure (Guay et al. 2016). The limited time-period after these disclosure
events precludes an in-depth analysis of this effect, but we nevertheless describe some preliminary
analysis on this potential corporate response to mandatory public tax-return disclosure.15
We start by examining the corporate communications from the ten largest firms that were
covered in the media as not having paid any tax, as arguably these firms would be most driven to
respond to the public disclosure. 16 We examine corporate press releases, annual reports, websites,
and do general Google searches for information from the firm. Of those ten firms, we find two
examples of changes in disclosure. 17 Next, we downloaded the most recent annual reports for the

See Kays (2017) for additional work on Australian firms’ voluntary disclosure responses to the mandated disclosure.
We obtained the list here: http://www.smh.com.au/business/the-economy/top-ten-australian-companies-paying-notax-20151217-glpr80.html.
17
Lendlease now hosts a website (http://www.lendlease.com/investor-centre/taxation/tax-disclosure/) that discusses
the ATO disclosure and provides some explanation for why Lendlease was disclosed as having paid no tax. While
Lendlease does provide this additional information, the reasons offered for owing no tax are very rudimentary.
Lendlease explained why it paid no tax by noting that “For FY15 Lendlease’s allowable tax deductions exceeded
taxable income for the year. This means Lendlease is in a ‘tax loss’ position in Australia.” It then went on to provide
some reasons why it had so many deductions. We also found evidence that Qantas, the largest non-tax payer that was
highlighted in many media articles, also included more tax information in its tax footnote in its annual report than it
had in the previous year. Qantas notes, in part that it “is committed to embedding risk management practices to support
the achievement of compliance objectives and fulfill corporate governance obligations… The Qantas Group has paid
all taxes that it owes and all tax compliance obligations are up to date. The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has
15
16

16

Australian Securities Exchange 100 (ASX 100), and, examined what disclosures they made
regarding the ATO. We found four examples out of the 100 annual reports that specifically
mentioned the ATO disclosure regime, often mentioning how much in tax the firm paid. 18 Finally,
in general searching online, we have found other examples of disclosure clarifying the tax
payments.19 In summary, we find some evidence of companies attempting to explain to the public
and investors the ATO disclosures. Our analysis suggests, though, that the great majority of
companies did not react in this way. However, as stated, this disclosure regime is relatively new,
and more firms may, in time, start disclosing clarifications regarding the ATO disclosure.
Finally, in May of 2016 the Australian Board of Taxation introduced the Voluntary Tax
Transparency Code to increase public disclosure of tax information by companies. 20 We find that
9 companies not subject to the mandatory disclosure regime adopted the voluntary code. 21 Of those
that were subject to the mandatory disclosure regime that adopted the Code, 15 of them were
foreign-owned and 50 were Australian public companies. We find that firms with a greater number
of subsidiaries and firms with a greater proportion of institutional shareholders were more likely
to adopt the voluntary code. Indeed, comments received from the ASX 100 in developing the
framework suggest that differences in consolidation for accounting and tax make it difficult for

advised that the Qantas Group is a key taxpayer continuing to have a ‘low’ likelihood of non-compliance.” It made
no such disclosure in prior years.
18
For example, CIMIC noted “The Group is committed to managing all taxes in a sustainable manner regarding the
commercial and social imperatives of our business and stakeholders. The Group does not undertake purely tax driven
transactions,” and went on to remark that, according to the ATO disclosure, its tax payment was the 13th largest of any
firm in Australia. In another example, Tatts discloses that its most significant contribution to sustainability is “our
financial contribution to the broader community via our tax contribution…” It then breaks down taxes paid by state.
19
Mirvac, for example, now maintains a document called “2016 Tax Corporate Governance Statement: Our Approach
to Tax,” where they note “Mirvac Limited did not pay any income tax in relation to the 2015 and 2016 financial years,
as its income was able to be offset by these historical tax losses.” On December 18, 2015, TechnologyOne issued a
press released that clarified “its effective tax rate in response to the ATO’s corporate tax transparency report,” and
notes that receipt of the R&D tax credit is partially responsible for their “effective tax rate being less than 30 per cent.”
20
See http://taxboard.gov.au/files/2015/10/Letter_from_tsr_anti-hybrid.pdf
21
The details of these analyses will be provided upon request.

17

investors to reconcile tax expense and tax payable. This suggests that firms increased voluntary
disclosure to help alleviate confusing mandatory disclosure and is consistent with the findings of
Guay et al. (2016), who find that managers use voluntary disclosures to help financial statement
users navigate complex financial statements.
4.

Does disclosure of tax information affect consumer sentiment?

4.1

Hypothesis development
Whether and how tax disclosure affects consumer sentiment are important unanswered

questions (Hanlon and Heitzman 2010). Anecdotally, managers fear consumer backlash of the sort
that Starbucks experienced in the U.K. (Graham et al. 2014). However, Gallemore et al. (2014)
were unable to detect a decline in sales revenue or an increase in advertising expense following
adverse media coverage accusing firms of tax shelter involvement. In our setting, we are able to
take advantage of relatively high-frequency survey data that was not available for the annual or
quarterly-level tests conducted in the illegal tax shelter setting in Gallemore et al. (2014).
Our setting also allows us to explore how information disseminated by the media about tax
avoidance affects consumers. Prior studies assume that only firms with a media report about tax
shelter use were accused of such an activity (Hanlon and Slemrod, 2009; Gallemore et al. 2014).
That is, the role of the media was to disseminate otherwise publicly available tax information,
lowering information acquisition costs (Dyreng et al. 2017). Kaniel and Parham (2017) describe a
channel through which the media impacts consumers called the “prominence channel”, whereby
the media increases visibility. We can explore this channel in the tax context because firms with
the same (publicly available) tax data experience negative media coverage, while others do not.
The prominence channel is relevant here because it is not clear the extent to which
consumers looked at the disclosed information on the ATO website, read about the disclosures in

18

the media, or both. In the tax shelter setting, looking directly at the information required tedious
searches of court documents. Here, looking directly at the information was relatively easy – the
ATO publicly posted the data on a widely accessed webpage. Indeed, usage statistics indicate that
the information was viewed over 13,000 times in December of 2015 (the release month of public
and foreign-owned firm data) and over 6,000 times in March of 2016 (the release month of private
firm data), and was one of the most widely accessed datasets the Australian government provides
to the public.22 Figure 5 shows that these usage statistics are significant relative to other months.
While some views constitute stakeholders other than consumers, the fact the data about private
firms was widely accessed suggests some consumers viewed the data.
With this background, we first consider whether being subject to disclosure has a negative
effect on sentiment. Being subject to disclosure raises the level of scrutiny that consumers might
consider a negative signal about the firm. Moreover, if consumers are unaware of the legislative
details regarding which firms were selected for disclosure, being subject to disclosure could be
interpreted as selective regulatory scrutiny. Our first hypothesis is:
H2a. Consumer sentiment is unchanged for firms subject to public disclosure.
Next we consider whether, conditional on being subject to disclosure, there is a differential
effect on sentiment for companies that are revealed to have paid no tax. One notable and easily
accessible piece of information (i.e., no calculations are required) in the data was the zero tax
liability reported by a large number of firms. Given that a zero tax liability in Australia for many
firms does not necessarily indicate aggressive tax avoidance, relative to, for instance, being
accused of tax shelter involvement, a decline in sentiment would suggest that some firms unfairly
experienced costs to public disclosure. Our second hypothesis is:

22

See https://data.gov.au/site-usage/dataset?month=&publisher=australiantaxationoffice for usage statistics.

19

H2b. Consumer sentiment is unchanged for firms subject to public disclosure of no tax payments.
Finally, we consider whether, conditional on being subject to disclosure, negative media
coverage affects sentiment. It was relatively straightforward to access the data directly, but if
consumers learned of firms’ tax data from media coverage, or if media visibility impacts consumer
sentiment, then we may observe a decline in sentiment only for those firms highlighted specifically
by name in a major news source. Thus, our third hypothesis is:
H2c. Consumer sentiment is unchanged for firms experiencing negative media coverage.
To test these hypotheses, we analyze two data sources. The first is data from YouGov, an
international market research firm that monitors sentiment daily for thousands of well-known
brands across the world using online surveys. The second is data from a survey designed by us and
executed by TurkPrime in Australia. Using these datasets, we examine changes in consumer
sentiment surrounding the tax disclosure events in Australia in December, 2015 and March, 2016.
4.2

Data and empirical tests – YouGov data
We obtain daily YouGov data at the respondent-level for 230 brands in Australia from June

of 2015 to June of 2016 to examine the December 2015 disclosure event. As YouGov covers large,
international brands, and the December disclosure includes the largest foreign-owned and listed
firms, the YouGov data are suitable for examining public firms. Our sample includes the panel of
brands covered by YouGov in December 2015, retaining brand/day observations with at least 30
respondents for November 2015 through January 2016. Table 4, Panel A displays the descriptive
statistics for this sample. There are 218,087 survey respondent/day/brand observations, with

20

159,256 of those observations representing brands owned by firms subject to disclosure. To
examine H1a, we estimate the following difference-in-difference specification:23
YouGov Measure = β0 + β1December 17, 2015 + β2Subject to Disclosure x
December 17, 2015 + Firm Fixed Effects + ε

(1a),

where YouGov Measure is either Reputation, Impression, or Buzz. Reputation (Impression) equals
-1 if the brand had a negative reputation (impression), 0 if it had neither a negative nor a positive
reputation (impression), and +1 if it had a positive reputation (impression).24 Buzz is -1 if over the
last two weeks they heard anything negative about the brand, 0 if they heard nothing, and +1 if
they heard something positive. December 17, 2015 is 1 for December 17, 18 or 19, 2015, and 0
otherwise. Subject to Disclosure is equal to 1 if the firm was subject to disclosure, and 0 otherwise.
The coefficient β2 captures the change in sentiment following public disclosure for firms subject
to disclosure, relative to other firms. To examine H1b, we estimate the following:
YouGov Measure = β0 + β1December 17, 2015 + β2Paid No Tax x
December 17, 2015 + Firm Fixed Effects + ε

(1b),

where YouGov Measure and December 17, 2015 are as defined above and Paid No Tax is equal to
1 if the brand owner was disclosed as having paid no tax, and 0 otherwise. We estimate Equation
(1b) in the sample of firms for which Subject to Disclosure equals 1, so the coefficient β2 captures
the change in sentiment following public disclosure of no tax paid, relative to public disclosure of
a paid some tax. To examine H1c, we estimate the following:
YouGov Measure = β0 + β1December 17, 2015 + β2Covered by Media x
December 17, 2015 + Firm Fixed Effects + ε

23

(1c),

Because respondents might provide responses for multiple brands, we cluster standard errors at the respondentlevel. As we include firm fixed effects, we do not include any firm-specific time-invariant indicator variables.
24
Reputation and Impression have a correlation of 0.50 across the population of YouGov data. Reputation captures
what the respondent believes others think of the brand, while Impression captures what the respondent thinks.

21

where all variables are defined previously except Covered by Media, which equals 1 if the firm
experienced negative media coverage in a major Australian news source, and 0 otherwise.25 We
also estimate Equation (1c) in the sample of firms for which Subject to Disclosure equals 1, so the
coefficient β2 captures the change in sentiment following negative media coverage, relative to no
(less prominent) media coverage.
Panel B of Table 4 tabulates the estimation results. Across all three dependent variables,
we fail to document a significant effect, consistent with this disclosure event in Australia not
meaningfully changing consumer sentiment. Thus, we are unable to reject any of our stated null
hypotheses in a sample of relatively large firms with strong global brands. This result may reflect
that for large, influential brands public perception is not easily shaken or that there was already a
widespread belief that these firms did not pay their “fair share” of taxes, and thus the disclosure
did not constitute “new news.” Interestingly, we fail to find a significant result in Column 9, where
firms are literally receiving more Buzz suggesting not all consumers are heavily influenced by the
media. In any case, these results line up with those reported in Section 3 where we fail to see public
firms increasing tax payments, which we would expect to see if firms experienced high costs to
public scrutiny of not paying tax from consumer backlash.
4.3

Data and empirical tests – TurkPrime data
As

YouGov captures large, global brands, the data are not suitable for learning about the

impact of tax disclosure on consumer sentiment regarding smaller, private, firms. Therefore, we

25

Coverage of this disclosure event in Australia occurred in a number of ways including Twitter, blogs, etc. Consistent
with prior literature, we focus on major news sources. Specifically, we search Factiva, in Australia, on December 17th
and 18th, for news types “Corporate/Industrial News”, “Political/General News”, or “Selection of Top
Stories/Trends/Analysis,” in the highest circulating newspapers (Herald-Sun, Daily Telegraph, Courier Mail, The
Sydney Morning Herald, and The West Australian), plus the Australian Broadcast Corporation, for the search string
(ATO OR “paid no tax”). We then read the resulting articles and recorded the names of firms/brands we judged to
have received negative coverage in the media. The notes from this exercise are available from the authors upon request.

22

administered a survey in Australia through TurkPrime, Amazon’s online platform, surrounding the
March 22, 2016 disclosure to examine changes in sentiment about generally smaller Australian
private firms. We asked Australians about their impression of 30 firms on two separate days prior
to the March 22 disclosure (March 17 and 20) and three separate days after (March 23 and 27, and
April 21). TurkPrime ensured a minimum of 1,400 respondents for each date. The number of
responses per firm varies depending on the level of familiarity respondents have with that firm and
whether, conditional upon familiarity with the firm, they answered all the questions. No respondent
participated more than once. Our sample appears to be reflective of the Australian population. 26
Because we had to design the survey before we learned which companies would be subject
to disclosure, selecting the sample for the survey was not straightforward. We chose the 30
Australian private companies for our survey in two steps. First, we collected information on
financial accounting sales from the BvD Orbis database and selected the largest 100 private firms.
Second, we ran an initial survey to gauge familiarity with these 100 firms, and retained the 30
firms on the list with the highest level of familiarity. For up to 15 companies with which a
respondent was familiar, we asked the following questions, across the five survey dates:
(1) In your personal opinion, how favorable is your perception of X?
(2) Assuming you were in a position to need to do business with a company like X, how
likely is it that you would do business with X, instead of one of its competitors?
(3) How ethical do you think X is?
(4) Do you feel that X pays as much in taxes as it should?
(5) Have you heard of any recent scandals involving X?”

26

Based on observable information, our respondents appear representative of the general Australian population.
According to the Australia Bureau of Statistics,
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/0/151AA7593B394934CA2573210018DA4A?Opendocument
49.7 percent of Australians are male and in our sample 49.5 percent are male. Using the midpoint of a range for age
(e.g., respondents who answered they are between 20 and 29 are assumed to be 25), the average age of our respondents
is 36, whereas the median age in Australia is 37.4. Finally, respondents had average income of 75,000 AUD, whereas
average income in Australia is 81,920 AUD (http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6302.0).

23

We measure General Perception, Willing to do Business, Ethical Perception, and Pays
Sufficient Tax along a seven-point Likert scale for questions (1) through (4), respectively (Likert
1932). A response of 1 indicates “Not Favorable”, “Not Likely”, “Not Ethical”, or “No” while a
response of 7 indicates “Very Favorable”, “Very Likely” “Very Ethical” or “Yes”. For question
(5), we measure Heard of Scandal as an indicator variable equal to 1 if the respondent indicates
they have heard of a recent scandal involving the firm, and 0 otherwise. Table 4 Panel A provides
descriptive statistics for the data. To test H2a, we estimate a difference-in-difference specification:
TurkPrime Measure = β0 + β1March 22, 2016 + β2Subject to Disclosure
+ β3March 22, 2016 X Subject to Disclosure + ε

(2),

where TurkPrime Measure is either General Perception, Willing to do Business, Ethical
Perception, Pay Sufficient Tax, or Heard of Scandal. The variable March 22, 2016 is equal to 1
for survey responses after the disclosure, and 0 otherwise. Subject to Disclosure is equal to 1 if the
firm was subject to disclosure, and 0 otherwise. We cluster standard errors by firm and respondent.
In Equation (2), the coefficient β3 captures the change in consumer sentiment following public
disclosure for firms subject to disclosure, relative to firms not subject to disclosure.
While we would ideally be able to test H2b and H2c with the TurkPrime data, data
limitations preclude these tests. Instead we predict, based on public data, which firms would be
disclosed and, among those, which would be disclosed as having paid no tax or be subject to media
coverage. This is because we needed to administer the first two rounds of our survey prior to the
disclosure data’s release. In the event, our predictions were imperfect, as only one company subject
to disclosure in our survey paid no tax or was subject to media scrutiny, providing insufficient
variation. As a result, we cannot rigorously test H2b or H2c with the TurkPrime data.
We present the results of estimating Equation (2) that tests H2a in Table 5. The estimated
coefficient on the interaction term is negative and statistically significant in Columns 1 through 4.
24

This result is consistent with consumers interpreting firms’ inclusion in the disclosure regulation,
and the resulting increase in scrutiny, negatively. Taken together with our earlier results from the
YouGov data, consumer sentiment surrounding tax disclosure appears more fragile for relatively
smaller firms. In Column 5, whether the respondent has heard of the firm being involved in a
scandal increases after the disclosure, but—surprisingly—not more so for firms subject to
disclosure. This possibly reflects many of the headlines in the media referring to companies paying
no Australia tax, rather than naming specific firms. These results are consistent with the patterns
observed in Section 3, whereby private firms appear more eager to avoid disclosure and increase
tax payments than public firms, most likely to temper, at least in part, consumer backlash.
5.

Does disclosure of tax information affect equity prices?

5.1

Hypothesis development
Much of the existing literature on tax avoidance focuses on how shareholders of public

firms view tax avoidance. The public firm setting is complicated by the fact that tax reporting
decisions occur in a principal-agent framework (Crocker and Slemrod 2005). Managers have
private information about the availability of legal avenues for tax reduction, so incentives are often
aligned through complex compensation contracts. As residual claimants, it is in the shareholders’
best interest for the manager to engage in some level of tax avoidance, net of any costs of doing
so. These may be direct costs arising from settling tax disputes, or they may be indirect costs, such
as those from consumer backlash (declines in sentiment), political backlash (changes in tax rules
or regulation), or a decline in the optimal amount of tax avoidance in the absence of disclosure.
Public disclosure of tax information has the potential both to increase costs of tax
avoidance and reduce private information. Consequently, a priori public disclosure may have
either negative or positive effects to shareholders. Consider, for instance, that in addition to the

25

potential decline in consumer sentiment described earlier, investors might also anticipate a policy
backlash that is harmful to the firm. Indeed, the statistics ultimately generated by the disclosure
event--that more than one-third of firms remitted no tax--apparently resonated with some portion
of the Australian public, and certainly played a role in the political debate over corporate tax
reform.27 Alternatively, investors may learn something new about the firm’s tax reporting due to,
for instance, the low level of convergence in Australia between accounting income and taxable
income (Alford et al. 1993), reducing agency costs (Desai and Dharmapala 2006) .
Which effect dominates is an empirical question and depends on many things including the
amount of backlash the firm experiences (or, is expected to experience), whether any new
information revealed to investors about the firm’s tax reporting decisions is positive or negative,
and how firms respond (or are expected to respond). Existing research has detected a small, shortterm, negative market reaction to news of tax shelter involvement (Hanlon and Slemrod 2009;
Gallemore et al. 2014). However, a zero tax liability does not carry the same negative connotation
as tax shelter involvement, does not necessarily involve future payments for fines or penalties, nor
does it necessarily constitute new information. Financial accounting information serves as a proxy
for the level of tax payments by the firm, and is already publicly available.
We search for a reaction by investors by examining stock returns in the 3-day window
surrounding two key dates – April 3, 2013 and December 17, 2015. Searching for a response across
both dates allows us, in part, to separate out some of the key factors described above. For instance,

For example, The West Australian carried a story on December 18, 2015 headlined “Pressure on for company tax
reform” that noted how the disclosure was pressuring the Turnbull Liberal Party government to reform the corporate
tax law. Labor unions referenced the statistic to criticize corporations (International Transport Workers’ Federation
2016; Australian Council of Trade Unions 2016). Tax activist groups used the statistic to encourage tax reform
(GetUp! 2016; Oxfam 2016). The disclosure has been tied to talk of criminalization of some forms of tax planning,
including using jail sentences as punishment (Passant 2016). And, perhaps most importantly, the statistic has been
referred to in advocating for tax reform legislation (e.g., Leigh 2016a; Leigh 2016b; Ludwig 2016; Wardell 2016).
27

26

April 3, 2013 was when the intent to pass legislation was announced, along with the details of how
firms would be selected for disclosure; however, no tax information about firms was disclosed.
December 17, 2015 was the date on which tax information was first disclosed. Therefore, results
from our April tests cannot be attributed to the arrival of new information.
H3a: Equity prices are unchanged following anticipation of public tax disclosure.
H3b: Equity prices are unchanged following public tax disclosure.
5.2

Data and empirical tests – April 3, 2013
As no information was disclosed on April 3, in order to react appropriately to the new

legislation, investors needed to predict which firms would ultimately be subject to disclosure.
Moreover, to anticipate costs of disclosure, investors would also need to predict the content of the
disclosure. For consistency, we assume in these tests that investors focus on what the media
ultimately highlighted after the disclosure event--no-tax companies.28 We also assume that
financial accounting data is used by investors to predict which firms would be subject to disclosure
and whether the firm would be disclosed as a firm that pays no tax. 29 To test H3a, we estimate the
following regression equation during the period March 1 to May 31 of 2013:
Three Day Buy and Hold Return = β0 + β1Paid No Tax + β2April 3, 2013
+ β3Paid No Tax x April 3, 2013

(3a),

where Three Day Buy and Hold Return is, unsurprisingly, the three-day buy-and-hold return. April
3, 2013 is equal to 1 for April 3, and 0 otherwise. Paid No Tax is equal to 1 if the firm had zero
tax expense in fiscal 2012, and 0 otherwise. We cluster standard errors by calendar date. As the

28

Note that a zero tax liability is often the focus of media coverage, particularly in the context of tax payments in a
single, relatively high-tax, country – e.g., a typical story headline covering the Starbucks affair in the U.K. read, “Good
bean counters? Starbucks has paid no tax in UK since 2009” (Hickman 2012).
29
Financial accounting Sales in Orbis is assumed to be the market’s proxy for Total Income on the tax return. The
correlation between Financial Accounting Tax Expense in Orbis, the market’s proxy for Tax Payable on the tax return,
and actual Tax Payable in the ATO data is 0.79.

27

disclosure threshold is based on income, which is highly correlated with size, any economy-wide
factor that affected large firms differently from small firms could spuriously manifest on the date
of the disclosure. To address this issue, we use a sample of firms most likely to be subject to
disclosure, and examine the stock price behavior of firms likely to be disclosed as paying no tax. 30
We report the results of estimating Equation (3a) in Table 5, Panel B. The estimated
negative interaction term in Column 1 implies that firms with zero financial accounting tax
expense reported in the prior period had three-day returns surrounding the April 3 event date that
were 1.18 percentage points lower than other firms. This suggests that investors anticipated
relatively higher costs of disclosure for the set of firms likely to be disclosed as not paying tax.
In the remaining columns of Panel B, we report the results of cross-sectional tests of
response heterogeneity with respect to indicators of these potential costs in order to shed light on
whether it is the anticipation of higher costs to disclosure driving the result reported in Column 1.
First, we consider group complexity, measured by the number of legal entities in the group from
the BvD Orbis data. As highlighted by the ATO, a significant difference between book and tax
accounting arises in consolidation. The ATO report notes that “disclosed information will be at
the corporate tax entity level; however, these entities may not represent economic groups, and
some economic groups contain two or more tax groups and other non-consolidated entities within
them.”31 Companies with larger groups could experience relatively higher costs from anticipated

30

We find similar results across other specifications. For instance, when we look at the effect of being subject to
disclosure, there is a significantly negative market response. We also control for size, and analyze only those firms
right around the disclosure threshold – both of these specifications produce similar results to those that we report.
These results are available from the authors upon request.
31
Also in the ATO report: “Entities listed in Report of entity tax information may not be directly comparable to entities
reporting as financial groups under corporation law. Many economic groups are made up of multiple entities and lodge
returns for each entity in the group, even though they may all be included in one set of financial statements. This can
also result in the tax being paid by one entity in the group, for the whole group, and others in the group showing nil
tax payable.” See https://www.ato.gov.au/Business/Large-business/In-detail/Tax-transparency/Tax-transparency-reporting-of-entity-tax-information/

28

disclosure if book-tax diffferences concern consumers, regulators, or politicians. Alternatively,
firms with more complex groups may have greater ability to influence the likelihood of disclosure
through restructuring and intercompany transactions, lowering the costs of the new rules. In
Column 2, the point estimate is not statistically significant.
Second, we consider the proportion of institutional investors, a common proxy for investor
sophistication (Bartov et al. 2000). As described earlier, the potential impact to firms from the new
disclosure regime in Australia is quite nuanced, and was surely difficult to assess early on.
However, Chen (2016) documents a significant amount of negative media coverage surrounding
the April 3, 2013 legislative date arguing that disclosure would be costly for firms. We expect that
negative media coverage is less likely to influence the analysis of a sophisticated investor.
Therefore, our prior was that institutional investors anticipated lower costs of disclosure. In
Column 3, we report a significantly positive coefficient for firms with more institutional
shareholders (0.0137), consistent with our expectations. This result is also consistent with our
inability to document, on average, a sizable decline in consumer sentiment for public firms in
Section 4, or a change in firm behavior in Section 3 suggesting that firms themselves anticipated
a no-tax disclosure to be costly.
Third, we consider brand value, measured as a binary variable indicating YouGov
coverage. Naturally, YouGov polls consumers about brands owned by firms concerned about
brand image. On the one hand, these firms could experience relatively higher costs to disclosure
from greater consumer backlash. On the other hand, consistent with our inability to find any
decline in consumer sentiment in Section 3 in our YouGov sample, these firms may experience
relatively lower costs to disclosure because these brands are so well established. In Column 4, we

29

report a significantly positive coefficient for firms covered by YouGov (0.0088), suggesting that
the latter effect dominates.
5.3

Data and empirical tests – December 17, 2015
Next, we examine the market reaction to the actual disclosure event. As in our prior tests,

reaction surrounding the disclosure could arise from changes in expected costs of disclosure.
Unlike our prior tests, however, here investors could also react to the arrival of new information
about firms’ tax situation. To test H3b, we estimate the following specification during the period
November 1, 2015 – January 31, 2016:
Three Day Buy and Hold Return = β0 + β1Paid No Tax + β2 December 17, 2015
+ β3Paid No Tax X December 17, 2015

(3b),

The variable December 17, 2015 is equal to 1 for December 17, and 0 otherwise.32 To capture the
new information about no-tax liability contained in the disclosure, we code Paid No Tax equal to
1 if the firm is disclosed as a no-tax firm but had positive zero financial accounting tax expense
reported in the prior period. We report the results of estimating Equation (3a) in Table 5 Panel C.
In Column 1, we report a small, but statistically significant, negative response to Paid No
Tax for firms subject to disclosure. This result arises either from investors interpreting the new tax
information negatively, consistent with agency costs (Desai and Dharmapala 2006), or from beliefs
that backlash to the firm would be greater than anticipated.33 To separate out the potential channels,

32

In robustness analysis, we expand the date window, and set the date indicator equal to one for December 16, 17 and
18; our main result, the negative coefficient in Column 1 of Table 6, Panel C becomes indistinguishable from zero.
This could be because increasing the window to include days where investors were not actively pricing the disclosure
simply adds noise to the regression result, or could be because of a return reversal as investors decide they overreacted.
To test for overreaction, we set the date indicator equal to one for December 21 and 22 (December 19 and 20 are
Saturday and Sunday), and find that the coefficient on December 21 and 22 x Paid No Tax is not significantly different
from zero, failing to support the possibility of a return reversal. Details are available from the authors.
33
To avoid estimation problems that firms near the threshold of disclosure cause, we also estimated the regressions
eliminating the 10 firms closest to the threshold, and the results are qualitatively unchanged.

30

we run the same cross-sectional tests as before. 34 In Column 2, we again fail to find any significant
effect attributable to group complexity. In Column 3, we report a large positive response to a notax disclosure for firms with less sophisticated investors and a small negative response for firms
with more sophisticated investors. The large response by less sophisticated investors suggests they
are more likely to use financial accounting information as a proxy for tax information, and thus,
there is more ‘news’ in the disclosure. Moreover, the news is positive, suggesting they think less
about agency costs of tax avoidance than more sophisticated investors. Indeed, Khan, Srinivasan,
and Tan (2017) recently find evidence consistent with institutional investors encouraging tax
avoidance. Finally, in Column 4, we find evidence that the negative response to the actual
disclosure of no-tax paid is concentrated in the YouGov sample.35 As we find no evidence of an
actual decline in consumer sentiment surrounding the disclosure, it is more likely that investors
are anticipating a greater level of political backlash to large, well-known firms.
6.

Conclusions
There is currently widespread pressure for action to limit perceived harmful tax practices

by businesses. One response has been to increase the amount of information available to taxing
authorities for enforcement, while another is to improve accountability and compliance with
disclosure to the public. The latter response is of particular concern to firm managers fearing that

34

We argue that we are able to separate out the new information channel from the beliefs about indirect costs in these
tests because, for instance, we see no good reason why more versus less sophisticated investors would form
significantly different beliefs about backlash around the actual disclosure because backlash is now observable.
Moreover, we see no reason why investors in YouGov firms would form different opinions about the new information
contained in the disclsoure than investors in non-YouGov firms.
35
One concern expressed by some Australian firms was that firms that validly paid no tax because they actually earned
no income would be perceived as avoiding tax. It is difficult to tell from the ATO data which firms paid no tax for
valid reasons, and which did not. However, in a sample of only firms that had no taxable income that remitted no tax,
we continue to find a small, negative reaction on the date of the disclosure for firms that paid no tax, suggesting that
the market punished even those that potentially had valid reasons for paying no tax. We do not conduct this test for
our survey-based tests, as we do not believe it is plausible that Australian consumers would be able to differentiate
between a firm paying no tax because it has no income, and paying no tax for other reasons.

31

the costs of public disclosure will outweigh the benefits. For instance, transparency can potentially
create compliance burdens, divulge sensitive information, generate confusion about company
behavior, and impose reputational damage on firms. Policy discussions generally proceed in a
near-absence of evidence of the effects of disclosure.
Our paper seeks to fill this void by considering the recent episode wherein the ATO
disclosed firm-level data from Australian company tax returns, including income and taxes
payable, for listed and private firms. We analyze changes in firm behavior, consumer sentiment,
and share prices. Our results suggest that private companies took more action to avoid disclosure,
and the effect of disclosure appears to have raised the tax payments of private companies but
lowered the tax payments of public companies, consistent with differences in disclosure costs.
Relatedly, private firms experienced a small decline in consumer sentiment, suggesting that
expectations of consumer backlash motivated some private firms to avoid disclosure. Finally, we
find a small negative investor reaction to both anticipated and actual disclosure. Cross-sectional
tests point to anticipated policy backlash resulting in changes to the tax code as the likely source
of a reaction. For instance, Australia introduced a diverted profits tax, effective on July 1, 2017.
The momentum for this was clearly intensified by public scrutiny of tax information.
Our paper contributes to the literature examining the costs and consequences of public taxreturn information, including how specific implementation rules may affect disclosure outcomes.
Further, our paper contributes to the growing literature on taxes and reputation. Surveys of tax
directors have found that one pervasive fear associated with tax planning is garnering negative
attention. Relatedly, several studies have searched for evidence on reputational consequences
associated with tax shelter involvement. Our study shows that there can be costs to disclosure
outside of the tax shelter context – i.e., even when firms may be obeying the law.

32

References
Austin, C. R., and R. J. Wilson. 2017. An Examination of Reputational Costs and Tax Avoidance:
Evidence from Firms with Valuable Consumer Brands. The Journal of the American
Taxation Association 39 (1): 67–93.
Australian Council of Trade Unions. 2016. Australians say it’s time to tackle corporate tax
avoidance. ASU National.
Bartov, E., S. Radhakrishnan, and I. Krinsky. 2000. Investor Sophistication and Patterns in Stock
Returns after Earnings Announcements. The Accounting Review 75 (1): 43–63.
Bernard, D. 2016. Is the risk of product market predation a cost of disclosure? Journal of
Accounting and Economics 62 (2). Conference papers 2015: 305–325.
Beyer, A., D. A. Cohen, T. Z. Lys, and B. R. Walther. 2010. The financial reporting environment:
Review of the recent literature. Journal of Accounting and Economics 50 (2–3): 296–343.
Bird, A., A. Edwards, and T. Ruchti. 2017. Taxes and Peer Effects. Working Paper.
Bø, E. E., J. Slemrod, and T. O. Thoresen. 2015. Taxes on the Internet: Deterrence effects of public
disclosure. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (1): 36–62.
Bradbury, D. 2013. Improving the transparency of Australia’s Business Tax System [03/04/2013].
Australian Government, The Treasury.
Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand. 2015. Corporate tax transparency comes at a
cost.
Chartered
Accountants
Australia
and
New
Zealand.
https://www.charteredaccountantsanz.com/en/Site-Content/News-andUpdates/Corporate-tax-transparency-comes-at-a-cost.aspx#.VzDP0ORWKRJ.
Chen, S. 2016. Do Investors Value Corporate Tax Return Information? Evidence from Australia.
Working Paper.
Christensen, H. B., E. Floyd, L. Y. Liu, and M. Maffett. 2017. The Real Effects of Mandated
Information on Social Responsibility in Financial Reports: Evidence from Mine-Safety
Records. Journal of Accounting and Economics.
Crocker, K. J., and J. Slemrod. 2005. Corporate tax evasion with agency costs. Journal of Public
Economics 89 (9–10): 1593–1610.
Desai, M. A., and D. Dharmapala. 2006. Corporate Tax Avoidance and High-Powered Incentives.
Journal of Financial Economics 79 (1): 145–179.
Dyreng, S., J. L. Hoopes, and J. H. Wilde. 2016. Public Pressure and Corporate Tax Behavior.
Journal of Accounting Research 54 (1): 147–186.
Dyreng, S., J. Hoopes, and J. Wilde. 2017. Strategic Subsidiary Disclosure. Working Paper.
Ernst & Young. 2011. 2011–12 Tax Risk and Controversy Survey.
Frischmann, P. J., T. Shevlin, and R. Wilson. 2008. Economic consequences of increasing the
conformity in accounting for uncertain tax benefits. Journal of Accounting and Economics
46 (2–3): 261–278.
Gallemore, J., E. L. Maydew, and J. R. Thornock. 2014. The Reputational Costs of Tax Avoidance.
Contemporary Accounting Research 31 (4): 1103–1133.
Gao, F., J. S. Wu, and J. Zimmerman. 2009. Unintended Consequences of Granting Small Firms
Exemptions from Securities Regulation: Evidence from the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Journal
of Accounting Research 47 (2): 459–506.
Garber, S., J. Adams, S. Peltzman, and D. L. Rubinfeld. 1998. Product and Stock Market
Responses to Automotive Product Liability Verdicts. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity. Microeconomics 1998: 1–53.

33

GetUp! 2016. Closing the Carribbean Connection: Solving Aggressive Tax Avoidance by Top
Foreign Multinationals Operating in Australia.
Graham, J. R., M. Hanlon, T. Shevlin, and N. Shroff. 2014. Incentives for Tax Planning and
Avoidance: Evidence from the Field. The Accounting Review 89 (3): 991–1023.
Guay, W., D. Samuels, and D. Taylor. 2016. Guiding through the Fog: Financial statement
complexity and voluntary disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 62 (2).
Conference papers 2015: 234–269.
Hanlon, M., and S. Heitzman. 2010. A Review of Tax Research. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 50 (2): 127–178.
Hanlon, M., and J. Slemrod. 2009. What Does Tax Aggressiveness Signal? Evidence from Stock
Price Reactions to News About Tax Shelter Involvement. Journal of Public Economics 93
(1–2): 126–141.
Hasegawa, M., J. L. Hoopes, R. Ishida, and J. B. Slemrod. 2013. The Effect of Public Disclosure
on Reported Taxable Income: Evidence from Individuals and Corporations in Japan.
National Tax Journal 6 (33): 571–608.
Healy, P. M., and K. G. Palepu. 2001. Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital
markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 31 (1–3): 405–440.
Hickman, M. 2012. Good bean counters? Starbucks has paid no tax in UK since 2009. Independent,
October 16.
Hurst, D. 2015. Coalition says kidnap risk means wealthy need tax reporting exemptions. The
Guardian, June 5, sec. Australia news.
International Transport Workers’ Federation. 2016. Chevron: “The Godfather of Tax
Minimisation.” chevrontax.info.
Kaniel, R., and R. Parham. 2017. WSJ Category Kings – The impact of media attention on
consumer and mutual fund investment decisions. Journal of Financial Economics 123 (2):
337–356.
Karpoff, J. M., J. Lott John R., and E. W. Wehrly. 2005. The Reputational Penalties for
Environmental Violations: Empirical Evidence. The Journal of Law and Economics 48 (2):
653–675.
Karpoff, J. M., D. Scott Lee, and G. S. Martin. 2008. The consequences to managers for financial
misrepresentation. Journal of Financial Economics 88 (2): 193–215.
Kausar, A., N. Shroff, and H. White. 2016. Real effects of the audit choice. Journal of Accounting
and Economics 62 (1): 157–181.
Kays, A. 2017. Interdependencies of Mandatory and Voluntary Disclosure: Evidence from Partial
Tax Return Disclosure in Australia. Working Paper.
Khan, M., S. Srinivasan, and L. Tan. 2017. Institutional Ownership and Corporate Tax Avoidance:
New Evidence. The Accounting Review 92 (2): 101–122.
Kubick, T. R., D. P. Lynch, M. A. Mayberry, and T. C. Omer. 2016. The Effects of Regulatory
Scrutiny on Tax Avoidance: An Examination of SEC Comment Letters. The Accounting
Review.
Leigh, A. 2016a. Statement on Implementation of the Common Reporting Standard.
———. 2016b. Statement on Tougher Penalties for Country-by-Country Reporting.
Leuz, C., A. Triantis, and T. Yue Wang. 2008. Why Do Firms Go Dark? Causes and Economic
Consequences of Voluntary Sec Deregistrations. Journal of Accounting and Economics 45
(2): 181–208.
34

Likert, R. 1932. A technique for measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology 140: 5–55.
Ludwig, J. 2016. Statement on Implementation of the Common Reporting Standard.
Oxfam. 2016. Australian multinationals are the real “taxed-nots.” Oxfam Australia.
Passant, J. 2016. Has the time come to criminalise tax avoidance? Independent Australia, April
28.
Shroff, N. 2016. Discussion of “Is the risk of product market predation a cost of disclosure?”
Journal of Accounting and Economics 62 (2). Conference papers 2015: 326–332.
Slemrod, J. 1992. Do Taxes Matter? Lessons from the 1980’s. The American Economic Review 82
(2): 250–256.
Towery, E. M. 2017. Unintended Consequences of Linking Tax Return Disclosures to Financial
Reporting for Income Taxes: Evidence from Schedule UTP. The Accounting Review 92
(5): 201–226.
Verrecchia, R. E. 2001. Essays on disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 32 (1–3): 97–
180.
Verrecchia, R. E., and J. Weber. 2006. Redacted Disclosure. Journal of Accounting Research 44
(4): 791–814.
Wardell, J. 2016. Australia cracks down on multinational tax avoidance in 2016 Budget. Stuff,
May 4.

35

Figure 1. Articles in Media

40
Number of Articles

35
30
25
20
15

10
5
0

Article with "paid no tax"

Articles about ATO

Notes. Figure 1 graphs the number of times articles with the phrase “paid no tax” (dark lines) or about the ATO (as
determined by Lexis Nexus) occur in the Australian Media, during December 2015.

36

Figure 2. Starbuck’s Buzz Score in the UK from May 2012 through June 2013

Notes. Figure 2 reports Starbuck’s Buzz Score. YouGov’s Buzz score for a brand measures whether people have heard
anything positive or negative about the brand in the media or via word of mouth. Specifically, Buzz Score is positive
(negative) if the consumer indicated “Over the PAST TWO WEEKS, which of the following brands have you heard
something POSITIVE (NEGATIVE) about (whether in the news, through advertising, or talking to friends and
family)”. Three key dates (indicated by the vertical lines) related to allegations of tax avoidance by Starbucks in the
UK are: (1) October 15, 2012: Reuter’s published a news article exposing some of Starbuck’s international tax
arrangements, (2) November 12, 2012: Starbucks executives appeared before the Public Accounts Committee; (3)
December 6, 2012: Starbucks announced that it intends to remit £20 million U.K. tax, but admits no wrongdoing.
Graphic courtesy of YouGov.

37

Figure 3. Analysis of Changes in Reported Total Income

Number of Firms

Panel A. Foreign-Owned
50
40
30
20
10
0
80-<85
$AUD

85-<90
$AUD

90-<95
$AUD

95-<100 100-<105 105-<110 110-<115 115-<120
$AUD
$AUD
$AUD
$AUD
$AUD
(Under) (Over)

2013 (Year Before Disclosure)

2014 (Year After Disclosure)

Number of Firms

Panel B. Australian Private
100
80
60
40
20
0
80-<85
$AUD

85-<90
$AUD

90-<95
$AUD

95-<100 100-<105 105-<110 110-<115 115-<120
$AUD
$AUD $AUD $AUD $AUD
(Under) (Over)

2013 (Year Before Disclosure)

2014 (Year After Disclosure)

Number of Firms

Panel C: Australian Public
20
15
10
5
0
80-<85
$AUD

85-<90
$AUD

90-<95
$AUD

95-<100 100-<105 105-<110 110-<115 115-<120
$AUD
$AUD
$AUD
$AUD
$AUD
(Under) (Over)

2013 (Year Before Disclosure)

2014 (Year After Disclosure)

38

Figure 3. Analysis of Changes in Reported Total Income (cont.)
Panel D. % Change in the Number of Firms Just Below the Threshold from 2013 to 2014
2
Public Taxed
1.75

Percentage Change

1.5
Foreign Taxed
1.16

1
Private Not Taxed
0.70

0.5

0

-0.5

Foreign Not Taxed
0.20

Private Taxed
0.63
Public Not Taxed
(0.38)

Notes. Panels A, B, and C show the number of foreign-owned, Australian private and Australian public firms in each
total income bin that filed a company tax return in Australia in 2013 and 2014. The disclosure threshold was total
income of 100 AUD million and 2014 was the first year subject to disclosure. Panel D graphs the percentage change
from 2013 to 2014 in the number of firms just below the disclosure threshold. The percentage change is shown
separately for foreign-owned, Australian private and Australian public firms based on their taxpaying status. Source:
Australian Tax Office.

39

% of Firms Paying No Tax

Figure 4. Tax Payments for Firms Over versus Under the Reporting Threshold
Panel A. Percentage of Firms Paying No Tax
55.0%
45.0%
35.0%
25.0%

15.0%
2011

2012

Foreign-Over Threshold
Private-Under Threshold

2013
Foreign-Under Threshold
Public-Over Threshold

2014
Private-Over Threshold
Public-Under Threshold

Panel B. Ratio of Taxes Payable / Total Income for Firms Paying Tax
Ratio of Taxes Payable /
Total Income for Firms
Paying Tax

5.0%
4.0%
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
2011
Foreign-Over Threshold
Private-Under Threshold

2012
2013
Foreign-Under Threshold
Public-Over Threshold

2014
Private-Over Threshold
Public-Under Threshold

Notes. Panel A graphs the percentage of firms reporting a zero tax liability as a share of all firms filing a company tax return in Australia for 2011, 2012, 2013 and
2014. Panel B graphs the ratio of taxes payable to total income for firms reporting a positive tax liability. In both panels, we present the data separately for foreignowned, Australian private and Australian public firms, over and under the disclosure threshold. The disclosure threshold was total income of 100 AUD million and
2014 was the first year subject to disclosure. Data Source: Australian Tax Office.

40

14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0

December, 2015
December, 2016
March, 2016

November, 2015
December, 2015
January, , 2016
February, 2016
March, 2016
April, 2016
May, 2016
June, 2016
July, 2016
August, 2016
September, 2016
October, 2016
November, 2016
December, 2016
January, 2017
February, 2017
March, 2017
April, 2017
May, 2017
June, 2017
July, 2017
August, 2017

Website Views

Figure 5. Views of ATO Corporate Tax Transparency website

Notes. Figure 5 depicts the monthly number of website views to the Corporate Tax Transparency website,
https://data.gov.au/dataset/corporate-transparency, obtained from site usage statistics provided by the Australian
government at https://data.gov.au/site-usage/dataset?month=&publisher=australiantaxationoffice.

41

Table 1. Timeline of Events
Date

Event

Description

February 4, 2013

Intention to improve corporate The Australian government announced
tax transparency announced
the intention to pass some form of public
tax disclosure with no details provided
regarding what that disclosure might be

April 3, 2013

Proposed law
announced

introduction The Australian government announced
that, following public consultation, they
intended to legislate a regime of public
disclosure of selected company tax return
information for firms above 100 AUD
million

May 29, 2013

Law introduced

Formal legislation introduced for public
comment

June 29, 2013

Law enacted

Tax disclosure for all firms above 100
AUD million in total income becomes
law

June 4, 2015

Private company carve-out

Australian private company exemption
draft amendment released for comment

November 12, 2015

Private carve-out enacted

Australian resident private companies
removed

December 3, 2015

Amendment passed

Australian private company exemption
amended to increase disclosure threshold
to 200 AUD million rather than offer
complete exemption

December 11, 2015

Amendment enacted

Australian resident private companies
with 200 AUD million or more total
income back in the measure

December 17, 2015

Public and foreign-owned firm Data for 1538 Australian public and
data disclosed
foreign-owned companies released

March 22, 2016

Private firm data disclosed

42

Data for 312 Australian
companies released

private

Table 2. Disclosed Data on ATO Corporate Tax Transparency website

Sample Composition
All Firms
Australian Public
Foreign-Owned
Australian Private

N
1854
281
1252
321

TI > 0
TP > 0
1307
1179
211
179
857
777
239
223

Only Taxpaying Firms (TP > 0)
All Firms
Total income
Taxable income
Tax payable
Effective tax rate
Australian Public
Total income
Taxable income
Tax payable
Effective tax rate
Foreign-Owned
Total income
Taxable income
Tax payable
Effective tax rate
Australian Private
Total income
Taxable income
Tax payable
Effective tax rate

N
Mean
Mdn
1179
1,118
297
1179
147
22
1179
36
6
1179 26.40% 29.90%

Std
4,234
871
216
6.40%

Min
Max
101 67,456
0 13,760
0
3,951
0.00% 30.00%

179
3,867
565
179
589
60
179
150
13
179 24.10% 27.00%

9,865
2,005
533
7.10%

103 67,456
1 13,760
0
3,951
0.20% 30.00%

777
679
266
777
78
20
777
17
5
777 26.60% 30.00%

1,665
416
45
6.40%

101 28,217
0 10,716
0
515
0.00% 30.00%

223
441
297
223
34
14
223
9
4
223 27.30% 30.00%

429
115
33
5.50%

200
3,391
0
1,570
0
466
3.20% 30.00%

Notes. This table shows the sample composition of firms included in the ATO disclosure of tax return data in
December (Australian public and foreign-owned) and in March (Australian private). We rely on BvD Orbis data to
identify Australian public firms (of the 1,859 firms in the ATO data we are not able to match 5 to Orbis). TI is Taxable
Income. TP is Tax Payable. The Effective Tax Rate is the ratio of Tax Payable/Taxable Income. Total Income is the
tax return data item on which the disclosure thresholds were based. Dollar amounts are in millions.

43

Table 3. Consumer Response: YouGov Data
Panel A. Descriptive Data

Variable
Reputation
Impression
Buzz
December 17, 2015
Subject to Disclosure
Paid No Tax
Covered by Media

n
218,087
218,087
218,087
218,087
218,087
159,256
159,256

Mean
0.188
0.2522
0.1056
0.031
0.730
0.263
0.258

S.D.
0.542
0.5823
0.4311
0.173
0.444
0.440
0.438

0.25

Mdn
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.75
0
0
0
0
1
0
0

1
1
0
0
1
1
1

Panel B. Regression Results

VARIABLES
December 17, 2015
December 17, 2015 X Subject to Disclosure
December 17, 2015 X Paid No Tax
December 17, 2015 X Covered by Media
Firm Fixed Effects
Respondent Clustering
Observations
R-squared

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Reputation Impression
Buzz
Reputation Impression Buzz Reputation Impression
-0.002106 -0.003882 0.028829* -0.005165 0.026337 0.019288 -0.021604 0.016987
(-0.10)
(-0.18)
(1.69)
(-0.31)
(1.48)
(1.29)
(-1.14)
(0.86)
-0.008449 0.030445 -0.009470
(-0.44)
(1.46)
(-0.59)
-0.021303 0.000960 0.000260
(-1.30)
(0.05)
(0.02)
0.040960* 0.035576
(1.65)
(1.36)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
218,087 218,087 218,087 159,256 159,256 159,256 159,256 159,256
0.0578
0.0770
0.0433
0.0581
0.0877
0.0490
0.0581
0.0877

(9)
Buzz
0.016654
(1.05)

0.010012
(0.45)
Yes
Yes
159,256
0.0490

Notes. Reputation is -1 if the consumer indicated the brand had a negative reputation, 0 if they did not believe it had
a negative or positive reputation (but were still aware of the brand), and +1 if the consumer believed the reputation
was positive. Impression is -1 if the consumer answers that the brand has a negative impression, 0 if they did not have
a positive or negative impression, or (but were still aware of the brand), and +1 if the consumer had a positive
impression of the brand. Buzz is -1 if over the last two weeks the consumer has heard anything negative about the
brand, 0 if had heard nothing about the brand, and +1 if had heard something positive about the brand. December 17,
2015 is equal to 1 for December 17, 18 or 19th, 2015, and 0 otherwise. Subject to Disclosure is equal to 1 if the firm
that owns the brand had its tax return data included in the December 17, 2015 disclosure, and 0 otherwise. Paid No
Tax is equal to 1 if the ATO disclosure reveals a zero tax payable for the firm that owns the brand, and 0 otherwise.
Covered by Media is equal to 1 if the firm that owns the brand was highlighted in an Australian news source based on
a search of all Factiva articles on March 22, 2016 for either “ATO” or “tax transparency”, and 0 otherwise. In Panel
B, standard errors are clustered by respondent, with t-stats displayed in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed).

44

Table 4. Consumer Response: TurkPrime Data
Panel A. Descriptive Data
Variable
General Perception
Willing to do Business
Ethical Perception
Pays Sufficient Tax
Heard of Scandal
March 22, 2016
Subject to Disclosure

n
32,407
31,867
29,192
23,231
35,466
40,249
40,249

Mean
5.013
4.860
4.813
4.504
0.155
0.647
0.284

S.D.
1.629
1.731
1.635
1.866
0.362
0.478
0.451

Mdn
5
5
5
5
0
1
0

Notes. General Perception, Willing to do Business, Ethical Perception, and Pays Sufficient Tax are measured using a seven point Likert scale according to how
respondents answered questions (1) through (4), respectively. A response of 1 indicates “Not Favorable”, “Not Likely”, “Not Ethical”, or “No” while a response
of 7 indicates “Very Favorable”, “Very Likely” “Very Ethical” or “Yes” depending on the question being asked. Question (1): In your personal opinion, how
favorable is your perception of X? Question (2): Assuming you were in a position to need to do business with a company like X, how likely is it that you would do
business with X, instead of one of its competitors? Question (3): How ethical do you think X is? Question (4): Do you feel that X pays as much in taxes as it
should? We measure Heard of Scandal as an indicator variable equal to 1 if the respondent indicates that they have heard of a recent scandal involving the company,
and 0 otherwise. March 22, 2016 is equal to 1 for survey responses collected after the March 22, 2016 disclosure, and 0 otherwise. Subject to Disclosure is equal
to 1 if the firm’s tax return data was included in the March 22, 2016 disclosure, and 0 otherwise.

45

Table 4. Consumer Response: TurkPrime Data (cont.)
Panel B. Regression Results

VARIABLES
March 22, 2016
Subject to Disclosure
March 22, 2016 X Subject to
Disclosure

Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

General
Perception
0.009
(0.35)
-0.199
(-0.94)

Willing
to do
Business
0.004
(0.14)
-0.089
(-0.42)

Ethical
Perception
-0.002
(-0.07)
-0.203
(-0.94)

Pay
Sufficient
Tax
-0.019
(-0.43)
-0.269
(-1.00)

Heard of
Scandal
0.013**
(2.42)
0.007
(0.10)

-0.081**
(-2.37)

-0.092***
(-2.61)

-0.061*
(-1.89)

-0.146***
(-3.27)

-0.010
(-1.20)

29,884
0.0017

29,373
0.0022

26,831
0.0016

21,122
0.0145

32,588
0.0021

Notes. General Perception, Willing to do Business, Ethical Perception, and Pays Sufficient Tax are measured using a seven point Likert scale according to how
respondents answered questions (1) through (4), respectively (below). A response of 1 indicates “Not Favorable”, “Not Likely”, “Not Ethical”, or “No” while a
response of 7 indicates “Very Favorable”, “Very Likely” “Very Ethical” or “Yes” depending on the question being asked. Question (1): In your personal opinion,
how favorable is your perception of X? Question (2): Assuming you were in a position to need to do business with a company like X, how likely is it that you
would do business with X, instead of one of its competitors? Question (3): How ethical do you think X is? Question (4): Do you feel that X pays as much in taxes
as it should? We measure Heard of Scandal as an indicator variable equal to 1 if the respondent indicates that they have heard of a recent scandal involving the
company, and 0 otherwise. March 22, 2016 is equal to 1 for survey responses collected after the March 22, 2016 disclosure, and 0 otherwise. Subject to Disclosure
is equal to 1 if the firm’s tax return data was included in the March 22, 2016 disclosure, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors are clustered by firm and survey respondent,
with t-stats displayed in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed).

46

Table 5. Market Response
Panel A. Descriptive Data

Three Day Buy and Hold Return
April 3, 2013
Paid No Tax
Number of Entities in Group
Share of Institutional Shareholders
Consumer Oriented

n
14036
14036
14036
13915
14036
14036

Mean
-0.01
0.02
0.18
101
0.86
0.07

S.D.
0.05
0.13
0.39
267
0.25
0.26

0.25
-0.03
0.00
0.00
19
0.87
0.00

Mdn
0.00
0.00
0.00
36
0.96
0.00

0.75
0.02
0.00
0.00
90
1.00
0.00

December 17, 2015 Test Three Day Buy and Hold Return
December 17, 2015
Paid No Tax
Number of Entities in Group
Share of Institutional Shareholders
Consumer Oriented

12758
12761
12761
12700
12761
12761

0.00
0.02
0.24
98
0.88
0.10

0.05
0.13
0.43
272
0.21
0.30

-0.03
0.00
0.00
18
0.88
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
36
0.96
0.00

0.02
0.00
0.00
83
1.00
0.00

April 3, 2013 Test

Notes. Three Day Buy and Hold Return is the three-day buy-and-hold return. April 3, 2013 is equal to 1 for April 3,
2013, and 0 otherwise. For the April 3, 2013 test, Paid No Tax is equal to 1 if the firm had zero tax expense in 2012
(our best estimate for a zero tax firm), and 0 otherwise. For the December 17, 2015 test, Paid No Tax is equal 1 if a
firm had positive tax expense in 2014, but, was disclosed as having paid no tax, and 0 otherwise. Number of Entities
in Group is a count variable equal to the number of legal entities in the economic group to which the entity in the ATO
data belongs. Share of Institutional Shareholders is the share of the firm owned by institutional shareholders.
Consumer Oriented is an indicator variable coded to equal 1 for firms with brands that are covered by YouGov.

47

Table 5. Market Response (cont.)
Panel B. April 3, 2013 Tests (Legislative Announcement)

(1)

VARIABLES
Paid No Tax
April 3, 2013
Paid No Tax X April 3, 2013
Interaction
Paid No Tax X Interaction
April 3, 2013 X Interaction
Paid No Tax X April 3, 2013 X Interaction

Interaction Variable
Cluster by Date
Observations
R-squared

(2)
(3)
(4)
Three Day Buy and Hold Return
0.000269
-0.000496
-0.001323
0.000621
(0.17)
(-0.30)
(-0.25)
(0.39)
-0.019485*** -0.019338*** 0.009067*** -0.020257***
(-9.87)
(-10.06)
(2.92)
(-9.99)
-0.011831*** -0.014023*** -0.024025*** -0.011975***
(-7.44)
(-8.49)
(-4.60)
(-7.52)
-0.000003** 0.004672* 0.009483***
(-2.08)
(1.82)
(4.26)
0.000007***
0.002049
-0.001561
(3.14)
(0.36)
(-0.48)
0.000004*** -0.033242*** 0.009715***
(2.81)
(-12.95)
(4.36)
0.000004
0.013733** 0.008843***
(1.62)
(2.39)
(2.74)
Number of
Share of
Consumer
Entities in
Institutional
Oriented
Group
Shareholders
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
14,036
13,915
14,036
14,036
0.0029
0.0032
0.0038
0.0051

Notes. Three Day Buy and Hold Return is the three-day buy-and-hold return. April 3, 2013 is equal to 1 for April 3,
2013, and 0 otherwise. Paid No Tax is equal to 1 if the firm had zero tax expense in 2012 (our best estimate for a zero
tax firm), and 0 otherwise. The variable Interaction refers to Number of Entities in Group, Share of Institutional
Shareholders, and Consumer Oriented, respectively. Number of Entities in Group is a count variable equal to the
number of legal entities in the economic group to which the entity in the ATO data belongs. Share of Institutional
Shareholders is the share of the firm owned by institutional shareholders. Consumer Oriented is an indicator variable
coded to equal 1 for firms with brands that are covered by YouGov, and 0 otherwise. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed).

48

Table 5. Market Response (cont.)
Panel C. December 17, 2015 Tests (Actual Disclosure)
(1)

VARIABLES
Paid No Tax
December 17, 2015
Paid No Tax X December 17, 2015
Interaction
Paid No Tax X Interaction
December 17, 2015 X Interaction
Paid No Tax X December 17, 2015 X Interaction

Interaction Variable
Cluster by Date
Observations
R-squared

(2)
(3)
(4)
Three Day Buy and Hold Return
-0.000640
-0.000736
-0.007947
-0.000294
(-0.52)
(-0.58)
(-1.24)
(-0.23)
0.023792*** 0.024832*** -0.011661*** 0.022473***
(12.62)
(13.09)
(-4.81)
(12.01)
-0.004813*** -0.004296*** 0.088648*** -0.002083
(-3.90)
(-3.37)
(13.88)
(-1.66)
0.000006**
-0.000165 0.007096***
(2.21)
(-0.06)
(5.58)
-0.000001
0.008306
0.004689
(-0.15)
(1.11)
(1.24)
-0.000011*** 0.040339*** 0.010855***
(-3.90)
(13.69)
(8.54)
0.000002 -0.105278*** -0.045792***
(0.33)
(-14.03)
(-12.11)
Number of
Share of
Consumer
Entities in
Institutional
Oriented
Group
Shareholders
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
12,758
12,697
12,758
12,758
0.0029
0.0037
0.0036
0.0048

(5)
-0.000312
(-0.23)
0.023152***
(12.14)
-0.008148***
(-6.00)
0.005179***
(2.91)
-0.006089
(-1.58)
0.017750***
(9.97)
0.014735***
(3.83)

Notes. Three Day Buy and Hold Return is the three-day buy-and-hold return. December 17, 2015 is equal to 1 for
December 17, and 0 otherwise. Paid No Tax is equal 1 if a firm had positive tax expense in 2014, but, was disclosed
as having paid no tax, and 0 otherwise. The variable Interaction refers to Number of Entities in Group, Share of
Institutional Shareholders, and Consumer Oriented, respectively. Number of Entities in Group is a count variable
equal to the number of legal entities in the economic group to which the entity in the ATO data belongs. Share of
Institutional Shareholders is the share of the firm owned by institutional shareholders. Consumer Oriented is an
indicator variable coded to equal 1 for firms with brands that are covered by YouGov, and 0 otherwise. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively (two-tailed).

49

Media
Yes
12,758
0.0034

