NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF ORGANIZED BREAST CANCER SCREENING ON MAMMOGRAPHY USE:
EVIDENCE FROM FRANCE
Thomas C. Buchmueller
Léontine Goldzahl
Working Paper 24316
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24316

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018

For the second author, this research has been supported by a post-doctoral grant co-financed y the
chair "Sante" at the Fondation du risque and the project ANR 11-LABX-0019. The authors wish
to thank the IRDES who provided the ESPS data used in this paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Thomas C. Buchmueller and Léontine Goldzahl. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Organized Breast Cancer Screening on Mammography Use: Evidence from
France
Thomas C. Buchmueller and Léontine Goldzahl
NBER Working Paper No. 24316
February 2018
JEL No. I12,I14,I18
ABSTRACT
In 2004, France introduced a national program of organized breast cancer screening. The national
program built on pre-existing local programs in some, but not all, départements. Using data from
multiple waves of a nationally representative biennial survey of the French population, we
estimate the effect of organized screening on the percentage of women obtaining a mammogram.
The analysis uses difference-in-differences methods to exploit the fact that the program was
targeted at women in a specific age group: 50 to 74 years old. We find that organized screening
significantly raised mammography rates among women in the target age range. Just above the
lower age threshold, the percentage of women reporting that they had a mammogram in the past
two years increased by over 10 percentage points after the national program went into effect.
Mammography rates increased even more among women in their sixties. Estimated effects are
particularly large for women with less education and lower incomes, suggesting that France's
organized screening program has reduced socioeconomic disparities in access to mammography.

Thomas C. Buchmueller
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
tbuch@umich.edu
Léontine Goldzahl
Université Paris-Dauphine, LEDA-LEGOS - Office P10
Place du Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny
75016 Paris France
leontine.goldzahl@dauphine.fr

1

Introduction

Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of death from cancer among
women worldwide, accounting for one-quarter of all new cancer cases and roughly 15 percent of cancer deaths
(Torre et al., 2015). The incidence of breast cancer is generally higher in more developed countries, though
incidence rates have risen recently in less developed countries. In 2015, roughly 154,400 women in the 28
countries of the European Union and 46,400 women in the U.S. died of breast cancer (Ferlay et al. (2015)).
If detected early, breast cancer is highly treatable, with very high rates of survival. Survival rates depend
importantly on the stage at which breast cancer is detected. Five-year relative survival rate for breast cancer
are 99 percent for localized cancers, 85 percent for regional cancers and 26 percent for metastatic cancers
(Siegel, Miller and Jemal, 2016). Early screening increases the likelihood to detect a cancer at a more local
stage, thereby improving survival.
The most common method of early detection is mammography, low dose X-ray imaging of the breasts
used to identify abnormalities. In light of evidence from clinical trials indicating that screening mammography reduces mortality by detecting tumors at an earlier stage (Duffy and Paci, 2012), expert organizations,
including the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer and the American
Cancer Society, recommend regular, biennial screening mammograms starting at age 50 (Perry et al., 2008).
Nearly every European country has established a national breast cancer screening program that make mammograms available free of charge for women in the recommended age range (Altobelli and Lattanzi, 2014).
Despite the central role that organized screening programs play in national cancer prevention strategies,
there is surprising little research evidence on their impact. A basic question regarding the impact of organized
programs is whether they are effective in increasing the number of women who receive mammograms. In this
paper, we examine this question using data from France. The first organized programs in the country were
introduced in the late 1980s and early 1990s at the level of the département.1 In 2004, France established a
national program that built on and strengthened the early local programs in several ways. In particular, the
target age range was expanded slightly and the recommended frequency for mammography screening was
increased to once every two years from once every three years. By 2009, France’s organized breast cancer
screening program was the largest in the European Union in terms of the number of mammogram performed
each year (Séradour, 2010).
1 The département is the fundamental administrative and political jurisdiction in France. There are 95 départements in
“metropolitan France”, with an average land area of 5,666 square kilometers (three and half times the median land area of US
counties). In terms of population, in 2015 départements varied in size from 76,000 to 2.6 million, with an average population
of 670,000.

2

We evaluate the impact of both the national program and the earlier local programs using data from a
nationally representative survey of the French population spanning the period 2000 to 2010. We estimate
difference-in-differences models that exploit variation in exposure to organized screening related to age,
geography and time. Our main outcome is an indicator variable that equals one for women who report
having had a mammogram at some point in the last two years.
Numerous studies from multiple countries have documented significant disparities related to socioeconomic status in the use of a wide range of preventive health services, including cancer screening (Schueler,
Chu and Smith-Bindman, 2008; Pruitt et al., 2009; Jusot, Or and Sirven, 2012; Carrieri and Wubker, 2013;
Devaux, 2015). An important objective of population-based screening programs is to reduce such disparities
in utilization, thereby reducing disparities in cancer detection and survival. We consider whether France’s
organized screening program has reduced disparities in screening by testing for heterogeneous treatment
effects related to education and income.
Our results indicate that the early local programs increased the percentage of women who had a mammogram in the past two years by roughly 6 percentage points, a 14 percent effect relative to the rate in
areas without an organized program. We estimate that the effect of the national program that went into
effect in 2004 was nearly twice as large. Although the percentage of women reporting a recent mammogram
increased for all ages within the target range, the change was greatest among women in their sixties. This
result combined with the fact that we find a weaker effect of the program on the probability of ever having
had a mammogram, suggests that the program has increased not only initiation to mammogram use, but
also the regularity with which women obtain screening. Because we find that France’s organized screening
program had a larger effect on mammography rates for women with lower socioeconomic status, gradients
with respect to education and income have declined since the national program has been in place.

2
2.1

Background and Previous Literature
Breast Cancer Screening

Breast cancer screening typically includes a clinical breast exam, a physical examination of the breast by a
physician or nurse, and a mammogram, which is an X-ray of the breast tissue that provides detailed images of
the breast from 2 angles (frontal and profile). The mammogram is performed and analyzed by a radiologist.
Screening mammograms are given to asymptomatic women to look for suspicious markers. Diagnostic
mammograms are typically given to women who have had a previous abnormal screening mammogram, have

3

a family history of breast cancer, or have certain symptoms, such as the presence of lumps.
The accuracy of a mammogram depends on the density of the breast tissue, which tends to decline with
age. For women over age 50, the sensitivity of the test (the probability of detecting an existing cancer) ranges
between 66 and 90 percent and specificity (the probability that the test is negative for someone without the
disease) reaches 95 percent (Smith, 2003). Thus, mammography is seen as an effective means of detecting
breast tumor for women older than 50 years old. It is considered less appropriate for younger women whose
breast tissue tends to be denser.
Several studies based on randomized control trials have concluded that mammography screening leads to a
significant reduction in breast cancer mortality (Duffy and Paci, 2012). These results led to recommendations
by medical societies and public agencies that women receive regular mammograms as well as public policies
aimed at increasing mammography rates. Reviewing evidence from a number of micro-simulation studies,
Cutler (2008) concludes that nearly half of the reduction in breast cancer mortality in the U.S. between 1990
and 2004 can be attributed to increased screening.
Recently, however, there has been some debate about how the benefits of mammography related to
reduced mortality should be weighed against the cost associated with false positive results and overdiagnosis
possibly leading to overtreatment (Gøtzsche and Nielsen, 2009). In 2009, the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) generated some controversy when it revised its guidelines to recommend that women begin
to receive regular mammograms starting at age 50, rather than at 40 as it has previously recommended. The
USPSTF also revised its recommendation regarding the frequency of screening mammograms from annual to
biennial. In 2012, a U.K. expert panel conducted a meta-analysis of the randomized trial evidence concluded
that screening mammograms reduced the relative risk of mortality by 20 percent, while acknowledging the
problem of overdiagnosis (Marmot et al., 2012). The panel’s conclusions supported the NHS policy of
organized breast cancer screening beginning at age 50.

2.2

The Effect of Public Policies on Screening

Most countries have policies aimed at increasing the number of women who receive a regular mammogram.
In the U.S., with its fragmented system of health care financing, different strategies have been targeted at
women with different types of insurance coverage. Between the late 1980s and early 2000s, nearly every
state enacted laws requiring private health insurance plans to include screening mammograms as a covered
benefit. Recent research indicates that these benefit mandates significantly increased the percentage of
women obtaining a mammogram, with especially large effects occurring when plans were prohibited from

4

charging cost-sharing for the service (Bitler and Carpenter, 2016a).2 The requirement that private insurance
plans provide first-dollar coverage for screening mammograms became national policy starting in 2010 as
a result of the Affordable Care Act. A different U.S. policy, the National Breast and Cervical Cancer
Early Detection Program (NBCCEDP), aims to increase breast cancer screening among uninsured lowincome women. Although it is a Federal program, the NBCCEDP was rolled out incrementally by different
states throughout the 1990s. Research exploiting that implementation pattern finds that this program also
significantly increased the percentage of women obtaining mammograms (Adams et al., 2003; Bitler and
Carpenter, 2016b).
In Europe, breast cancer prevention strategies have centered on organized screening programs (Altobelli
and Lattanzi, 2014). The earliest programs, established at the local level, date to the 1980s. Finland,
Luxembourg, the UK and Sweden expanded their programs to the national level in the early 1990s. In 2003,
the European Commission formally recommended population-based screening for women between the ages
of 50 and 69. Soon thereafter, nearly every European country had established a national organized breast
cancer screening program.3 Although the exact details vary, these national programs share several common
elements. The modal program targets 50 to 69 year-olds.4 Every two years,5 women in the target age range
receive a letter inviting them to receive a free mammogram. The standard protocol involves two images
per breast and double reading of normal mammograms.6 Today, digital mammography is the most common
screening method used.
Two recent studies evaluate the effect of organized breast cancer screening programs on the utilization of
mammography, using difference-in-differences research designs similar to the approach we use in this paper.
Pletscher (2017) analyzes the impact of organized screening in Switzerland, where a program targeted at
women between the ages of 50 and 69 was rolled out over several years at the level of the canton. This pattern
of implementation provides variation related to geography, age and time. However, it is not clear that this
variation is orthogonal to other factors affecting cancer screening. According to Pletscher (2017), cantons
that did and did not implement screening programs differed in terms of breast cancer incidence, treatment
2 A related literature from the U.S. examines the effect of insurance coverage on mammography use. Busch and Duchovny
(2005) and Finkelstein et al. (2012) find a positive effect of Medicaid on mammography use. Several recent studies examine the
effect of Massachusetts’ 2006 health reform, which significantly increased insurance coverage. The results regarding the effect of
this coverage expansion on mammography use are mixed (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012; Keating et al., 2013; Sabik and Bradley,
2016).
3 Greece, Hungary, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia do not currently have national programs but do have local or
regional programs that incorporate the key features of the national programs in other countries.
4 In addition to France, the Netherlands extends the target age range to 74. In Ireland and Estonia, the upper age limit is
64 and 65, respectively. In the Czech Republic, Hungary and Portugal, organized screening begins at age 45. Eligibility for the
national program of Austria and Sweden start at 40 years old.
5 Malta and the United Kingdom have a 3 years invitation cycle.
6 Austria, Latvia and the United Kingdom do not have a double reading of every normal mammogram.

5

patterns, the supply of radiologists and patient preferences (as indicated by public approval for public policies
related to health insurance). In addition, the survey data he uses has an important limitation: the only
question related to mammography use asks if female respondents had ever had a mammogram. Thus, to
the extent that organized screening affects not only initiation to mammography but also the regularity of
screening, his analysis will understate the impact of the policy. Pletscher (2017) finds that organized screening
is associated with a 4.6 percentage point increase in the probability of ever having had a mammogram.
Carrieri and Wuebker (2016) use data from the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe
(SHARE) to estimate cross-sectional difference-in-differences models that compare women from 13 different
countries who were exposed to organized screening to those who were not exposed because of their age or
geographic location. Their dependent variable is an indicator for whether a woman had a mammogram in the
past two years. This outcome is well suited for evaluating the impact of organized screening programs, given
that that these programs typically invite women to receive a mammogram every two years. One limitation
of their research design is that the geographic variation is measured at the level of the NUTS-2 region, a
statistical unit that does not map directly to political or administrative divisions, and therefore does not
necessarily correspond to the geographic area covered by an organized screening program.7 For example,
NUTS-2 regions in Switzerland are larger than cantons, the level at where the organized screening programs
analyzed by Pletscher (2017) were implemented. Similarly, the NUTS-2 regions defined for France encompass
multiple départements. Thus, it is likely that some women in Carrieri and Wuebker (2016)’s treatment group
were not actually exposed to an eligible screening program, while some women in their control group were.
And, even more than in the case of Switzerland’s cantons, differences in health care financing and delivery
among European countries raise concerns about the comparability of this study’s “treatment” and “control”
groups. Their main estimates imply that organized breast cancer screening programs raise the probability
that a women in the target age range has had a mammogram in the past 2 years by roughly 17 percentage
points. Although their regression model allows the direct effect of age to be non-linear, they do not test
whether the effect of organized screening varies with age.
Numerous studies document significant socioeconomic disparities in breast cancer screening. Jusot, Or
and Sirven (2012) use data from the 2004 and 2006 waves of the SHARE to examine the socioeconomic
correlates of several types of preventive care. They find that, controlling for other factors, women in the
highest education group are more than 50 percent more likely than women with the lowest level of education
to have had a mammogram in the past two years. Carrieri and Wubker (2013) conduct a similar analysis
7 NUTS stands for Nomenclature of Units for Territorial Statistics. The system was developed by Eurostat for developing,
collecting and analyzing harmonized statistics at the sub-national level.

6

using SHARE data from 2009. They also find that after controlling for proxies for need, screening rates
increase significantly with education and income. Significant disparities in mammography use have also
been documented in the U.S. (Sabatino et al., 2008; Lantz et al., 2006; McMorrow, Kenney and Goin, 2014)
and Canada (Katz and Hofer, 1994; Katz, Zemencuk and Hofer, 2000). In a comparative study of 19 OECD
countries, France ranked fourth in terms of income-related inequalities in mammography use (Devaux, 2015).
If cost is an important reason that lower income women make less use of mammography and other
types of preventive care, organized programs that make mammograms available free of charge should reduce
disparities in utilization. Similarly, to the extent that disadvantaged women have low rates of breast cancer
screening because they are not well-informed about the benefits of mammography, the information that is
provided as part of an organized program can also reduce disparities. On the other hand, more educated,
higher income women may be more efficient user of health inputs, and therefore they may be more responsive
to the reduced cost and informational intervention associated with an organized screening program. Thus,
it is possible that an organized program could amplify rather than reduce disparities in mammography use
related to socioeconomic status (Goldman and Lakdawalla, 2001).
The existing evidence on the effect of public policies on disparities in mammography utilization is limited
and mixed. Adams, Breen and Joski (2007) find that although the NBCCEDP increased breast and cervical
cancer screening in the U.S., the program did not reduce disparities in screening outcomes related to race
or ethnicity. Similarly, in his analysis of organized screening in Switzerland, Pletscher (2017) tests for
heterogeneous effects related to education and income and finds no clear pattern with respect to either.
In contrast, Carrieri and Wuebker (2016) find that organized screening programs have a larger effect on
mammography uptake among women with the lowest levels of education compared to those with medium or
high levels of education.
Descriptive studies reporting changes in mammography use after the introduction of an organized screening program also provide mixed results. Espinas et al. (2011) report changes in the percentage of women
in Catalonia reporting that they “regularly” have a mammogram before and after an organized screening
program was extended to the entire Catalan population in 2002. They find significantly larger changes
in regular mammography use among women with a primary school education or less compared to women
with a higher level of education. In contrast, a similar analysis for Belgium suggests that the effect of that
country’s national breast cancer screening program was similar for all education groups, leaving the gradient
with respect to education essentially unchanged (Puddu, Demarest and Tafforeau, 2009).

7

2.3

Organized Breast Cancer Screening in France

As in other European countries, organized screening in France began in the 1980s at the local level. Between
1989 and 1998, programs were launched in 27 départements; by 2000, there were 32 local programs. These
départements, which are shown as the darkest ones on the map (Figure 1), are scattered throughout the
country. This effectively random geographic dispersion of local programs and the fact that France’s health
care system is highly centralized, with uniform benefits and reimbursement policies nationwide, minimizes the
concern that the distribution of these local programs was correlated with other factors that likely influenced
the demand for or supply of mammography.
The national program was announced in 2003 and by 2004 was operational throughout France. The
current system is financed at the national level by the public health insurance funds and is overseen by the
national cancer institute, though the operation of the program is still managed at the level of the département,
typically by a non-profit organization.
The protocol for the early programs involved a single image, which was read by two radiologists. The
national program is based on a new protocol, which includes two images per breast and a clinical breast
exam. Whereas the local programs sent invitation letters every three years to women between the ages of
50 and 69, under the national program women between the ages of 50 and 74 receive an invitation letter
every two years. This letter provides information one the benefits of mammography in general as well as
the specific advantages of the organized program, such as the second reading, as well as a list of radiologists
participating in the program. Participating radiologists must undergo a specific training, perform a minimum
of 500 mammograms per year and agree to have their equipment inspected by a national agency. The goal
of these requirements is to assure a standard level of quality throughout the country. For women who accept
the invitation to the organized screening program, there is no charge for the mammogram.
Whether or not a woman receives a letter of invitation, she can screen “opportunistically” by obtaining a
prescription from a physician (usually a gynecologist or a general practitioner). In that case she would face
some out-of-pocket expenses. Currently, the amount that the public insurance system pays for a mammogram
(the “standard tariff”) is 66.42 euros. Women screening opportunistically would need to pay upfront, though
70 percent of the standard tariff would be reimbursed by the public health insurance system and part or all
of the remaining 30 percent would be reimbursed by private complementary insurance. Some radiologists are
allowed to charge more than the standard tariff. It is estimated that in 2008 the physician’s fee exceeded the
standard tariff for over 80 percent of the mammograms performed outside of the national program, with an
average extra-billing amount of 6 euros (Haute Autorité de Santé, 2011). This extra-billing is not reimbursed
8

by the public system, though part may be reimbursed by private complementary insurance, depending on
the contract. Mammograms done outside the organized program are not necessarily read by two radiologists
and need not be combined with a clinical breast exam.
Thus, there are multiple channels by which the organized screening program may increase mammography
utilization. First, there may be an educational or informational effect: the letter informs women about the
benefits of mammmography and providing information about where they can obtain a mammogram. Second,
the program lowers the financial cost of screening. Finally, the program may also increase utilization by
affecting perceptions of the quality of the program relative to opportunistic screening. A number of studies
find a positive relationship between the volume of mammograms that a physician interprets and accuracy,
both in terms of sensitivity and specificity (Esserman et al., 2002; Smith-Bindman et al., 2005). Other
research finds that double reading of mammograms significantly increases cancer detection rates (Thurfjell,
Lernevall and Taube, 1994; Kopans, 2000). A qualitative study of target-age women in France found that
those who had participated in the organized program viewed the second reading as an indicator of quality
(Kalecinski et al., 2015).8
With the program’s two-year invitation cycle, women in the target age range receive an invitation letter
20-22 months after their last mammogram received through the program—if they took up the previous
offer—or their last invitation letter—if they did not. In the absence of an organized program, there would
be no such follow-up for women who had obtained a mammogram by getting a prescription from their
doctor. Thus, an organized screening program may not only affect the likelihood that a woman ever receives
a mammogram, but the regularity with which she does. A recent study by Goldzahl and Jusot (2017) is
suggestive of such an effect. They find that women who participate in the organized screening program are
more likely than women who obtained a mammogram outside the program to receive a second mammogram
within two years.

3
3.1

Data and Methods
Data: The ESPS

Our analysis is based on data from the Enquete Santé et Protection Sociale (ESPS), a representative
population-based survey that has been conducted biennially since 1988 by the Institute de Recherche et
8 A study by Smith-Bindman et al. (2003) that compares screening mammography outcomes in the U.S. and the U.K. provides
indirect evidence of the quality advantages of an organized program. The U.K. has a national program that shares several of
the key features of the French program; the U.S. does not. Although cancer detection rates are similar in the two countries,
differences in recall rates imply a higher rate of false positives in the U.S.

9

Documentation en Economie de la Santé (IRDES). The ESPS is administered to a sample of French households randomly drawn from public health insurance files. The survey provides information on both the
household and its members collected using both interviews (telephone or face to face) and self-administered
questionnaires.9 We use data from the 2000, 2002, 2006, 2008 and 2010 surveys, which are the only years in
which the survey includes questions on mammography. The ESPS has a longitudinal component, whereby
half of the sample is interviewed every 4 years. Thus, some respondents were interviewed two or three times
in the five survey waves that we analyze. In our main analysis we treat the sample as a repeated cross-section.
As a sensitivity check, we also use the panel dimension to estimate models with individual fixed effects.
The timing of the surveys is well-suited for our study for several reasons. First, we have two periods of
data before and three periods of data after the implementation of the national screening program in 2004.
Second, all but one of the local programs that pre-dated the national program were in place by 2000.10 This
facilitates clear cross-sectional comparisons during the “pre” period and simplifies the implementation of
the difference-in-differences model to estimate the effect of the national program. Third, the fact that our
first year of “post” data is two years after the program was put in place nationally, means that nearly all
women in the target age group should have received a letter of invitation from the program by the time they
responded to the survey. Fourth, the four-year gap between our last year of data pre-dating the national
program and our first year of “post” data means that our estimates should not be affected by short-run
dynamic effects around the implementation year. That is, our estimates should not be subject to an upward
bias caused by women delaying a mammogram they otherwise would have had in 2003 in order to benefit
from the program or by a downward bias from a “learning curve” in the initial year of the program.
There are two timing issues that could potentially cause the effect of the local program to be different
in 2000 and 2002. The first is that 8 of the 32 early local programs were started in 1998 or later. So, while
the program was in place by 2000, some eligible women may not have received their invitation letter by the
time they completed the 2000 ESPS. The second issue is that some départements with local programs began
transitioning to the new protocol in 2001 and 2002. Both of these factors could result in the program having
a larger impact in 2002 than in 2000. However, we find no evidence of such a difference. Therefore, we pool
the data from 2000 and 2002, treating it as a single “pre” period relative to the introduction of the national
program.
As in previous studies on mammography use (Sabik and Bradley, 2016; Pletscher, 2017; Carrieri and
9 More
information
on
the
ESPS,
including
questionnaires
for
every
year,
is
available
at
http://www.irdes.fr/recherche/enquetes/esps-enquete-sur-la-sante-et-la-protection-sociale/actualites.html.
10 The exception was the Essonne, a département in the greater Paris region, which established its program in January 2000.

10

Wuebker, 2016; Bitler and Carpenter, 2016a,b) our dependent variables are based on self-reports. In the first
two waves, the ESPS asks women whether they ever had a mammogram. Possible answers are Yes, in the
past two years ; Yes, between two and three years ago ; Yes, more than three years ago ; No, never. We
create a binary variable that equals who screened in the past two years. In the next three waves, the ESPS
asks women whether they have ever had a mammogram. Those answering yes are then asked to give the
date of their last mammogram. Based on these responses, we create a binary variable that equals one for
women who have had a mammogram in the past two years and zero for all others, including both women
who have never had a mammogram and women whose last mammogram was more than two years earlier.
An obvious limitation to the use of this type of self-report is that they may be subject to recall bias. In
particular, women may misremember the date of their last mammogram and inaccurately place it inside or
outside the two-year window. Although the mammography question is asked of all female respondents over
age 15, mammography rates for younger women are extremely low. Therefore, we limit our main analysis
sample to women age 35 and older.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the full sample and for women living in départements with and
without a local organized screening program respectively in the pre and post-period. (The last column
presents p-values for the difference in means between the two groups.) As we describe below, our estimate
of the effect of the local program relies on a cross-sectional comparison of women in départements with and
without such programs. Thus, the validity of our research design relies on the assumption that women in
départements without a local program are good controls for women in départements with a program. The
summary statistics support this assumption. In the pre-period, the two subsamples, which represent 45 and
55 percent of the full sample, respectively, are remarkably similar in terms of observable characteristics. The
mean age is 54.4 years old in départements that had an organized screening program and 55.1 years old in
those that did not. In each group, just under 5 percent of women report their health as poor, 17 percent of
women report their health as fair, and 16 percent say they are in excellent health. Between 13 and 14 percent
of women in each type of département are current smokers. The percentage with private complementary
health insurance—which has been shown to be positively correlated with the utilization of outpatient care
(Buchmueller et al., 2004)—is very similar (87.1 percent in départements with a local program, 88.2 percent
in those without) as is the distribution of income.
The one notable difference is that départements with local programs tend to be less rural. Despite this,
there is not a meaningful difference in the supply of services, as measured by the density of radiologists per
capita. The two groups were also quite similar in terms of the breast cancer mortality rate for the years 1980

11

to 1988: in the average département with a local program the rate was 17.3 deaths per 100,000 population
compared to 16.5 per 100,000 in the average département without a local program.11

3.2

Empirical Strategy

The quasi-experimental variation in our data allows for several different estimates of the effect of organized
breast cancer screening programs on mammography use. Let Ttk be the screening rate for women in the
target age range (50 to 74), and Ctk be the screening rate for women outside this age range, i.e., the “control”
group. The superscript k indexes two types of départements: those with (L) and without (N ) local screening
programs. The subscript t indexes two time periods. The “pre” period (t=0) consists of the years 2000 and
2002, before the national program was established; the “post” period (t=1) consists of data from 2006 to
2010, when the national program was in place in all départements.
Using this notation, a simple cross-sectional estimate of the average effect of the pre-existing local programs can be obtained by comparing the screening rates for the target age group in the two types of
départements:

∆L = T0L − T0N .

(1)

As just noted, départements with and without local programs are quite similar in terms of observable
characteristics. However, unobserved département level factors remain a potential source of bias. One can
imagine the bias going in either directions. On one hand, the “first mover” départements may be those that
already had good referral networks and radiologists with a strong orientation toward population screening.
On the other hand, some départements may have established organized programs in response to low rates of
opportunistic screening. If these other factors have the same effect on women within and outside the target
age range, this potential bias can be eliminated by using a cross-sectional difference-in-differences estimator:

∆∆L = (T0L − T0N ) − (C0L − C0N ).

(2)

The effect of the national program can be estimated by calculating changes in screening rates for target
group women who were not exposed to the earlier local programs, using changes for control group women
in the same départements to account for the effect of other factors that may have caused screening rates to
11 We use an averaged mortality rate data from the year 1980 to 1988. This is before local programs implementation. The
reason is that we wanted to control for potential pre-local program implementation mortality differences between départements
in case those differences explain why some départements launched a local program or not. GP and radiologist density rates
were collected for the years 1998 to 2008 which is contemporaneously with surveys. The data comes from the Eco-Santé website

12

change over time. This difference-in-difference estimate can be calculated as

∆∆N = (T1N − T0N ) − (C1N − C0N ).

(3)

Given that the national program put in place in 2004 is stronger in several respects than the pre-existing
local programs, it is of interest to test whether screening rates increased in those areas that had local
programs in place in the “pre” period. The difference-in-difference estimate

∆∆LN = (T1L − T0L ) − (C1L − C0L )

(4)

captures the combined effect of those specific elements of the national program that differ from the local
programs: the use of a 2-year rather than 3-year invitation cycle, the extension of program eligibility to age
74 rather than 69, two images per breast are taken instead of one, and the fact that women receive a clinical
exam in addition to a mammogram.
Because we have no data from years before the local programs were established, we cannot directly
estimate the full effect of the national program in these départements. However, we can construct an
estimate of that effect by summing the cross-sectional difference-in-differences estimate of the effect of the
local program, ∆L , with our estimate of the effect of moving from the local program to the national program
∆∆LN . Note that comparing this measure with our direct estimate of the effect of the national program,
∆N , provides a useful test of the assumption that the two types of départements are similar, apart from when
they implemented their programs. If this assumption holds, the two estimates of the effect of the national
program should be similar.
These various estimates can be obtained from the following regression estimated on pooled data:

y = α1 Local + α2 T arget + α3 P ost + β1 Local × T arget + β2 Local × P ost + β3 T arget × P ost
+ γLocal × T arget × P ost + X 0 θ + 

(5)

In this equation Local is an indicator variable that equals one for women who live in a département that
had a local screening program before 2004, Target is an indicator for women between the ages of 50 and
74, the indicator Post equals one for years after 2004, and X is a vector of control variables. The various
estimates are then:

13

3.3

Effect of local program:

∆∆L =

β1

Effect of national program:

∆∆N =

β3

Effect of transition from local to national program:

∆∆LN =

β3 + γ.

Testing for Parallel Trends

Our strategy for estimating the effect of the national program relies on the assumption that the post-2004
experience of women outside the target age range represents an appropriate counterfactual for women that
were targeted by the program. A standard way to test that assumption is to examine whether outcomes for
the two groups were trending similarly before the policy was put in place. The fact that we have only two
years of data from the pre-period limits our ability to analyze pre-trends. Nonetheless, it is informative to
test for differences in changes in mammography utilization between 2000 and 2002. A finding that utilization
among target age women was already increasing relative to the control group before the national program
was in place would suggest that our difference-in-differences estimates may overstate the program’s effect.
Appendix Table A.1 presents the change in mammography utilization between 2000 and 2002 for the four
categories of women defined by target group status and departement type. We see that for each category,
there was no significant change in utilization over this period. The most important comparison is between
treatments and controls in departements without a pre-existing program, since these are the observations
upon which our main estimates of the national program are based. Within these departements, the screening
rate fell by a statistically insignificant one percentage point for women in the target age range (p-value =
0.535) and increased by a statistically insignificant 0.3 percentage points for the control group (p-value =
0.881). The difference between these two estimates is also not significantly different from zero (p-value =
0.741). While estimates based on only two years of data from the ”pre” period do not provide definitive
evidence of parallel trends, these null results along with several other findings discussed below do provide
support for our empirical strategy.

4
4.1

Results
Unadjusted Difference-in-Differences Estimates

Table 2 presents the percentage of women who had a mammogram in the past two years tabulated by
membership to the target age group of 50 to 74 years old, residence in a département with a local program,

14

and the years before or after the implementation of the national program. These figures can be used to
calculate the various estimates just described.
Panel A reports data from the “pre” period (2000 and 2002). The first row pertains to women who are
outside the target age range and therefore not eligible for organized screening regardless of where they live. A
comparison of mammography rates for this group in the two types of départements provides information on
whether there are other factors affecting mammography that are correlated with the existence of a program.
The fact that the difference is not statistically significant, suggests that other confounding factors are not
a concern. As a result, when we compare mammography rates across département types for women in the
target group, the simple difference, ∆L , and the difference-in-differences estimate of the program effect, ∆∆L
are essentially identical. Both imply that the local programs raised mammography rates among women in
the target age range by roughly 6 percentage points, or by about 14 percent of the rate in départements
without an organized screening program.
Panel B presents screening rates after the national program was in effect. The comparisons across
département types again suggest a strong similarity between those with and without an organized screening
program in place before 2004. As in the earlier period, there is no statistically significant difference between
the two types of départements among women outside of target age range. The results for women in the
target age range indicate that the implementation of the national screening program eliminated the gap in
screening rates between départements with and without local program. In the “post” period, 55.3 percent
of women in départements with an already established local program and 56.5 of women who were not
exposed to organized screening prior to 2004. The 1.2 percentage point difference between these two rates is
not statistically significant. The fact that screening rates for target group women were essentially identical
when the policy environment was the same provides additional support for interpreting the cross-sectional
difference in the pre-period as representing the effect of the local programs.
The effect of implementing the national program can be estimated based on changes over time, which
are reported in Panel C of the table. Again, it is informative to note the differences that are not statistically
significant. In both types of départements we see that there was no significant change for women outside
the targeted age range. This suggests that there were not other contemporaneous factors, such as a general
increase in breast cancer awareness or a change in clinical guidelines that might have caused screening to
increase over time.
In contrast to this lack of a trend for women who were ineligible for organized screening, we see significant
changes for women who were eligible. For women in the target group who were not previously exposed to

15

a local organized screening program (column 1), the percentage with a mammogram in the past two years
increased by 13.8 percentage points, a 32 percent effect relative to the baseline rate. Since there was no
significant change for women outside the target group, the difference-in-differences estimate of the effect
of the program is essentially identical. The fact that this estimated effect is substantially larger than the
estimated effect of the local programs suggests that the ways in which the national program strengthened
the local programs had a meaningful effect. This conclusion is reinforced by the finding that screening rates
increased over time in départements where there was already a local organized screening program in place.
The difference-in-differences estimate of the effect of this change is 6.9 percentage points (∆∆LN = 0.063 +
0.006 = 0.069).

4.2

Basic Regression Results

In Table 3 we report key results from linear probability regressions that generate the same set of estimates.
In the upper panel of the table we report estimated coefficients and robust standard errors (clustered by
département). In the lower part of the table, we present the three difference-in-differences estimates of
interest. The model reported in column 1 includes no covariates and therefore corresponds directly to
the cross-tab results in Table 2. The specifications in column 2 adds the following covariates: age, age
squared, age cubed, quintiles of household income, self-reported health status (5 categories), education (5
categories), current or former occupation (7 categories), complementary health insurance status (3 categories)
and indicator variables for smoking, having at least one chronic health condition, living in a rural area and
living in the greater Paris region. We also control for radiologist density, GP density and the rate of mortality
from breast cancer by département.
For the most part, including covariates does not have a major impact on the coefficients on the variables
of interest. One important exception is the coefficient on the indicator for being in the target group, which
is large and statistically significant in column 1 (0.177, p=0.000) and is a precisely estimated zero in the
adjusted model (p=0.999). This result provides support for our difference-in-differences approach as it
indicates that in the absence of an organized program there is not a discrete change in the probability of
having a recent mammogram associated with turning 50. In other words, our estimates of the effect of
organized screening are not capturing the effect of other factors, such as age-based clinical guidelines.
The full regression results are reported in Appendix Table A.2. In addition to the positive effect of age,
the estimated coefficients on the other control variables are consistent with results from previous studies on

16

the determinants of mammography use.12 Women with private complementary insurance are more likely
to have a recent mammogram than women who either have no complementary coverage or are covered by
means-tested public insurance. Current smokers are significantly less likely than non-smokers to have had
a recent mammogram, a result that may reflect preferences regarding risk and preventive medical care.
There appears to be an inverse U-shaped relationship with self-reported health. The probability of having a
mammogram in the past two years is highest for women who report their health as good and lower for those
who say it is fair, poor or excellent. The results for education and income indicate a positive gradient with
respect to socioeconomic status, an issue to which we return below.
Turning to the coefficients that represent the effect of organized screening program, we see that the
adjusted differences-in-differences estimates are qualitatively similar to those from the unadjusted model.
According to the model reported in column 2, the local programs raised the percentage of target aged women
having a mammogram in the past two years by 6.6 percentage points. Modifying those programs to conform
with the new national protocols and standards raised the two-year mammography rate by an additional
4.2 percentage points. Combining these two estimates implies that the national program had the effect of
raising the mammography rate by 10.8 percentage points. This is only slightly smaller than the differencein-differences estimate of the effect of the national program that is identified by changes in départements
that did not previously have an organized program (∆∆N =.122).
Columns 3 and 4 report results a different outcome: a binary variable that equals one if a woman has
ever had a mammogram and zero otherwise. The results from the model with covariates (column 4) imply
that both the local and national programs raised the probability of every having a mammogram by between
3 and 4 percentage points. These estimates are quite similar to the effects that Pletscher (2017) finds in his
evaluation of organized breast cancer screening in Switzerland. The comparison between the two outcomes
is informative as to the margins on which organized screening programs operate. The fact that we find a
significant effect on ever having a mammogram but larger effects on the probability of screening in the past
two years suggests that these programs have important effects on both initiation and the regularity with
which women screen.

4.3

Alternative Samples

In Table 4, we report key results from models using alternative estimation samples. For ease of comparison,
the covariate-adjusted results from column 2 of Table 3 are presented again in the first row. In row 2 we
12 Schueler, Chu and Smith-Bindman (2008) provide a comprehensive review of studies using data from the U.S. For a recent
analysis of the correlates of mammography use in France, see Sicsic and Franc (2014) and Goldzahl and Jusot (2017).

17

exploit the limited longitudinal feature of the ESPS data by limiting the sample to respondents who appear
more than once in the data and estimating a model with individual fixed effects. The estimated program
effects from this model are comparable to our main estimates.
The next three rows illustrate the impact of changing the age criteria used to form the estimation sample
or the target group. Because very young and very old women may not be good controls for women in the
target age range, in row 3 we limit the sample to women between the ages of 40 and 80. In row 4, the
sample includes all women 35 and older with the exception of those who are 50 or 51 at the time of the
survey. The reason for dropping women right above the lower age threshold is that while they are eligible
for the program, some may have not yet received an invitation letter. These modifications also do not have
a material impact on the estimates.
A particular feature of our research design is that the control group combines women who are too young
to participate in the program and women who are too old. These two groups are not only quite different
in terms of their demand for mammography in the absence of the program, but also in the extent to which
their behavior may be influenced by the program. Women under the age of 50 are a “cleaner” control group
as they should have never received a letter inviting them to have a mammogram through the program. In
contrast, some women above the age of 74 will have participated in the program, especially in the later years.
Additionally, to the extent that their recall is not perfect, some women who received a mammogram through
the program, say, three or four years ago, may mistakenly say that they had one in the past two years. Thus,
we would expect to find stronger effects of the program if we compare women in the target group only to
those under age 50 than if we compare them to women over age 74. Consistent with this expectation, our
estimates of ∆∆L and ∆∆N are slightly larger than the corresponding estimates for the full sample, though
again the difference is small.

4.4

Accounting for Heterogeneous Effects by Age

Even though the covariate-adjusted models reported in Table 3 control flexibly for the main effect of age,
they restrict the impact of organized screening to be the same for all women in the target groups. In Figure
2 and Table 5 we present analyses that allow the effect of the program to vary with age. We stratify the
analysis by département type to account for baseline differences in policy. The figure uses two-year bins;
in the regression we interact the indicator variable for the “post” period with indicators for five-year age
categories.
The results for départements without a pre-existing local program (panel A of the figure and column 1 of

18

the table) provide the clearest evidence of the impact of the national program. When there was no organized
screening program in place, mammography rates increased with age up to age 60 and declined thereafter.
A comparison of the age profiles for the “pre” and “post” periods indicates that the implementation of the
national program had no effect on mammography rates for women under the age of 50. This is visually
apparent from the figure and can be seen by the fact that the coefficient on “post”, which represents the
change over time for 35 to 40 year olds and the interaction of that variable and indicators for the next two
age categories (40-45, 45-49) are all insignificantly different from zero. Again, these null results for women
who were just below the program’s age eligibility threshold suggest that there is little reason to worry about
unobservable shocks that might have affected mammography rates in France during this period.
The results indicate that the implementation of the screening program increased mammography rates
for all age groups within the 50 to 74 year-old target range, but the effect was not uniform. The percentage
of women between the ages of 50 and 54 having a mammogram in the past two years increased by just
under 9 percentage points after the national screening program was established. After the program was in
place, mammography rates increased slightly up until around age 70 and then began to decline thereafter.
Because mammography rates peaked at an earlier age during the “pre” period, the implied effect of the
program is larger for women in their 60s and 70s than women in their 50s. The probability of having a
recent mammogram increased by roughly 20 percentage points for women in their 60s and by 29 percentage
points for women between 70 and 74. This pattern provides further evidence suggesting that an important
way that the program increased screening was by affecting the regularity of mammography use among women
in the target age range.
There was also a statistically significant increase among women between the ages of 75 and 79, who
are just outside the target age range. Given that the dependent variable equals one for women who had a
mammogram in the past two years, many of these women may have participated in the national screening
program just before aging out of the target group. Indeed, a supplementary analysis suggests that this is the
case. We ran separate regressions for 75–79 year-olds, allowing the effect to differ between 75–76 year-olds,
who would have been eligible for the organized program during the two year look-back period, and 77–79
year-olds, who would not have been. For the younger group, the probability of having a recent mammogram
increased by 25 percentage points, which is comparable to the effect for 70–74-year olds. The increase
was roughly half as large for 77–79 year-olds, though it was still statistically significant (0.13, p=0.005).
This effect for women just above the upper age threshold may reflect a true spillover effect. For example,
after being exposed to the organized program women may continue to have a strong demand for screening

19

even after they age out of the program. Alternatively, it could reflect measurement error: women may be
understating the time since their last mammogram.
In départements with pre-existing local programs, the largest changes were for women between the ages
of 70 and 74, who are covered by the new protocol but were outside the old protocol’s target age range. For
women in their 50s and early 60s, the change over time is much smaller and is not statistically significant.
This suggest that the expansion of the target range is a major reason for the observed difference between
the national program and the earlier local programs.

4.5

Impacts on Disparities in Screening

Both the basic difference-in-differences results and the models allowing for heterogeneous effects by age
indicate that France’s national breast cancer screening program significantly increased the percentage of
women receiving mammograms. We now turn to the question of whether organized screening has also
reduced socioeconomic disparities in mammography utilization. Table 6 presents utilization rates tabulated
by education and income categories. Because we are interested in how utilization changed among affected
women after the national program was implemented, we focus on women in the target age range of 50 to
74 years old. To account for differences in baseline conditions, we present separate results for départements
with and without pre-existing local programs.13
Looking first at départements without pre-existing local programs, we see that before the national program was established there were strong gradients with respect to education and income. Women with a
middle school education were 16 percentage points more likely to report having had a mammogram in the
past 2 years than women with a primary school education or less. The utilization rate is higher still for women
with high school educations and those with university degrees. The ratio between the rate for the highest
education category to the rate for the lowest category was 1.79. The percentage of women with a recent
mammogram also increased monotonically with income, with a slightly larger ratio between the highest and
lowest quintiles. After the national program was put in place, mammography rates in those départements
increased for all education and income categories, though the change was generally larger at the lower ends
of each distribution. The changes were 18.3 and 20.9 percentage points for the lowest education and income
categories, respectively, compared to just over 6 percentage points for the highest categories. As a result of
13 Some studies in the literature on health disparities focus on unadjusted differences among groups, while others condition
on proxies for health need and preferences as well as, in some cases, other observable characteristics. Because we are interested
in overall differences in mammography use among targeted women, we focus on unadjusted differences across education and
income groups. For a useful discussion of methodological issues concerning the measurement and analysis of health-related
disparities, see Cook, McGuire and Zaslavsky (2012).

20

this differential effect, the ratio between the top and bottom income quintiles fell from 1.99 to 1.35.
In départements with pre-existing local programs, the baseline gradients were less steep, which suggests
that organized screening had already reduced socioeconomic disparities there. For those areas, we also see
greater increases over time for women in lower education categories, though, as would be expected, the
differences were less pronounced than what we observe for départements that went from having no program
to implementing the national program. In the “post” period, the ratio of the mammography rates for the
top and bottom education category and income categories were similar in the two types of départements.
The 2006 and 2008 ESPS surveys asked not only whether a woman had a mammogram in recent years,
but those who had a mammogram were asked whether or not they received it through the organized program.
In the last column of Table 6 we present the percentage of women in each education or income category that
participated in the program. For these calculations, the sample is limited to women who had a mammogram
in the past 2 years. Because the overall utilization rate and the gradients are so similar across département
types, we pool départements with and without pre-existing local programs. The results indicate that a strong
negative relationship between socioeconomic status and the decision to obtain a mammogram through the
organized program. Seventy percent of women with a primary education or less who had a mammogram
in the past two years received it through the program, compared to 53 percent of women with at least a
university degree. Similarly, the percentage using the program ranged from 71.5 percent in the lowest income
quintile to 55.8 percent in the highest. Multiplying these percentages by the mammography rates for the post
period, gives the percentage of women in each group participating in the program. This calculation indicates
that program participation was quite similar across groups and that the gradients that remain are driven
by the fact that higher SES women are more likely to go outside the program to receive a mammogram.
Overall, the results in Table 6 suggest that the organized program had the effect of reducing disparities in
mammography use.
The finding that the organized program had a larger impact on lower SES women is consistent with results
found by Carrieri and Wuebker (2016) and not with those of Pletscher (2017). One possible explanation for
this is Pletscher (2017) tests for effects on the probability of ever having a mammogram, which we know is
less sensitive to the policy. In Table 7 we replicate the analysis of Table 6 using this outcome. Here too,
we see that screening increased most for women in the lowest education and income categories, causing the
ratio of screening rates for the highest and lowest categories to decline. After 2004, women in the highest
income category were only 9 percent more likely to have ever had a mammogram than women in the lowest
income category. As with our main outcome variable, the gradients in the “post” period are essentially the

21

same in the two types of départements. Thus, it appears that France’s organized screening program reduced
socioeconomic disparities in mammography initiation.

5

Discussion and Conclusion

Our results provide strong evidence that French women who were eligible for a publicly funded organized
screening program were significantly more likely to have had a recent mammogram than women who were
not eligible. The fact that our estimates of the impact of the French program are similar to those found
for other European countries (Carrieri and Wuebker, 2016; Pletscher, 2017) strengthens the conclusion that
organized screening programs are successful in increasing the percentage of women obtaining a mammogram.
As with any difference-in-differences analysis, the interpretation of our results as causal effects depends
importantly on untestable assumptions about the comparability of treatment and control groups. In our
case, there are two critical comparisons, one that is cross-sectional and one related to changes over time.
Our cross-sectional estimates of the effect of the local programs that existed before 2004 relies on the
assumption that women in departements without local programs are good controls for women in departements
with such programs. Several results support this assumption. First, women in the two types of départements
are remarkably similar in observable demographic, economic and health characteristics. Second, in the years
2000 and 2002, differences in mammography use are observed only for women in the target age range.
Outside this age group, we observe no significant difference in screening rates. Third, after 2004, when a
uniform policy was in place throughout France, we see no difference in mammography utilization between
départements that did and did not have local programs prior to 2004. Taken together, these factors suggest
that the roughly 6 percentage point difference in screening rates that we observe in that earlier period
represents the causal effect of the local programs that existed in some départements but not others.
Our estimate of the effect of the national program is identified by comparing changes over time for women
within and outside the target age range. Several factors support the validity of this identification strategy
as well. We see no trend in mammography rates for women in either the target or control group between
2000 and 2002. Moreover, after 2004 screening rates remained constant for the control group, suggesting the
non-importance of secular trends in breast cancer awareness, technology diffusion or other factors affecting
clinical practice. For the target group, however, there is a large and significant increase in screening after the
national program was put in place. Our preferred estimate, based on a regression model that conditions on
individual demographic, economic and health characteristics implies that the national program led to a 12

22

percentage point increase in the screening rate, a 29 percent effect relative to the baseline mean. Regression
models that allow for heterogeneous effects related to age provide further evidence that the increases in
mammography utilization occurred only for women age 50 or older.
One important difference between our study and that earlier research is that we test for heterogeneous
effects related to age. Interestingly, we find the largest effects for women in their mid-60s, who are in the
middle of the target age range. This result combined with the fact that we find weaker effects on the
probability on the probability of ever having a mammogram suggest that the most important effect of the
program may not be on mammography initiation, but rather on the regularity of screening.
By eliminating financial barriers and increasing awareness of the importance of screening, organized
programs have the potential to reduce socioeconomic disparities in cancer screening. Consistent with other
research on France and other European countries, in the years prior to the introduction of the national
program, we observe significant positive gradients in mammography use with respect to education and
income among target age women. The implementation of the national program increased mammography
rates for women of all education and income levels. However, because the increases were greater for women
of lower socioeconomic status, the policy had the effect of reducing disparities in mammography utilization.
While our results suggest that France’s organized breast cancer screening program was successful at
increasing mammography use, the ultimate goal of any such program it to reduce mortality through the timely
detection of treatable tumors. Although the benefits of mammography have long been taken as given, the
strongest empirical evidence comes from randomized clinical trials, not population-based screening programs.
The extent to which the higher rates of mammography use generated by this program led to reductions in
mortality is an empirical question that merits further research.

23

References
Adams, E Kathleen, Curtis S Florence, Kenneth E Thorpe, Edmund R Becker, and Peter J Joski. 2003. “Preventive care: female cancer screening, 1996–2000.” American journal of preventive
medicine, 25(4): 301–307.
Adams, E Kathleen, Nancy Breen, and Peter J Joski. 2007. “Impact of the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program on mammography and Pap test utilization among white, Hispanic,
and African American women: 1996–2000.” Cancer, 109(S2): 348–358.
Altobelli, E, and A Lattanzi. 2014. “Breast cancer in European Union: An update of screening programmes as of March 2014 (Review).” International journal of oncology, 45(5): 1785–1792.
Bitler, Marianne P, and Christopher S Carpenter. 2016a. “Health insurance mandates, mammography, and breast cancer diagnoses.” American Economic Journal–Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Bitler, Marianne P, and Christopher S Carpenter. 2016b. “New Evidence on the Effects of the
National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program.” Vanderbilt University.
Buchmueller, Thomas C, Agnès Couffinhal, Michel Grignon, and Marc Perronnin. 2004. “Access
to physician services: does supplemental insurance matter? Evidence from France.” Health economics,
13(7): 669–687.
Busch, Susan H, and Noelia Duchovny. 2005. “Family coverage expansions: impact on insurance
coverage and health care utilization of parents.” Journal of health economics, 24(5): 876–890.
Carrieri, Vincenzo, and Ansgar Wubker. 2013. “Assessing inequalities in preventive care use in Europe.” Health policy, 113(3): 247–257.
Carrieri, Vincenzo, and Ansgar Wuebker. 2016. “Quasi-Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Health
Information on Preventive Behaviour in Europe.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 78(6): 765–
791.
Cook, Benjamin Lê, Thomas G McGuire, and Alan M Zaslavsky. 2012. “Measuring racial/ethnic
disparities in health care: methods and practical issues.” Health services research, 47(3pt2): 1232–1254.
Cutler, David M. 2008. “Are we finally winning the war on cancer?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
22(4): 3–26.
24

Devaux, Marion. 2015. “Income-related inequalities and inequities in health care services utilisation in 18
selected OECD countries.” The European Journal of Health Economics, 16(1): 21–33.
Duffy, S, and E Paci. 2012. “Bénéfices et risques du dépistage du cancer du sein par mammographie.”
Bulletin épidémiologique hebdomadaire, 35: 406–411.
Espinas, Josep A, Luisa Aliste, Esteve Fernandez, Josep M Argimon, Ricard Tresserras, and
Josep M Borras. 2011. “Narrowing the equity gap: the impact of organized versus opportunistic cancer
screening in Catalonia (Spain).” Journal of medical screening, 18(2): 87–90.
Esserman, Laura, Helen Cowley, Carey Eberle, Alastair Kirkpatrick, Sophia Chang, Kevin
Berbaum, and Alastair Gale. 2002. “Improving the accuracy of mammography: volume and outcome
relationships.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 94(5): 369–375.
Ferlay, Jacques, Isabelle Soerjomataram, Rajesh Dikshit, Sultan Eser, Colin Mathers, Marise
Rebelo, Donald Maxwell Parkin, David Forman, and Freddie Bray. 2015. “Cancer incidence and
mortality worldwide: sources, methods and major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012.” International journal
of cancer, 136(5): E359–E386.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker. 2012. “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
Evidence from the First Year*.” The Quarterly journal of economics, 127(3): 1057–1106.
Goldman, Dana, and Darius Lakdawalla. 2001. “Understanding health disparities across education
groups.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldzahl, Léontine, and Florence Jusot. 2017. “Determinants of breast cancer screening regularity in
France.” Revue française d’économie, 31(4): 109–152.
Gøtzsche, Peter C, and Margrethe Nielsen. 2009. “Screening for breast cancer with mammography.”
Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 4(1).
Haute Autorité de Santé. 2011. “La participation au dépistage du cancer du sein des femmes de 50 à 74
ans en France Situation actuelle et perspectives d’évolution.”
Jusot, Florence, Zeynep Or, and Nicolas Sirven. 2012. “Variations in preventive care utilisation in
Europe.” European Journal of Ageing, 9(1): 15–25.

25

Kalecinski, Julie, Véronique Régnier-Denois, Samiratou Ouédraogo, Tienhan Sandrine
Dabakuyo-Yonli, Agnès Dumas, Patrick Arveux, and Franck Chauvin. 2015. “Dépistage organisé
ou individuel du cancer du sein? Attitudes et représentations des femmes.” Santé Publique, 27(2): 213–220.
Katz, Steven J, and Timothy P Hofer. 1994. “Socioeconomic disparities in preventive care persist
despite universal coverage: breast and cervical cancer screening in Ontario and the United States.” Jama,
272(7): 530–534.
Katz, Steven J, Judith K Zemencuk, and Timothy P Hofer. 2000. “Breast cancer screening in the
United States and Canada, 1994: socioeconomic gradients persist.” American Journal of Public Health,
90(5): 799.
Keating, Nancy L, Elena M Kouri, Yulei He, Dee W West, and Eric P Winer. 2013. “Effect
of Massachusetts health insurance reform on mammography use and breast cancer stage at diagnosis.”
Cancer, 119(2): 250–258.
Kolstad, Jonathan T, and Amanda E Kowalski. 2012. “The impact of health care reform on hospital
and preventive care: evidence from Massachusetts.” Journal of Public Economics, 96(11): 909–929.
Kopans, Daniel B. 2000. “Double reading.” Radiologic Clinics of North America, 38(4): 719–724.
Lantz, Paula M, Mahasin Mujahid, Kendra Schwartz, Nancy K Janz, Angela Fagerlin, Barbara
Salem, Lihua Liu, Dennis Deapen, and Steven J Katz. 2006. “The influence of race, ethnicity, and
individual socioeconomic factors on breast cancer stage at diagnosis.” American Journal of Public Health,
96(12): 2173–2178.
Marmot, MG, DG Altman, DA Cameron, JA Dewar, SG Thompson, M Wilcox, et al. 2012. “The
benefits and harms of breast cancer screening: an independent review.” The Lancet, 380(9855): 1778–1786.
McMorrow, Stacey, Genevieve M Kenney, and Dana Goin. 2014. “Determinants of receipt of recommended preventive services: implications for the Affordable Care Act.” American journal of public health,
104(12): 2392–2399.
Perry, N, M Broeders, C De Wolf, S Tornberg, R Holland, and L Von Karsa. 2008. “European
guidelines for quality assurance in breast cancer screening and diagnosis.” Annals of Oncology, 19(4): 614–
622.

26

Pletscher, Mark. 2017. “The effects of organized screening programs on the demand for mammography in
Switzerland.” The European Journal of Health Economics, 18(5): 649–665.
Pruitt, Sandi L, Matthew J Shim, Patricia Dolan Mullen, Sally W Vernon, and Benjamin C
Amick. 2009. “Association of area socioeconomic status and breast, cervical, and colorectal cancer screening: a systematic review.” Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention Biomarkers, 18(10): 2579–2599.
Puddu, Marina, Stefaan Demarest, and Jean Tafforeau. 2009. “Does a national screening programme
reduce socioeconomic inequalities in mammography use?” International journal of public health, 54(2): 61–
68.
Sabatino, Susan A, Ralph J Coates, Robert J Uhler, Nancy Breen, Florence Tangka, and
Kate M Shaw. 2008. “Disparities in mammography use among US women aged 40–64 years, by race,
ethnicity, income, and health insurance status, 1993 and 2005.” Medical care, 46(7): 692–700.
Sabik, Lindsay M, and Cathy J Bradley. 2016. “The Impact of Near-Universal Insurance Coverage on
Breast and Cervical Cancer Screening: Evidence from Massachusetts.” Health economics, 25(4): 391–407.
Schueler, Kristin M, Philip W Chu, and Rebecca Smith-Bindman. 2008. “Factors associated with
mammography utilization: a systematic quantitative review of the literature.” Journal of women’s health,
17(9): 1477–1498.
Séradour, B. 2010. “Breast cancer screening in France: an overview in 2009.” La Revue du praticien,
60(2): 191–199.
Sicsic, Jonathan, and Carine Franc. 2014. “Obstacles to the uptake of breast, cervical, and colorectal
cancer screenings: what remains to be achieved by French national programmes?” BMC health services
research, 14(1): 465.
Siegel, Rebecca L, Kimberly D Miller, and Ahmedin Jemal. 2016. “Cancer statistics, 2016.” CA: a
cancer journal for clinicians, 66(1): 7–30.
Smith-Bindman, Rebecca, Philip Chu, Diana L Miglioretti, Chris Quale, Robert D Rosenberg,
Gary Cutter, Berta Geller, Peter Bacchetti, Edward A Sickles, and Karla Kerlikowske. 2005.
“Physician predictors of mammographic accuracy.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 97(5): 358–
367.

27

Smith-Bindman, Rebecca, Philip W Chu, Diana L Miglioretti, Edward A Sickles, Roger
Blanks, Rachel Ballard-Barbash, Janet K Bobo, Nancy C Lee, Matthew G Wallis, Julietta Patnick, et al. 2003. “Comparison of screening mammography in the United States and the United
Kingdom.” Jama, 290(16): 2129–2137.
Smith, Robert A. 2003. “Iarc handbooks of cancer prevention, volume 7: Breast cancer screening.” Breast
Cancer Res, 5(4): 216–7.
Thurfjell, Erik L, K Anders Lernevall, and AA Taube. 1994. “Benefit of independent double reading
in a population-based mammography screening program.” Radiology, 191(1): 241–244.
Torre, Lindsey A, Freddie Bray, Rebecca L Siegel, Jacques Ferlay, Joannie Lortet-Tieulent, and
Ahmedin Jemal. 2015. “Global cancer statistics, 2012.” CA: a cancer journal for clinicians, 65(2): 87–
108.

28

100 km
60 mi
© Daniel Dalet

Figure 1: Implementation of the local and national programs
a The

a

grey areas represent the départements that adopted a local program before 2004.

29

Figure 2: The Percentage of Women with a Mammogram in the Past 2 Years by Age
30

Table 1: Summary Statistics: Full ESPS Sample, 2000-2010

Mammogram in the past 2 yrs
Ever had a mammogram
Poor health
Fair health
Good health
Excellent health
Health unknown

0.378
0.531
0.046
0.168
0.310
0.160
0.297

0.487
0.499
0.194
0.362
0.462
0.382
0.454

Depts without a
local program
0.372
0.483
0.526
0.499
0.045
0.207
0.167
0.373
0.308
0.462
0.163
0.369
0.298
0.457

Private compl. insurance
Public compl. insurance
No compl. insurance
Unknown
Has long-term condition
Smoker
Education: Primary or less
Education: Middle school
Education: High school
Education: University
Education: Other

0.877
0.054
0.008
0.009
0.157
0.137
0.303
0.271
0.192
0.194
0.040

0.328
0.226
0.091
0.097
0.363
0.344
0.459
0.444
0.394
0.396
0.195

0.882
0.051
0.009
0.008
0.156
0.140
0.301
0.267
0.196
0.200
0.037

0.323
0.219
0.097
0.091
0.363
0.347
0.459
0.442
0.397
0.400
0.189

0.871
0.058
0.010
0.008
0.157
0.134
0.305
0.276
0.188
0.188
0.043

0.335
0.235
0.097
0.091
0.364
0.341
0.461
0.447
0.391
0.391
0.202

0.005
0.003
0.979
0.866
0.963
0.155
0.391
0.083
0.111
0.012
0.018

Occupation:
Occupation:
Occupation:
Occupation:
Occupation:
Occupation:
Occupation:

0.047
0.048
0.082
0.176
0.431
0.163
0.053

0.212
0.214
0.274
0.381
0.495
0.369
0.224

0.057
0.053
0.083
0.181
0.416
0.162
0.049

0.231
0.223
0.276
0.385
0.493
0.368
0.215

0.035
0.043
0.080
0.170
0.449
0.165
0.058

0.185
0.202
0.271
0.376
0.497
0.371
0.234

0.000
0.000
0.350
0.024
0.000
0.544
0.001

0.106
0.123
0.132
0.171
0.182
0.286

0.308
0.329
0.338
0.376
0.386
0.452

0.108
0.125
0.134
0.167
0.179
0.287

0.311
0.331
0.341
0.373
0.384
0.452

0.104
0.121
0.129
0.176
0.185
0.285

0.305
0.327
0.335
0.381
0.389
0.451

0.229
0.313
0.156
0.027
0.168
0.689

0.293
0.124
54.779
9.053
85.202
16.96
0.179
0.184
0.204
0.213
0.219
29,296

0.455
0.330
13.600
2.362
11.480
2.192
0.384
0.387
0.403
0.410
0.414

0.347
0.113
55.095
8.900
85.374
17.30
0.180
0.184
0.207
0.215
0.214
16,059

0.476
0.317
13.805
2.450
12.190
2.099
0.384
0.388
0.405
0.411
0.410

0.227
0.137
54.395
9.239
84.990
16.54
0.178
0.184
0.202
0.211
0.226
13,237

0.419
0.344
13.337
2.238
10.560
2.23
0.383
0.387
0.401
0.408
0.418

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.004
0.000
0.670
0.846
0.299
0.372
0.013

All

Income:
Income:
Income:
Income:
Income:
Income:

Farmer
Craftsman
Executive
Intermediate occup.
Employees
Workers
Other/Unknown

1st quintile
2nd quintile
3rd quintile
4th quintile
5th quintile
Refused to answer

Rural
Paris
Age
Radiologist density
GP density
Mortality rate 1980-88
Year: 2000
Year: 2002
Year: 2006
Year: 2008
Year: 2010
Observations

Depts with a
local program
0.385
0.487
0.537
0.499
0.048
0.213
0.169
0.375
0.313
0.464
0.157
0.364
0.295
0.456

P-value of
the diff.
0.032
0.006
0.218
0.537
0.456
0.161
0.519

31

Table 2: Unadjusted Difference-in-Differences Estimates
Département has
a Pre-Existing Program?
A. Pre-National Program

No

Yes

Difference

(2000 and 2002)

[1]

[2]

[2] - [1]

0.250

0.254

0.004

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.012)

0.427

0.490

0.063***

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.014)

0.235

0.248

0.012

(0.006)

(0.008)

(0.009)

0.565

0.553

-0.012

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.010)

-0.014

-0.006

(0.010)

(0.011)

0.138***

0.063***

(0.012)

(0.013)

Outside of Target Age Range

In Target Age Range

B. Post-National Program
(2006 to 2010)
Outside of Target Age Range

In Target Age Range

C. Change over Time
(B - A)
Outside of Target Age Range

In Target Age Range

32

Table 3: Basic regression results
Mammogram Last 2 Years?

Local (α1 )

Target (α2 )

Post (α3 )

Local x Target (β1)

Post x Local (β2)

Post x Target (β3)

Post x Local x Target (γ)

∆∆L (β1)

∆∆N (β3)

∆∆LN (β3 + γ)

N
Covariates?

Mammogram Ever?

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.004

-0.011

0.007

-0.006

(0.015)

(0.012)

(0.015)

(0.012)

0.177***

-0.002

0.186***

-0.043***

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.015)

(0.013)

-0.014

-0.026***

0.064***

0.035***

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.010)

(0.008)

0.059***

0.066***

0.031

0.037**

(0.021)

(0.018)

(0.022)

(0.017)

0.009

0.012

0.012

0.017

(0.013)

(0.014)

(0.014)

(0.013)

0.153***

0.122***

0.065***

0.037***

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.017)

(0.012)

-0.084***

-0.080***

-0.061**

-0.058***

(0.019)

(0.017)

(0.023)

(0.018)

0.059***

0.066***

0.031

0.037**

(0.021)

(0.018)

(0.022)

(0.017)

0.153***

0.122***

0.065***

0.037***

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.017)

(0.012)

0.069***

0.042***

0.004

-0.021

(0.015)

(0.011)

(0.016)

(0.013)

29,296

29,296

29,296

29,296

No

Yes

No

Yes

Notes: The models in columns 2, 4 include the following covariates: age, age squared, age cubed,
the number of radiologists and GP per capita in the département; indicators for smokers, individuals with
long-standing chronic conditions, living in a rural area, living in the greater Paris region; and
categorical variables for self-reported health, complementary health insurance coverage, education,
current or former occupation, income quintile and breast cancer mortality rate. See Appendix
Table A.2 for results corresponding to the model in column 2. ∗ ∗ ∗p < .01; ∗ ∗ p < .05; ∗p < .10

33

Table 4: Regression results of robustness check specifications

1. Full Sample (N = 29,296)

2. Panel analysis (N = 17,960)

3. Ages 40 to 80 (N = 24,305)

4. Drop 50 & 51 Year-olds (N = 27,586)

5. Control group 49 and younger (N=26,207)

∆∆L

∆∆N

∆∆LN

0.066***

0.122***

0.042***

(0.018)

(0.014)

(0.011)

0.054***

0.128***

0.062***

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.014)

0.064***

0.116***

0.041**

(0.020)

(0.014)

(0.012)

0.067***

0.125***

0.049***

(0.019)

(0.015)

(0.012)

0.079***

0.137***

0.039**

(0.019)

(0.014)

(0.011)

Notes: Covariates are included in each specification. ∗ ∗ ∗p < .01; ∗ ∗ p < .05; ∗p < .10

34

Table 5: Regression results by age
Dépts w/o Local Program

Dépts with Local Program

Coefficient

Std. Error

Coefficient

Std. Error

Age 40 to 44

0.203***

(0.022)

0.200***

(0.020)

Age 45 to 49

0.308***

(0.020)

0.279***

(0.025)

Age 50 to 54

0.345***

(0.023)

0.386***

(0.020)

Age 55 to 59

0.408***

(0.023)

0.405***

(0.028)

Age 60 to 64

0.320***

(0.025)

0.424***

(0.030)

Age 65 to 69

0.272***

(0.025)

0.401***

(0.030)

Age 70 to 74

0.174***

(0.021)

0.257***

(0.041)

Age 75 to 79

-0.007

(0.019)

0.110***

(0.038)

Age 80 to 84

-0.072***

(0.019)

-0.029

(0.027)

Age 85+

-0.064***

(0.021)

-0.095***

(0.017)

Post

-0.015

(0.015)

-0.001

(0.015)

Post x 40 to 44

-0.024

(0.027)

-0.029

(0.023)

Post x 45 to 49

-0.031

(0.026)

0.002

(0.031)

Post x 50 to 54

0.088***

(0.026)

0.027

(0.023)

Post x 55 to 59

0.057**

(0.027)

0.042

(0.031)

Post x 60 to 64

0.192***

(0.030)

0.034

(0.040)

Post x 65 to 69

0.204***

(0.035)

0.079*

(0.040)

Post x 70 to 74

0.289***

(0.035)

0.219***

(0.041)

Post x 75 to 79

0.205***

(0.031)

0.081*

(0.045)

Post x 80 to 84

0.069**

(0.027)

0.041

(0.035)

-0.009

(0.024)

0.038

(0.026)

0.113***

(0.011)

0.107***

(0.016)

Age (ref: 35-39)

Post x 85+
Constant

N

16,059

13,237

∗ ∗ ∗p < .01; ∗ ∗ p < .05; ∗p < .10

35

Table 6: Percentage of Women Receiving a Mammogram in Past 2 Years by income and education categories

% Screened
via Organized
Dépt with no Local Program

Dépts with Local Program

Program

A. Differences by Education
Pre-2004

Post-2004

(N = 2,562)

(N = 4,806)

Primary or less

31.8%

50.1%

Middle School

47.8%

High School

Change

Pre-2004

Post-2004

Change

Post-2004

(N = 2,072)

(N = 3,994)

Change

(N = 3464)

18.3% ***

42.8%

50.3%

7.5%***

70.3%

57.7%

9.9% ***

50.0%

58.4%

8.4%**

59.6%

53.8%

63.6%

9.8 % **

56.7%

59.3%

2.6%

61.7%

University or higher

56.8%

63.1%

6.3 % **

63.1%

62.2%

-0.9%

53.0%

University/Primary or less

1.79

1.26

1.47

1.24

Pre-2004

Post-2004

Pre-2004

Post-2004

Change

Post-2004

(N = 1,856)

(N = 3,535)

(N = 1,492)

(N = 2,954)

1st Quintile

33.6%

54.5%

20.9% ***

50.2%

55.2%

4.9%

71.5%

2nd Quintile

42.1%

61.4%

19.3%***

54.5%

63.1%

8.6%**

66.0%

3rd Quintile

53.7%

66.9%

13.2% ***

60.3%

62.9%

2.6%

67.0%

4th Quintile

61.6%

67.9%

6.3% **

66.2%

68.9%

2.8%

61.3%

5th Quintile

66.7%

73.3%

6.5%**

66.3%

67.9%

1.7%

55.8%

5th Quintile/1st Quintile

1.99

1.35

1.32

1.23

B. Differences by Income
Change

(N = 3464)

Notes: We assess if the change is statistically significant using t-tests. Screened via Organized program is only available for the years 2006 and 2008.
∗ ∗ ∗p < .01; ∗ ∗ p < .05; ∗p < .10

36

Table 7: Percentage of Women Receiving a Mammogram ever by income and education categories

Dépt with no Local Program

Dépts with Local Program

A. Differences by Education
Pre-2004

Post-2004

(N = 2,562)

(N = 4,806)

Primary or less

46.25%

63.90%

Middle School

63.21%

High School

Change

Pre-2004

Post-2004

Change

(N = 2,072)

(N = 3,994)

17.65***

56.11%

64.16%

8.05***

70.98%

7.77***

61.72%

70.66%

8.94***

65.88%

75.49%

9.61***

64.60%

72.77%

8.17**

University or higher

66.91%

74.22%

7.31**

72.48%

72.31%

-0.17

University/Primary or less

1.45

1.16

1.29

1.13

Pre-2004

Post-2004

Pre-2004

Post-2004

(N = 1,856)

(N = 3,535)

(N = 1,492)

(N = 2,954)

1st Quintile

52.20%

77.46%

25.26***

65.33%

74.46%

9.13**

2nd Quintile

60.69%

77.18%

16.49***

67.77%

79.92%

12.15***

3rd Quintile

73.03%

79.56%

6.53**

79.04%

77.72%

-1.32

4th Quintile

77.42%

81.74%

4.32*

77.46%

81.45%

3.99

5th Quintile

78.69%

84.64%

5.95**

78.86%

81.39%

2.53

5th Quintile/1st Quintile

1.51

1.09

1.21

1.09

B. Differences by Income
Change

Change

Notes: We assess if the change is statistically significant using t-tests.
∗ ∗ ∗p < .01; ∗ ∗ p < .05; ∗p < .10

37

A

Appendix
Table A.1: Parallel trends
2000

2002

Difference

(1)

(2)

(1)-(2)

0.24

0.267

-0.027

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.017)

0.487

0.493

-0.005

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.021)

0.251

0.248

0.003

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.016)

0.421

0.432

-0.010

(0.014)

(0.013)

(0.019)

Local program
Outside of target age range

In target age range

No local program
Outside of target age range

In target age range

38

Table A.2: Basic regression results with covariates

Local
Target
Post
Local x Target
Post x Local
Post x Target
Post x Local x Target
Health status (ref: good)
Poor
Fair
Excellent
Unknown
Complementary health insurance (ref: private)
Unknown
None
Public
Chronic disease (ref: no)
Has a chronic disease
Smoker
Education (ref: primary or lower)
Junior High school
High school
University
Other
Occupation (ref: executive)
Farmer
Shopkeeper, craftmen
Intermediary profession
Employee
Worker
Not working/other
Income (ref: 1st quintile)
2nd quintile
3rd quintile
4th quintile
5th quintile
Unknown
Rural
Parisian region
Age
Age squared
Aged cubed
Radiologist density
GP density
Mortality rate of breast cancer
Constant
Observations
R-squared

Coefficient
-0.011
-0.002
-0.027***
0.066***
0.012
0.122***
-0.080***

Std. Error
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.018)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.017)

-0.085***
-0.015*
-0.030***
-0.470***

(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.010)

-0.044***
-0.088***
-0.069***

(0.017)
(0.010)
(0.011)

0.016**
-0.043***

(0.007)
(0.008)

0.032***
0.037***
0.040***
0.002

(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.011)

-0.036***
-0.025
0.009
-0.015
-0.042***
-0.078***

(0.013)
(0.017)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.017)

0.023**
0.041***
0.060***
0.082***
0.007
-0.010
0.013
0.167***
-0.002***
0.000***
0.007***
0.000
-0.001
-3.418***
29,296
0.340

(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.002)
(0.171)

Notes: ∗ ∗ ∗p < .01; ∗ ∗ p < .05; ∗p < .10

39

