                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE WEDGE OF THE CENTURY:
 UNDERSTANDING A DIVERGENCE BETWEEN CPI AND PPI INFLATION MEASURES

                                         Shang-Jin Wei
                                           Yinxi Xie

                                      Working Paper 24319
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24319


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 2018, Revised May 2019




Previously circulated as "On the Divergence between CPI and PPI as Inflation Gauges: The Role
of Supply Chains." We thank Pol Antràs, Xuehui Han, Yang Jiao, Miklos Koren, Andrei A.
Levchenko, Ernest Liu, Nikhil Patel, Michael Woodford, and participants in the seminars and
workshops at the Reserve Bank of Australia, Asian Development Bank, Columbia University,
IMF, CEPR, UIBE, University of Melbourne, and University of Tokyo for their valuable
comments, and Joy Glazener for editorial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Shang-Jin Wei and Yinxi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Wedge of the Century: Understanding a Divergence between CPI and PPI Inflation Measures
Shang-Jin Wei and Yinxi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 24319
February 2018, Revised May 2019
JEL No. E5,F1

                                           ABSTRACT

Two strands of the literature suggest that PPI inflation, rather than CPI inflation, should be the
targeting variable in a monetary policy rule. The distinction between these two rules would only
be important if the two inflation indices do not co-move strongly. The first contribution of this
paper is to document that the two inflation gauges did co-move strongly in the last century but the
correlation has fallen substantially since the start of this century. The second contribution is to
propose a structural explanation for this divergence based on a lengthening of world production
chains since 2000. This theory implies that the decline in the correlation is likely to be permanent
and a rethinking of the monetary policy rules has become more important. Our multi-stage multi-
country production model has additional predictions on the behavior of CPI and PPI inflation
beyond a fallen correlation, and these predictions are also confirmed in the data.


Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

Yinxi Xie
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
yinxi.xie@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
In‡ation is a central variable of interest to macroeconomics and enters almost any central bank’s
policy reaction function. In‡ation can be measured by changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
or Producer Price Index (PPI): the former measures changes in the prices of goods and services
that households buy, while the latter measures changes in the prices of the goods made by domestic
producers.
    While almost all central banks in practice target only CPI in‡ation, the literature has pointed
out two types of reasons for PPI in‡ation to be the preferred target in an optimal monetary policy
reaction function. First, in an open economy, for which PPI di¤ers from CPI by including only prices
of domestic products and excluding imported products, Gali and Monacelli (2005) and De Paoli
(2009) show that a second-order approximation of a welfare-maximizing central bank’s objective
function can be written as a function of PPI in‡ation, not CPI in‡ation, in addition to output gap
and real exchange rate.1 In this strand of literature, the key distinction between PPI and CPI is
whether the central bank should focus on the in‡ation of domestic products.2
    Second, in a closed-economy setting, Huang and Liu (2005) propose a two-stage production
model and show that it is also better to include PPI in‡ation rather than CPI in‡ation in a simple
monetary policy rule.3 In this strand of literature, the key distinction between PPI and CPI is that
the former includes intermediate goods prices whereas the latter does not. Intuitively, with sticky
prices, ‡uctuations in the relative prices between intermediate goods relative to …nal goods cause
distortions in the allocation of labor across production stages. A welfare maximizing central bank
should take this into account, and the PPI in‡ation captures more of the relevant information than
the CPI in‡ation.
    In a more general New Keynesian model (featuring both open-economy and multi-stage produc-
tion), Wei and Xie (2019) show that it is always the best for the monetary policy rule to include
separate in‡ation measures for prices at each production stage, in addition to real exchange rate and
output gap. Even the PPI in‡ation, which can be regarded as sales-weighted average of the output
prices at di¤erent production stages - does not in general assign the correct weights to producer
prices at di¤erent stages of production. Nonetheless, the calibrations in Wei and Xie (2019) also
show that most of the welfare gains can be achieved by switching from embedding CPI in‡ation to
PPI in‡ation in a monetary policy rule. Furthermore, as the number of production stages increases,
which we see in the data (e.g., Wang et al., 2017), the optimal weight on the PPI in the monetary
policy rule should also increase.
    Importantly, if PPI in‡ation and CPI in‡ation co-move strongly, the distinction between the two
   1 Real exchange rate matters for an open economy because of a terms-of-trade externality as shown in De Paoli

(2009): as long as the elasticity of foreign demand for domestic export is …nite, the central bank has an incentive
to exploit domestic monopoly power in trade. Due to the special con…guration of parameters in Gali and Monacelli
(2005), the welfare loss function in their paper only includes PPI in‡ation and output gap.
   2 Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2010) provide a useful survey of the existing literature on monetary policy in an

open economy. Important references include Begino and Begino (2003), De Gregorio (2012), Lombardo and Ravenna
(2014), and Matsumura (2018).
   3 Strum (2009) develops a similar closed-economy New Keynesian model with two-stage production, and focuses on

the study of commitment and discretionary policy. Huang and Liu (2001) explore the persistent e¤ect of monetary
shock in a multi-stage production model.




                                                        2
indicators in theory would be unimportant in practice. We will show evidence that the CPI and PPI
in‡ation did co-move strongly in the last century so the practice of targeting only CPI in‡ation was
nearly harmless. This might be a reason for why central banks do not typically look beyond CPI
in‡ation (other than using PPI in‡ation as a forecasting variable for CPI in‡ation).
    However, we will also show evidence of a dramatic divergence between the two indices since the
start of this century. Indeed, in the United States, China, Republic of Korea, India, Singapore,
Thailand, Philippines and Malaysia, the two in‡ation indicators even went in opposite directions in
the recent past: While the CPI changes were moderately positive, the PPI changes were negative.
Given the signi…cant wedge between the two in‡ation measures in this century, the theoretical
literature on monetary policy rules implies that the central bank practice of not targeting PPI
in‡ation has become increasingly sub-optimal. One may also note that, given the actual values of
the two in‡ation indicators in recent years, the optimal monetary policy when targeting PPI in‡ation
would generally have been more expansionary than what is implied by a monetary policy rule that
targets CPI in‡ation only.
    Does the divergence between the two in‡ation indices represent a temporary aberration so that
relatively little will be lost if central banks continue to ignore it, or something more structural? This
requires an understanding of why PPI and CPI have diverged in the 21st century. Yet, we are not
aware of either theoretical or empirical papers that study the causes of the divergence. We aim to
…ll this important gap.
    Our theory is that a steep increase in the length of the global production chains around the turn
of the century is a key factor behind the big decline in the correlation between PPI and CPI in‡ation.
This structural explanation suggests that the reduction in the correlation is likely to persist.
    The steep increase in the length of the global production chains likely comes from a con‡uence
of two forces. First, advancement in digital technology has matured enough around the turn of the
century to generate systematic attempts in various industries to codify as much of the production
processes as possible, and to outsource those codi…able tasks from high-wage to low-wage countries
(e.g., Fort, 2016). Second, the rise of Central and Eastern Europe as a production backyard for
Western Europe since the late 1990s and the accession to the World Trade Organization by China
in 2001 have provided the world a set of eager recipients of a re-organization of global production
patterns. China, in particular, has come out of decades of economic isolation to become a dominant
“factory of the world.” The growth rate of its exports from 2000-2007 was twice as high as its
already-high GDP growth during the same period (see Feenstra and Wei, 2010, for a comprehensive
examination of the phenomenal emergence of China as a trading superpower, including the outsized
role of multinational …rms in China’s imports and exports). Trade liberalizations in Mexico and
many countries in South America and Southeast Asia also contributed to this wave of outsourcing
and o¤shoring activities. The upshot of these two forces is a pick-up in the share of intermediate
goods in many countries’imports (e.g., Hummels, Ishii, and Yi, 2001; Johnson and Nuguera, 2016;
Koopman, Wang, and Wei, 2014). The average production length for the world as a whole - measured
by the average number of times that value added passes through di¤erent country-sectors before it
is embedded in the …nal product - experienced an acceleration after 2001 (Wang, Wei, Yu, and Zhu,
2017).


                                                   3
    The key idea of this paper is that, as the number of production stages increases around the
beginning of the 21st century, the wedge in the composition of the baskets between CPI and PPI
also increases, which reduces the correlation between the two price indices. Note that the paper does
not test why the production process has become longer since 2001. Instead, we take this development
as given and study what it means for the relationship between PPI and CPI in‡ation measures.
    To capture the essence of global value chains, we build a model featuring many countries and mul-
tiple stages of production (for the tradable manufacturing sector). At any given stage of production,
manufacturing …rms in a given country can potentially buy intermediate inputs from any country in
the world. The ultimate decision of where and how much to buy is made based on a comparison of
costs inclusive of trade costs and factory-gate prices, which in turn re‡ect country-production stage-
speci…c productivity shocks. We combine an innovation in specifying the production stage-speci…c
intermediate input bundle with tools from the (single-stage) Eaton-Kortum model (2002) to solve
the model.
    This model generates the prediction that, as the number of production stages increases, the
correlation between PPI and CPI in‡ation falls. It also generates additional predictions that can be
tested in the data. In particular, as the production length increases, while both CPI and PPI in‡ation
become less sensitive to a shock to stage-speci…c productivity, the decline in the responsiveness of
CPI in‡ation is greater.
    Empirically, we use changes in the global industrial input prices (as reported by the International
Monetary Fund) as a proxy for productivity shock in the …rst stage of production. We will investigate
how CPI and PPI in the actual data react to such a shock, respectively. Since the world production
exhibits a pronounced increase in length around the turn of the century (Wang et al., 2017), we
separate the data into two periods - before and after 2001- and study whether and how the impulse
responses of PPI and CPI to an input price shock have changed respectively in the two periods.
Consistent with the model, we …nd that both CPI in‡ation and PPI in‡ation have indeed become less
responsive to a 1% change in industrial input prices after 2001, and the decline in the responsiveness
in percentage term is signi…cantly greater for CPI than for PPI. As a robustness check, we also study
the PPI and CPI responses to commodity price shocks and …nd similar patterns.
    A decline in the correlation between PPI and CPI in‡ation could in principle come from two
other sources too. First, an increase in the share of services in the consumption basket over time
could have caused a decline in the correlation between the two in‡ation measures. Second, greater
competition exerted by increased international trade can reduce markups that manufacturing …rms
can charge, reducing the prices of the goods more than those of the service items, and potentially
capable of producing a decline in the correlation between the two in‡ation measures. Our story and
these two additional stories are not mutually exclusive. Nonetheless, the evidence in later sections
suggests that the supply chain hypothesis is a quantitatively important part of the overall story. In
comparison, the other two explanations appear to be of limited signi…cance. In particular, while
the servic sector share did increase in many economies, there was no visible acceleration around
the turn of the century. While globalization likely puts more downward pressure on the prices of
manufactured products than service prices, this by itself should have impacted PPI more than CPI.
    If we were to restrict our ambition to explaining the average behavior of PPI and CPI, we do


                                                  4
not need to consider the international aspect of the story. A closed-economy version of the story
could deliver the results. However, the manner through which a lengthening of supply chains takes
place is through more international outsourcing and more international trade in intermediate goods.4
Since di¤erent countries have di¤erent comparative advantage (e.g., due to di¤erent trade costs and
di¤erent productivity levels), the in‡ation response to a common global technology shock can vary
by country. Our multi-stage and multi-country model also makes country-speci…c predictions on
these responses.
    As a more ambitious exercise, for all countries covered in the World Input-Output Database
(WIOD), we calibrate the theoretical responses of PPI at the country level to an industrial input
price shock. We take bilateral trade shares implied by WIOD data in 1998 and 2005 as the matching
targets for the calibration. Thus, conditional on the information in WIOD, the model generates a
list of country rankings in terms of their relative magnitude of PPI responses to a shock to the
industrial input prices. Separately, we also perform country-by-country empirical estimation of
the PPI response to the same shock. This generates a second country ranking of the relative
PPI responses. Because the latter empirical estimation is purely “data driven”, and does not use
information from WIOD and does not rely on the theoretical model, it provides another check on
whether the theoretical model is sensible. We …nd that we can easily reject the null that the two
rankings of the relative PPI responses are uncorrelated (in favor of the alternative that they are
positively correlated).
    Our paper makes two contributions to the monetary policy literature. First, by documenting a
visible breakdown in the correlation between PPI and CPI in‡ation since the beginning of the century,
it adds gravitas to the literature that distinguishes PPI and CPI in monetary policy rules (e.g., Gali
and Monacelli, 2005; Huang and Liu, 2005 and 2007; De Paoli, 2009; Strum, 2009). In particular, the
distinction was not important in the last century when the two in‡ation indices co-moved strongly.
The distinction is more important today since the correlation between the two has become much
lower. The standard monetary policy rule that targets only CPI in‡ation becomes more inferior
(in terms of welfare loss) relative to a rule that targets PPI in‡ation. When the PPI in‡ation is
negative and CPI in‡ation is (modestly) positive, as happened to the United States, the Euro zone,
and China in recent years, the optimal monetary policy should be more expansionary under the PPI
target than under the CPI target. Second, the paper provides a structural explanation for the fall
in the correlation between the two in‡ation indices - a rise in the number of production stages or a
lengthening of world production since the start of this century. This structural explanation suggests
that the fall in the correlation could be permanent. This further strengthens the case for a reform
of the central bank policy rules.
    This paper builds on the large literature on monetary policy rules which has been referenced
at the beginning of the paper. It also builds on the literature on the measurement and welfare
implications of global value chains (e.g., Hummels et al., 2001; Yi, 2003; Johnson and Noguera,
2009; Yi, 2010; Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare, 2013; Koopman, Wang, and Wei, 2014; Timmer et
al., 2014; Antràs and Chor, 2013; Costinot, Wang, and Vogel, 2013; Johnson and Moxnes, 2013;
    4 Appendix Figure A:1 in Appendix A presents evidence of an upward trend in the share of internationally traded

(i.e., imported) intermediate goods in total intermediate goods for major countries.



                                                        5
Alfaro et al., 2015; Antràs and De Gortari, 2017). It should be pointed out that none of these papers
studies the implications of global value chains for understanding the two in‡ation indices.
    This paper is somewhat related to the literature on international transmissions of shocks (e.g.,
Ambler, Cardia, and Zimmermann, 2002; Kose, Prasad, and Terrones, 2003; Huang and Liu, 2007;
Boivin and Giannoni, 2008; Monacelli and Sala, 2009; Mumtaz and Surico, 2012; Jin and Li, 2012;
Auer, Borio, Filardo, 2017; Auer, Levchenko, and Sauré, 2017). Of particular interest are two papers
by Auer, Borio, Filardo (2017) and Auer, Levchenko, and Sauré (2017), respectively, suggesting
international input-output linkages as a channel for foreign demand shocks to in‡uence domestic
in‡ation. However, this literature does not document nor explain a divergence in the PPI and CPI
in‡ation rates.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents more statistics on a structural break
in the relationship between CPI and PPI since 2001; Section 3 introduces the settings of the model;
Section 4 solves the general equilibrium and formally de…nes CPI and PPI indices, and in particular,
Section 4:4 discusses the response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to productivity shocks and trade shocks;
Section 5 further derives an explicit solution to the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to di¤erent
type of shocks by assuming homogeneous countries; Section 6 reports the major empirical results for
testing the model prediction; Section 7 shows the calibration results of the model by using World
Input-Output Data; and Section 8 concludes the paper.


2    The divergence between CPI and PPI in the new century
We now present systematic evidence on a decline in the correlation between CPI and PPI in‡ation
since the turn of the century. The top panel of Figure 1 presents the correlations between annual
CPI and PPI in‡ation rates across countries from 1970-2015. Each blue point in the …gure is the
cross-sectional correlation of CPI and PPI in‡ation in a given year across all countries with available
data. It is clear that the correlation was very high in the last century. That is, countries with a high
CPI in‡ation were also those with a high PPI in‡ation, and vice versa. However, a visible fall in the
correlation occurred around the turn of the century. That is, in the 21st century, one is more likely
to encounter the scenario of having a high CPI in‡ation and a low PPI in‡ation simultaneously. (As
discussed in the previous section, sometimes the two in‡ation indicators can even take on opposite
signs.)
    The middle panel presents the correlation of the two in‡ation indicators over (rolling) 5-year
intervals. The bottom panel gives the correlation in terms of changes over 10-years. We can see
clearly that the two in‡ation indices move together very strongly in the last century, but then show
a divergence in this century.
    Because the country coverage tends to increase over time, it may be useful to check if the pattern
is driven by di¤erences in the sample. While CPI is available for almost all countries throughout the
sample, the country coverage of PPI data grows progressively over time. One might wonder if the
pattern of a decline in the correlation between the two in‡ation measures is due to lower correlations
from newly added countries. To alleviate this concern, we also compute correlations - represented
by the red circles in the graph - for a (maximum) common set of countries since 1995. The basic


                                                   6
pattern holds for the common set of countries as well, namely, the correlations between the two
in‡ation measures were very high in the previous century and dropped in the 21st century.
    Note that the great moderation of in‡ation for advanced countries started in early 1990s. Most
developing countries that had high or hyperin‡ation in the 1970s or 1980s have gotten rid of very
high in‡ation by 1990s. Yet, no signi…cant decline in the correlation between CPI and PPI can be
detected in the 1990s in these graphs. Nonetheless, in formal tests of the key hypotheses in the
subsequent empirical section, we will include the initial level of in‡ation as a control variable.
    We now switch to two cross sections of time series correlations. The data for a given country is
divided into two sub-periods, 1996-2001 and 2002-2007. (We do not want the Global Financial Crisis
period to contaminate the calculations.) For each country in each period, we compute a correlation
between the CPI and PPI in‡ation. Figure 2 and Figure 3 present the cross-country distributions
of the country-speci…c time-series correlation between CPI and PPI in‡ation for the two periods,
for each of the two country groupings, respectively. For comparability, we use the common set
of countries for both time periods. Compared with the period of 1996-2001, we see a decline in
the country-speci…c time-series correlations for both high-income countries and developing countries
during 2002-2007.5
    Focusing on the periods before the crisis, Figure 4 shows the cumulative distribution of time-series
correlations across countries. It is obvious that the times-series correlations in the post-2001 period
are stochastically dominated by those in the pre-2001 period. Indeed, a Komogolov-Smirnov test
rejects the null of no di¤erence between the two cumulative distributions at the 10% level, in favor
of the alternative that the pre-2001 distribution curve stochastically dominates the post-2002 curve.
A more direct Dunn’s test reveals that the pre-2001 distribution curve stochastically dominates the
post-2002 curve at the 1% level.6 In other words, for a given country, the correlation between the two
in‡ation measures is greater in the pre-2001 period than that in more recent years. A similar pattern
is found for each of the sub-country groups, i.e., high-income countries and developing countries.
    To summarize, PPI and CPI in‡ation indicators used to co-move very strongly, rendering any
distinction between the two in theory unimportant in practice. However, the correlation has become
much lower in the new century.


3     The model setting
Consider a model with N countries, denoted by n = 1; 2;     ; N , and two sectors, manufacturing
sector denoted by m and service sector denoted by s, respectively. Within a sector, there is a
unit continuum of goods, u 2 [0; 1]. The manufacturing sector features a multi-stage production,
and the output at each stage can be traded internationally. The service sector features a single-
   5 One possible explanation for a temporary increase in the correlation during 2008-2013 is the Great Recession.

That is, the …nancial crisis dominates the movements of price indices and leads them to move in tandem. Also, as
shown in Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2014), the length of production chains shortens in periods of …nancial distress. Along
the idea in this paper, a temporarily shorter production chain could lead to a temporarily higher correlation between
CPI and PPI in‡ation during …nancial crises. The temporary rebound in the correlation in the immediate aftermath
of the global …nancial crisis in fact is consistent with the hypothesis in this paper.
   6 The test results on stochastic dominance are robust to using di¤erent time windows (of 5-years, 6-years, or 7-years)

to calculate country-speci…c time-series correlations.



                                                           7
stage production, and the output is not traded internationally. Figure 5 illustrates the production
processes of the manufacturing and service sectors for a country.
    We assume that the market is perfectly competitive, all production processes feature constant
returns to scale, and the productivity of production follows a Fréchet distribution across countries,
sectors and stages.


3.1       The manufacturing sector
The manufacturing production requires G stages, and each stage follows a standard Eaton-Kortum
framework.
   In the …rst stage, the production function for good u in country n is given by

                                                 q1n (u) = Z1n (u)l1n (u)

where Z1n (u) is the good-speci…c productivity in stage 1 of manufacturing sector in country n and
l1n (u) is the quantity of labor employed in production.
     In each subsequent stage, production uses a combination of labor and a composite intermediate
input. The production at stage g (for g = 2; : : : ; G) can be thought of as a two-step process. In
the …rst step, a …rm purchases di¤erentiated goods produced in the previous stage, i.e., stage g 1,
from all countries and forms a composite intermediate good. Speci…cally, the intermediate good to
be used by country n in production stage g, qgn , is a composite of all stage g 1 goods from all
countries in the world:
                                                         Z   1
                                          qgn   = exp(              qgn 1 (u))du)
                                                                 ln(~
                                                         0

where q~gn 1 (u) is the amount of country n’s purchase of stage g 1 output for good u. In the second
step, the …rm combines the composite intermediate good with labor input to produce an output.
   The production function for good u in stage g is given by

                                       qgn (u) =       Zgn (u)qgn (u) lgn (u)1

where = [(1 )1          ] 1 is a constant for normalization. Since the production of any good in stage
g needs a bundle of output from the previous stage as a collective input, it captures a characteristic
of an inter-country input-output table in which the output from all countries might be used as inputs
into the production.
    In the language of Baldwin and Venables (2013), the entire manufacturing production process
follows a combination of a snake and a spider patterns. At a given stage, outputs from the previous
stage from all over the world are purchased to form a composite intermediate input, resembling
a spider pattern. Going from one stage of production to the next, the process resembles a snake
pattern. 7
    Firms in each stage of manufacturing production could purchase inputs from any country, but
  7 In   comparison, the production process assumed in Antràs and De Gortari (2017) resembles a pure snake pattern.



                                                                 8
subject to a bilateral iceberg trade cost in when the inputs are shipped from country i to country
n.
     The productivity in manufacturing stage g of country n, i.e., Zgn (u), is independently drawn
across countries, stages, and goods from a Fréchet distribution. In other words, the productivity
Zgn (u) follows
                                       P r(Zgn (u) z) = Fgn (z)
                                                               Tgn z
                                                     =e

where Tgn is the location parameter,           is the shape parameter, and g = 1; : : : ; G.


3.2     The service sector
The service sector features a single stage of production for which labor is the only input. The
production function for service output u in country n is given by

                                                sn (u) = Zsn (u)lsn (u)

    Similar to the manufacturing sector, the good-speci…c productivity in the service sector of country
n, i.e., Zsn (u), is independently drawn across varieties and countries from a Fréchet distribution. In
other words, the productivity Zsn (u) follows

                                            P r(Zsn (u)            z) = Fsn (z)

                                                               Tsn z
                                                     =e
                                                                                    8
where Tsn is the location parameter and            is the shape parameter.


3.3     Households
Households purchase the …nal-stage manufacturing products from both domestic and foreign …rms,
and services from domestic service producers. They …rst aggregate the purchased manufacturing
goods and service items to form a manufacturing composite good and a service composite good,
denoted as Qn and S n , respectively, by a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) transformation.
That is,                                      Z                1
                                         Qn = exp(                 log(~n
                                                                       qG (u))du)
                                                           0
                                                       Z       1
                                           n
                                         S = exp(                  log(sn (u))du)
                                                        0
        n
where q~G (u) is the quantity of manufacturing good u purchased by households in country n and
 n
s (u) is the quantity of service good u purchased by domestic households.
   8 For simplicity, we assume a common shape parameter for productivity distributions across countries, sectors and

stages.




                                                               9
   The composite goods are then combined by a Cobb-Douglas aggregation to form a …nal con-
sumption basket, i.e.,
                                  F n = A(Qn ) (S n )1

where A = [(1      )1     ] 1 is a constant for normalization.9 Households maximize the value of
their consumption basket.
    The aggregation process described above is equivalent to a two-tier utility function by a represen-
tative consumer (e.g., Costinot, Donaldson, and Komunjer, 2012). The upper-tier is Cobb-Douglas
aggregation over two categories of the goods, while the lower-tier features constant elasticity of
substitution among di¤erentiated goods in each sector.
    We assume that the total labor supply in each country is …xed, denoted by Ln , and labor is
fully mobile between two sectors within a country but not across countries. Thus, there is a wage
assignment for each country. We assume a balanced trade, which implies wn Ln = PFn F n .




4      General equilibrium
4.1         The CPI de…nition
CPI is de…ned as the weighted average of the prices faced by households, including the prices of …nal
goods from both manufacturing sector and service sector. Given the wage assignment fw1 ; : : : ; wN g
in all the countries, …rst consider the price assignment of the manufacturing sector. Since all the
goods are symmetric, we ignore the index u in productivity Zgn . The good-speci…c productivity in
each stage and each country is drawn from a Fréchet distribution, i.e.,

                                                                             Tgn z
                                           P r(Zgn    z) = Fgn (z) = e

                                                                                                     i in
                                                                                     w
   In the …rst stage of production, for a speci…c country n and good u, let pin
                                                                             1 (u) =   Z1i
                                                                                           be the
                                                                         in           in
unit cost at which country i sells good u to country n in stage 1. Let G1 (p) = P r(p1 (u)     p).
Then, we get
                                               wi in             wi in
                           Gin
                             1 (p) = P r(Z1
                                           i
                                                     ) = 1 F1i (       )
                                                 p                 p
    Let p~n1 (u) = minfp1n              Nn           n
                                                                pn1 (u)
                        1 (u); : : : ; p1 (u)g and G1 (p) = P r(~         p) be the purchasing price
distribution of good u produced in stage 1, which are taken as inputs for stage 2 in country n. Then,
we have
                              Gn1 (p) = P r(~pn1 (u) p) = 1 exp[ n1 p ]
               PN
where n1 = i=1 T1i (wi in ) . Details about this result can be found in Appendix B.
    Each subsequent stage of production consists of two steps, i.e., aggregation and production. In
stage 2, for any country n, the goods purchased from the previous stage are …rst aggregated to form
    9 The   aggregation process is assumed to be the same, i.e., identical    , for all countries.




                                                             10
a composite intermediate good, i.e.,
                                                        Z      1
                                       q2n = exp(                      q1n (u))du)
                                                                   log(~
                                                           0

                                                        Z      1
                                       pn2 = exp(                      pn1 (u))du)
                                                                   log(~
                                                           0

   Following the standard results of the Eaton-Kortum model, we have

                                                                            1
                                                   pn2 = (          n
                                                                    1)


which is a constant.
     In the second step of stage 2, …rms use the intermediate composite goods for production. Sim-
ilar to the …rst stage, the unit cost of production in country i serving to country n is pin
                                                                                           2 (u) =
       i 1
  in (w )    (pi2 )            in           in
          Zi
                    , and let G2 (p) = P r(p2 (u) p). Then, we obtain
         2


                                                 i 1
                                         in (w     )        (pi2 )                              in (w
                                                                                                        i 1
                                                                                                        )         (pi2 )
                   Gin
                    2 (p) = P r(Z                                     )=1               F2i (                              )
                                                       p                                                      p

    Also, let p~n2 (u) = minfp1n              Nn           n
                                                                       pn2 (u) p) be the purchasing price
                              2 (u); : : : ; p2 (u)g, and G2 (p) = P r(~
distribution of good u produced in stage 2, which is taken as an input for stage 3 in country n. Note
that fpi2 gN                                   1n        Nn
           i=1 are constants, and thus fp2 (u); : : : ; p2 (u)g are independent of each other. This is a
key technical innovation that allows us to derive tractable solution to the multi-stage Eaton-Kortum
model by avoiding a sum or a product of Fréchet random variables.
    Then, we have
                               Gn2 (p) = P r(~  pn2 (Z) p) = 1 exp[ n2 p ]

where
                                             N
                                             X
                                     n
                                     2   =         T2i [     in
                                                                   (wi )1           (pi2 ) ]
                                             i=1

   The proof for this result is the same as in the …rst stage, which is shown in Appendix B.
   Similarly, for all the subsequent stages, i.e., 8g 2 f2; : : : ; Gg, we have

                                                                                1
                                                 png = (           n
                                                                   g 1)


and
                                             N
                                             X
                                     n
                                     g   =         Tgi [     in
                                                                   (wi )1           (pig ) ]
                                             i=1

with
                                                       N
                                                       X
                                             n
                                             1   =             T1i (wi      in
                                                                                    )
                                                       i=1




                                                               11
   The price of the …nal manufacturing composite in country n is therefore given by
                                             Z                1
                                                                                                             1
                               P n (m) = exp(                         pnG (u))du) = (
                                                                  log(~                                n
                                                                                                       G)
                                                          0



   We next consider the price assignment in the service sector. Since the outputs are non-tradable,
the price of good u in the service sector of country n is then given by

                                                                                 wn
                                                          pns (u) =
                                                                                 Zsn

with distribution Gn (p) = P r(pns (u)            p). The price distribution, Gn (p), satis…es

                                                              wn                                      wn
                                   Gn (p) = P r(                            p) = 1            Fsn (      )
                                                              Zsn                                      p

   By CES aggregation, the price of the …nal service composite in country n is then given by
                                                                    Z       1
                                            n
                                         P (s) = exp(                           log(pns (u))du)
                                                                        0

                                                                                1
                                                          = (Tsn )                  wn

   As a result, the price for the aggregated consumption basket in country n is

                                                 PFn = P n (m) P n (s)1

   De…nition 1: given wage assignment fw1 ; : : : ; wN g, the CPI in any country n is given by

                                            CP I n = P n (m) P n (s)1

where
                                                                                          1
                                                      P n (m) = (                   n
                                                                                    G)

and
                                                                                     1
                                                   P n (s) = (Tsn )                      wn
            n
Note that   G   is given by forward induction, i.e.,

                                                              N
                                                              X
                                                      n
                                                      1   =         T1i (wi          in
                                                                                          )
                                                              i=1

                                   N
                                   X
                           n
                           g   =         Tgi [   in
                                                      (wi )1        (       i
                                                                            g 1)          ]    ; 8g 2 2; : : : ; G
                                   i=1

    From the de…nition, the CPI in country n can also be expressed as a function of the wage
assignment, bilateral trade costs, and the parameters capturing productivity in each country.


                                                                    12
4.2    PPI de…nition
The Producer Price Index (PPI) is de…ned as a weighted average of selling prices charged by domestic
manufacturing …rms. On the one hand, the PPI basket not only excludes imported …nal goods, but
also excludes service output. On the other hand, it includes domestically produced intermediate
goods.
    For output good u produced in stage g, g = 1; : : : ; G, country n buys the good from country
i if the price charged by country i is the lowest, i.e., i = argminfp1n                   Nn
                                                                          g (u); : : : ; pg (u)g. Following
standard results of an Eaton-Kortum model, for g = 2; : : : ; G, the probability of this event is given
by
                      in
                           Tgi [ in (wi )1 (pig ) ]   Tgi [ in (wi )1 ( ig 1 ) ]
                      g  =                n
                                                    =                 n
                                         g                                             g

and for the …rst stage of production,

                                             in         T1i [   in
                                                                     wi ]
                                             1    =                  n
                                                                     1

     Assume country n’s total expenditure on purchasing output produced in stage g is Xgn , g =
1; : : : ; G, and the total spending of country n on goods from country i is Xgin . For any speci…c good
u, the spending of country n on country i for purchasing good u is expected to be in     g multiplied by
its total spending on goods u. Since all the goods are symmetric, for g = 1; : : : ; G, we have

                                                  Xgin               in
                                                       =             g
                                                  Xgn

   The total earnings of country i at the end of stage g, g = 2; : : : ; G, are then given by

                                       N
                                       X Tgi [    in
                                                       (wi )1        (    i
                                                                          g 1)     ]
                               Egi =                                 n
                                                                                       Xgn
                                       n=1                           g


and for the …rst stage of production,

                                                 N
                                                 X T1i [        in
                                                                     wi ]
                                        E1i =                        n       X1n
                                                 n=1                 1


    Given the production function in stage g, g = 2; : : : ; G, 1  fraction of its total earnings at
this stage is paid to domestic households as labor income, and fraction of its total earnings is used
to buy inputs, i.e., outputs from the previous stage. Therefore, for g = 2; : : : ; G, the relationship
between total earnings and total expenditure in country n in each stage is given by

                                                 Xgn     1   = Egn

   Using wn Ln = PFn F n , i.e., the balanced trade assumption, the total expenditure for any country




                                                          13
n on the outputs of manufacturing sector produced in the …nal stage G is given by

                                             n
                                            XG = PFn F n = wn Ln

                                           n
   Given the …nal-stage total expenditure XG in country n, its total earnings at the end of stage g
are given by backward induction, i.e.,

                                  N
                                  X Tgn [   ni
                                                 (wn )1      (      n
                                                                    g 1)           ]
                          Egn =                             i
                                                                                       Xgi ; g = 2; : : : ; G
                                  i=1                       g


                                            Xgn   1   = Egn ; g = 2; : : : ; G

and for the …rst stage,
                                                      N
                                                      X T n[    1
                                                                      ni
                                                                            wn ]
                                            E1n   =                         i
                                                                                       X1i
                                                      i=1                   1

    Note that all the intermediate goods are symmetric. The producer price index, PPI, is then
de…ned as the geometric mean of the domestic producer selling prices in all stages weighted by sales.
In other words, the PPI in country n is given by

                                           wn !n1                           (wn )1 ( ng 1 )             n
                            P P In = [            ]                 G
                                                                    g=2 [                            ]!g
                                         (T1n )1=                                (Tgn )1=

where wgn is the weight of sales on geometric mean of selling prices in each stage, i.e.,

                                                 Egn
                                         ! ng = PG                    ; g = 1; : : : ; G
                                                       g=1   Egn

   De…nition 2: given wage assignment fw1 ; : : : ; wN g, the PPI in country n is given by

                                           wn !n1                           (wn )1 ( ng 1 )             n
                            P P In = [            ]                 G
                                                                    g=2 [                            ]!g
                                         (T1n )1=                                (Tgn )1=

where
                                                 Egn
                                         ! ng = PG                    ; g = 1; : : : ; G
                                                       g=1   Egn
Note that Egn is given by backward induction, i.e.,

                                                   n
                                                  XG = wn Ln ; 8n

                                  N
                                  X Tgn [   ni
                                                 (wn )1      (      n
                                                                    g 1)           ]
                          Egn =                             i
                                                                                       Xgi ; g = 2; : : : ; G
                                  i=1                       g

                                            Xgn   1   = Egn ; g = 2; : : : ; G




                                                                 14
                                                 N
                                                 X T n[ 1
                                                              ni
                                                                   wn ]
                                      E1n   =                      i
                                                                          X1i
                                                 i=1               1

    PPI, de…ned as the domestic producer prices weighted by sales, can be expressed as a function
of wage assignment, labor supply, bilateral trade costs and the parameters capturing productivity
in each country.


4.3    The market clearing condition
The labor demand in country n can be derived from the total earnings in each stage of the production.
Note that, in any stage g of manufacturing production, g = 2; : : : ; G, the earnings paid to domestic
households in country n is given by
                                         Ign = (1   )Egn

   Since the only input in the …rst stage is labor, households’income in the …rst stage is given by

                                                   I1n = E1n

   Therefore, the total income for the households in country n is given by

                                             G
                                             X
                                      In =         Ign + (1            )wn Ln
                                             g=1


                                            G
                                            X
                               = (1     )         Egn + E1n + (1            )wn Ln
                                            g=2

where (1   )wn Ln is the labor income from the service sector.
   Households’total income in country n must equal to the total expenditure in country n, which
requires
                                        I n = wn Ln ; 8n
                                                 G
                                                 X
                               () (1         )         Egn + E1n = wn Ln ; 8n
                                                 g=2

   Since labor supply is …xed, wages will be adjusted to make sure labor market clearing. This
provides a system of N 1 independent equations to solve the wage assignment fw1 ; : : : ; wN g up to
a choice of numeraire.



4.4    Comparative Statics
We are ready to work out how CPI and PPI in‡ation rates respond to productivity and trade cost
shocks, respectively. We …rst consider a productivity shock to any …xed stage of manufacturing
process that is common to all countries. Then, with an eye for deriving theoretical predictions that
can be tested in the data, we focus on a productivity shock to the …rst stage of the manufacturing


                                                         15
production. (We will later use changes in the index of global industrial input prices as a proxy for
such an early-stage shock, and conduct corresponding empirical testings in Section 6.) We use m
to denote a productivity shock to stage h, and the location parameter for the stage-h productivity
                    0
after the shock, lnThn ; can be written as the log of the pre-shock location parameter value plus the
shock, i.e.,
                                            0
                                        lnThn = lnThn + m ; 8n

   We use ns to denote a shock to the service sector productivity, which is unique to country n, and
  to denote a shock to the trade cost, which is common for all countries, respectively, i.e.,

                                                          0
                                                  lnTs n = lnTsn +                  n
                                                                                    s ; 8n

                                                      0in              in
                                                 ln           = ln          +       ; 8i; n
          0
where lnTs n represents the location parameter for the service sector productivity after the shock, and
ln 0in represents the trade cost after the shock. The three shocks are assumed to be independent.
   We conjecture that the wage assignment of all countries, fw1 ; : : : ; wN g, does not change after
the productivity shocks and trade cost shocks. This conjecture can be veri…ed through the labor
market clearing conditions after we obtain the price assignment and labor assignment. Given the
expression of ng , g 2 f1; : : : Gg, after the shocks, it becomes

                                    0                                           g   1
                                     n           n             (1+ +        +           )
                                    g    =       g    e                                         ; g < h; 8n

                           0                     g    h                                     g    1
                            n            n                             (1+ +        +                )
                           g    =        g   e            m
                                                                   e                                     ;g   h; 8n

    By the expressions of Xg and Eg , g 2 f1; : : : Gg, in the de…nition of PPI, with the assumption
of wage assignment not changing, Xg and Eg under the productivity shocks become

                                                               0
                                                          Xgn = Xgn ; 8n

                                                               0
                                                              Egn = Egn ; 8n

which implies that the weights on the prices for de…ning PPI do not change under the shocks, i.e.,
  0
! gn = ! ng for 8n and g 2 f1; : : : Gg.
    Since the total earnings of each country in each stage of manufacturing production do not change
                             0
under the shocks, i.e., Egn = Egn , the labor market clearing conditions under the productivity shocks
are obviously satis…ed. Therefore, we have veri…ed that the wage assignment of all the countries,
fw1 ; : : : ; wN g, does not change under the productivity shocks and trade cost shocks. The intuition
of this result comes from two aspects. First, with the Cobb-Douglas utility function, households
always spend a …xed fraction of their income, i..e., (1       )wn Ln , on purchasing the outputs of the
service sector. Since …rms in the service sector make no pro…ts in competitive markets, they always
require a …xed labor demand, i.e, (1         )Ln , regardless of their productivity. Second, a common
productivity shock to any …xed stage of manufacturing production and a common shock to trade
costs do not a¤ect comparative advantage in any stage of manufacturing process across countries.


                                                                       16
This means that the manufacturing production assignment across countries does not change. As a
result, neither labor assignment nor wage assignment changes across countries.
   By the de…nitions of CPI and PPI, the post-shock CPI and PPI measures in country n are given,
respectively, by
                                                                        G
                             0              1           G h         1
                      lnCP I n = lnCP I n         n
                                                  s          m+
                                                                     1
                                                             G
                                                             X                                 G
                                                                                               X
                               0
                                   n
                                                               ! ng         g h
                                                                                                                       g
                     lnP P I           = lnP P I n       [                        ]   m   +[            ! ng               ]
                                                                                               g=2
                                                                                                               1
                                                         g=h

    The log-deviations of the two price indexes after the shocks in country n are thus given by

                                                                                                               G
                            \I n =              1             n             G h                    1
                           lnCP                               s                       m   +                                    (1)
                                                                                                    1
                                                   G
                                                   X                                  G
                                                                                      X
                                                     ! ng         g h
                                                                                                               g
                           \
                          lnP P In =           [                        ]   m   +[          ! ng                   ]           (2)
                                                                                      g=2
                                                                                                   1
                                                   g=h

    Inspecting these expressions, it is clear that a service-sector productivity shock ns would a¤ect
CPI but not PPI. This is a consequence of the Cobb-Douglas preference, under which the consump-
tion of the manufacturing and service items are fully separable.
    Importantly, as the total number of manufacturing stages G increases, the e¤ect of a common
productivity shock, m , on CPI in‡ation becomes smaller relative to that of a country-speci…c
service-sector shock, ns .
    Mathematically, the correlation between the log-deviations of CPI and PPI in country n after
the productivity shocks is given by

                              \I n ; lnP
                                      \                   1                                        var( ns )           1
                        corr(lnCP        P I n ) = [1 + (                             G   h
                                                                                            )2               ]         2       (3)
                                                                                                   var( m )

    Holding constant the variance of the productivity shocks, since < 1, it is clear that this corre-
                    \I n ; lnP
lation, i.e., corr(lnCP     \  P I n ), is strictly decreasing in G, the total number of manufacturing
stages.
    When h = 1, it indicates a productivity shock to the …rst stage of the manufacturing process
that is common to all countries. In Section 6, we use changes in the index of global industrial input
prices as a proxy for such a shock, and conduct empirical testings for model predictions.


5     The case of homogeneous countries
Additional analytical results can be obtained if we impose some symmetry assumptions. In particular,
let us assume countries are homogeneous, each with identical labor supply, identical productivity
distribution in each stage of manufacturing production, identical productivity distribution in the
service sector, i.e., Ln = Li , Tgn = Tgi = Tg , Tsn = Tsi = Ts for 8n 6= i and 8g 2 f1; : : : ; Gg, and
identical bilateral trade costs, i.e., in = for 8i; n. Under these symmetry assumptions, the wages
must be equal across all countries, i.e., wn = w for 8n. In this case, international trade happens


                                                                  17
because the realizations of productivity are di¤erent across countries.
   By the CPI de…nition, under the homogeneous country assumption, we have

                                                                   1   = N T1 (w )

                                  g   = N Tg [ (w)1                             (    g 1)          ]        ; 8g 2 2; : : : ; G
                     g                                       P
                1
                             g        g   j                 ( g        j    1
                                                                                )
Denote Ag = N    1       [   j=1 Tj           ][              j=1                   ], and then              g   = Ag w               . CPI is thus given by

                                                                                                                     1
                                          CP I = P (m) P (s)1                                 = AG Ts                        w                                 (4)

   We now turn to PPI. By the PPI de…nition, for g = 1; : : : ; G, we have

                                                             G g                                             G g
                                          Xg =                         wL; Eg = Xg =                                     wL

Then, the weights on prices in forming PPI in any stage g, g = 1; : : : ; G, is given by

                                                                    G g                           G g
                                               ! g = PG                     j 1
                                                                                          =             G
                                                                                                            (1           )
                                                                  j=1
                                                                                              1

and PPI is thus given by

                                                                                                    1
                                                       w                                   (w)            ( g 1)
                                 PPI = [                    ]! 1                     G
                                                                                     g=2 [                                        ]!g
                                                    (T1 )1=                                             (Tg )1=
                                                                                !g
                                                                 G                        G        !g
                                                    =[           g=1 Tg              ][   g=2 Ag 1    ]w                                                       (5)

    From the expression of CPI and PPI, i.e., Equation 4 and 5, by taking natural log for both sides
of the expressions, we have

                                                            G
                                                            X                                                    G                                G
                         1                                        G g                              1                                        (1      )
         lnCP I =                lnTs                   [                       lnTg ] +                             ln + lnw                         lnN
                                                            g=1
                                                                                                    1                                        (1    )

and
                                                         XG                                    XG
                                                            !g
                              lnP P I =                 [      lnTg ]                         [   ! g lnAg                   1]   + lnw
                                                        g=1                                   g=2

   Note that, by taking natural log on the expression of Ag , it gives

                                               g
                                               X                                                  g 1                             g
                                                            g j                       1                              1
                              lnAg =                              lnTj                                  ln +                          lnN
                                               j=1
                                                                                          1                          1

Substituting ! g and lnAg into the expression of lnP P I, it yields

                               XG         G g
                                                   (1            )(G        g + 1)                                   G G + (G               1) G+1
            lnP P I =         [                                     G
                                                                                          lnTg ] +                                          G
                                                                                                                                                   ln
                              g=1
                                                            (1          )                                            (1   )(1                 )


                                                                                     18
                                                             XG       G g            G
                                             +lnw           [                   G
                                                                                          lnN ]
                                                                g=2
                                                                       1
                                                                                                              10
With the expressions of lnCP I and lnP P I, we proceed with Proposition 1.


Proposition 1 Given N homogeneous countries with identical bilateral trade costs, wages are iden-
tical across countries. The market equilibrium always exists, and the CPI and PPI indices are given,
respectively, by

                                           XG                                              G                         G
                           1                          G g                       (1             )               (1      )
            lnCP I =              lnTs    [                     lnTg ] +                           ln + lnw              lnN
                                            g=1
                                                                                 1                              (1    )

                                XG    G g
                                            (1        )(G       g + 1)                             G G + (G   1) G+1
                 lnP P I =     [                        G
                                                                         lnTg ] +                             G
                                                                                                                     ln
                                g=1
                                                 (1         )                                      (1   )(1     )

                                                             XG       G g            G
                                             +lnw           [                   G
                                                                                          lnN ]
                                                                g=2
                                                                       1

   We can now derive explicit expressions about how CPI and PPI in‡ation respond to di¤erent
types of shocks. It is worth noting that, as more countries participate in international trade, both
CPI and PPI in‡ation will decrease due to higher probability of lower production costs through
outsourcing.


5.1        Productivity shock in the manufacturing sector
Consider a common global shock to the …rst stage productivity in the manufacturing production,
lnT1 . By Proposition 1, the responses of CPI and PPI are given, respectively, by

                                                   \I =
                                                  lnCP                     G 1    d1
                                                                                 lnT

                                                                                 G 1
                                             \                  G (1        )              d1
                                            lnP PI =                            G
                                                                                          lnT
                                                                       1
which yield
                                                       \
                                                      lnP PI   G(1                   )
                                                             =                   G
                                                       \I
                                                      lnCP     (1                     )
                                                                                         \I=lnT
    It is obvious that the response of CPI in‡ation to the productivity shock, i.e., jlnCP      d1 j =
   G 1
        , is strictly decreasing with respect to the number of total stages, G. For the response of PPI
in‡ation, given 2 (0; 1) and G 1, it is also strictly decreasing with respect to the number of total
stages. The proofs can be found in Appendix C. Furthermore, the right hand side of the expression
    \
of lnP        \I can be shown to be strictly increasing in the number of total stages, G. Details
        P I=lnCP
 1 0 It   can be easily veri…ed that, in the current settings, an equilibrium always exists.




                                                                  19
can be found in Appendix D. This implies Proposition 2.


Proposition 2 As the number of manufacturing production stages increases, both CPI and PPI
in‡ation become less responsive to a common global productivity shock in the …rst stage of manufac-
turing production, but the CPI in‡ation exhibits a greater decline in the responsiveness.


5.2    A decline in the correlation between the two in‡ation measures
We consider a common global productivity shock in the …rst stage of manufacturing sector, i.e., lnT1 ,
together with a productivity shock in the service sector, i.e., lnTs . By Proposition 1, the responses
of CPI and PPI are given by

                                 \I =          G 1    d1           1       ds
                                lnCP                 lnT                   lnT

                                                                 G 1
                                    \          G (1          )             d1
                                   lnP PI =                      G
                                                                          lnT
                                                         1
                                            d1 shock and lnT
    Holding constant the variances of the lnT              d s shock, as the number of manufac-
                                G 1 d                                      d s . Since lnT
                                                                                        d1 is the
turing stages, G, increases,        lnT1 , becomes smaller relative to 1 lnT
                                                                         \I and lnP
common component in the two in‡ation indexes, the correlation between lnCP           \  P I would
become smaller too. This echoes the results derived under heterogeneous countries as showed in
Equation 3. Formally, we have Proposition 3.


Proposition 3 Holding constant the variances of the productivity shocks in the manufacturing and
                                                                                           \I and
service sectors, as the number of manufacturing stages increases, the correlation between lnCP
 \
lnP P I decreases.

   We might contrast this proposition with what would happen under simultaneous global shocks
to both service and manufacturing sectors. Where there is a common global shock in all sectors,
CPI and PPI could become more, not less, correlated. An example of such a simultaneous shock
might be the global …nancial crisis of 2008-2010, which likely had negatively a¤ected all sectors at
the same time.


5.3    Common shocks in trade costs
Consider a common shock to trade costs, i.e., ln . By Proposition 1, the responses of CPI and PPI
are given by
                                                      G
                                    \I = (1
                                   lnCP
                                                        )d
                                                         ln
                                                  1
                                                             G 1
                                \                        G           (1     ) d
                               lnP PI =        [1                      G
                                                                             ]ln
                                          1                  1



                                                    20
    Since < 1, it is obvious that CPI in‡ation would become more responsive to a shock to the trade
costs shock as the number of manufacturing stages, G, increases. Similar to the proof in Appendix
C, it can be shown that PPI in‡ation would also become more responsive. To see the intuition,
it is important to recognize that trade costs exist in each stage of the manufacturing production.
Therefore, as the number of manufacturing stages increase, the total impact of trade costs on both
CPI and PPI becomes greater.
    Note that a reduction in the trade costs does not by itself lead to a lower correlation between
CPI and PPI in‡ation. To produce a lower correlation, it is necessary for the variance of the trade
cost shocks to decline much more than the variance of the productivity shocks to the service sector.
Otherwise, with an increase in the number of manufacturing production stages, the correlation could
increase as the greater trade costs simultaneously raise both CPI and PPI more than proportionately.


6     Empirical tests
A rise in the length of production process from the pre-2001 period to the post-2002 period - as
documented in Wang et al. (2017) - is in theory capable of generating a decline in the correlation
between CPI and PPI in‡ation measures, the empirical pattern that motivates this paper. To solidify
macroeconomic signi…cance of this model that stresses an expanding production chain, we now check
for empirical validity of other model-predicted consequences of a rise in the production length. In
particular, as stated by Proposition 2 in Section 5, we will check if the responsiveness of both CPI
and PPI to a common global productivity shock in the …rst-stage manufacturing production indeed
becomes weaker after 2002,
    Since the countries in the real world are not symmetric, the closed-form predictions in the model
might be regarded as an approximation for predictions in an asymmetric world.11 Indeed, in Sec-
tion 7:1, we use calibrations to show that similar predictions emerge from the model without the
symmetric assumptions.
    Since productivity shocks are not directly observed, we use observed changes in the global in-
dustrial input price index as a proxy for common global productivity shocks in the …rst-stage man-
ufacturing production. Industrial inputs - metals and agricultural raw materials for manufacturing
purposes - are disproportionally used in the very early stage of manufacturing production.12 Thus, a
change in the cost of industrial inputs can be viewed as a shock to the productivity of the …rst-stage
manufacturing production.
    It is useful and important to note that Proposition 2 should also hold for a productivity shock to
any other …xed stage h of the manufacturing process (not just the …rst stage of production). As long
as the change in industrial input prices can be regarded as a shock to early stages of production, we
should expect to see similar patterns in the CPI and PPI responses.
  1 1 In the case of heterogeneous countries, from Equation 1, it is clear that, as the number of production stages in-

creases, the response of CPI in‡ation to the …rst stage productivity shock becomes smaller, but it is not straightforward
for the response of PPI in‡ation.
  1 2 More precisely, the industrial input price index is constructed by the prices in two categories: metals and agricul-

tural raw materials (those for manufacturing purposes). Metals include Copper, Aluminum, Iron ore, Tin, Nickel, Zinc,
Lead, and Uranium; agricultural raw materials include timber, softwood, cotton, wool, rubber, and hides. Details can
be found in the IMF report, “Indices of primary commodity prices, 2007-2017 (by group, in terms of U.S.$).”



                                                           21
    As a robustness check, we will also use changes in the primary commodity price index as an
alternative proxy. The primary commodity price index is constructed by merging the industrial
input price index together with energy prices and prices for other non-fuel commodities (i.e., food
and beverages).
    We start with data in annual frequency that covers the period from 1980 to 2014. The data for
CPI, PPI, and wage per hour are measured in local currency, and collected from national sources.
Note that the Global Financial Crisis that started in 2008 might be regarded as a di¤erent and
special shock. In order for the empirics not to be "contaminated" by the Global Financial Crisis,
we have also conducted a robustness check in which the sample stops at 2007, and …nd the same
results.
    Appendix Figure A:2 shows the number of countries for which both CPI and PPI data are
available in each year.13 They range from 36 countries in 1980, 47 in 1990, 78 in 2000, and 86 in
2010. The industrial input price index, available from 1980 onwards, and the primary commodity
price index, available from 1992 onwards, are both constructed and reported by the International
Monetary Fund. Both are denominated in US dollars. In later regressions, they are converted into
local currencies.
    As documented earlier, there appears to be a structural break for the production length and in the
relationship between CPI and PPI around 2001. We thus separate the sample into two sub-samples:
1980-2001 and the other with 2001-2014.


6.1     Empirical speci…cation
We use industrial input price changes as a proxy for the common productivity shock to the …rst
stage production in manufacturing sector. Our baseline speci…cation is given by the following:

                      lnCP Itn =     1     lnCP Itn    1   +   2
                                                                       n
                                                                    lnPIndustrial;t + Xtn +   n
                                                                                              CP I;t                 (6)

                      lnP P Itn =    1     lnP P Itn   1   +   2
                                                                       n
                                                                    lnPIndustrial;t + Xtn +   n
                                                                                              P P I;t                (7)
             n
where lnPIndustrial;t   denotes the log-change in industrial input price in local currency, and Xtn
indicates other control variables including log-change of nominal wage per hour, year dummies
denoting the Great Recession period, the interaction of Great Recession dummies with the log-change
in industrial input price, domestic price index level and country …xed e¤ects. All the variables are
denominated in nominal local currency term.
    The baseline results of the speci…cation are shown in Table 1. Columns 1 and 2 use the pre-2001
sample, while Columns 3 to 6 use the post-2001 sample. Dummies denoting the period of Global
Financial Crisis are controlled in Columns 5 and 6: In Table 1, the coe¢ cient on changes in industrial
input prices, i.e., lnPIndustrial;t , is signi…cantly positive in all columns. This is not surprising.
    To shed light on the validity of our model, we compare the evolution in the responses of the
two in‡ation measures to changes in industrial input prices in the pre-2001 and post-2001 sub-
  1 3 In the case of heterogeneous countries, from Equation 1, it is clear that, as the number of production stages in-

creases, the response of CPI in‡ation to the …rst stage productivity shock becomes smaller, but it is not straightforward
for the response of PPI in‡ation.



                                                               22
samples. We can see that both CPI in‡ation and PPI in‡ation become less responsive after 2001,
and the response of CPI decreases even faster than that of PPI. These patterns are consistent with
Proposition 2.
     To formally test the last statement, we report the ratio of PPI in‡ation response divided by the
                                @ lnP P I =@ lnP
CPI in‡ation response, i.e., @ lnCP Itt =@ lnPIndustrial;t
                                                 Industrial;t
                                                              in Table 1. It shows that the response of PPI
in‡ation relative to the response of CPI in‡ation becomes larger after 2001, i.e., the ratio is 1:334 in
the pre-2001 period and becomes 4:706 in the post-2001 period. By one-sided test, we can see that
the response ratio between PPI and CPI in‡ation is signi…cantly larger in the post-2001 period. In
other words, given that both CPI and PPI in‡ation respond less to the industrial input price change,
the response of CPI is decreasing faster than that of PPI.
     To check whether the results are driven by the …nancial crisis, we have also controlled the year
dummies denoting the Great Recession, i.e., the year of 2008 and 2009, in Table 1, and all the results
are robust.
     To be closer to the theoretical model, we have also controlled the country-speci…c labor cost,
i.e., nominal wage per hour, as reported in Table 2. Since wage data are missing for half of the
sample, and most countries reporting wage data are developed countries, we construct the variable,
W ageDummy           lnwaget , in the regression to utilize the information in the full sample set. More
speci…cally, it equals lnwaget if wage data are available; otherwise, it equals 0. As shown In Table
2, consistent with the analysis for Table 1, all the coe¢ cients before the log-change in industrial
input price are positive and signi…cant. Compared with the pre-2001 period, both CPI and PPI
in‡ation in the post-2001 sample are less responsive to changes in the industrial input prices, and
the decline in the responsiveness of CPI is greater.
     To see if the in‡ation responsiveness could be a¤ected by the level of in‡ation itself, we control
for the one-year lag of the log price level, i.e., lnCP I and lnP P I, in Table 3. The one-sided ratio
test rejects the null of no di¤erence in the change in sensitivity between CPI and PPI, in favor of the
alternative that the decline in CPI’s sensitivity is greater, with a p-value of 1:6% when the global
…nancial crisis period is not controlled for, and with a p-value of 2:2% when the global …nancial crisis
period is controlled for. In other words, our conclusion on the relative changes in the sensitivity of
CPI and PPI to industrial input prices from the pre-2001 sample to the post-2002 sample is robust
to controlling for the level of in‡ation.
     Jasova et al. (2016) have documented that the pass-through of exchange rate to consumer prices
has fallen in emerging markets since 2000. It may be useful to also separate exchange rate changes
from changes in global industrial input prices in dollar terms. We do so in Appendix Table A:1.
While the coe¢ cients before the log-change of industrial input price in Appendix Table A:1 become
smaller compared with those in Table 1, 2 or 3, they are still signi…cantly positive. Most importantly,
we continue to …nd that both CPI and PPI respond less to the industrial input prices after 2001.
Furthermore, with the p-value of a one-sided ratio test of 1:1% in Column 3 and 4 in Appendix Table
A:1, and 1:6% in Column 5 and 6, the decline in the CPI in‡ation’s responsiveness is greater than
that of PPI in‡ation. In addition, similar to Jasova et al. (2016), the coe¢ cients for the exchange
rate pass-through are also smaller after 2001.
     For robustness check regarding Great Recession, we have also controlled the interaction term of


                                                    23
Great Recession dummies with the log-change in industrial input prices, e.g., Table 3 and Appendix
Table A:1, and all the results are robust.
   With a lagged dependent variable on the right-hand side in Speci…cation 6 and 7, the least-
squares dummy variable (LSDV) estimator may not be consistent. To address this issue, we adopt a
quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimator (Hsiao, Pesaran, and Tahmiscioglu, 2002) for dynamic
panel data. As robustness checks, we also use the Arellano-Bond estimator (Arellano and Bond,
1991), and the LSDV estimator. As reported in Appendix E, these results are qualitatively the same
as what is reported here.


6.2     Robustness checks
As a robustness check, we use the primary commodity price index constructed by the IMF as a proxy
for a productivity shock in the …rst-stage manufacturing production. The index incorporates the
industrial input price index with energy prices, i.e., crude oil, natural gas, and coal prices, and other
non-fuel commodities prices, i.e., food and beverage prices.14 More speci…cally, the weight of the
primary commodity price index on industrial inputs price is 18:4%, and the weight on energy price
is 63:1%, and the weight on other non-fuel commodities price (i.e., food and beverage) is 18:5%.
In other words, energy price plays a relatively more important role in the change of the primary
commodity price index.
    On the one hand, since energy is used in all stages of production, an exogenous change in the
energy price might be regarded as a shock to all stages of manufacturing production. On the other
hand, crude oil, natural gas, and coal, can be inputs for manufacturing process, and especially are
taken as initial inputs for producing chemical relevant products. Therefore, we might still view the
change in energy price as a shock primarily to early stages of production. Nonetheless, since the
commodity price shock also a¤ects later stages of production, our model implies that both PPI and
CPI would become more responsive to such a shock than to one in the …rst stage of manufacturing
production only.
    Using similar speci…cations as Speci…cation 6 and 7, we have

                      lnCP Itn =       1    CP Itn   1   +       2
                                                                            n
                                                                         lnPCommodity;t + Xtn +   n
                                                                                                  CP I;t


                     lnP P Itn =   1       lnP P Itn     1   +       2
                                                                            n
                                                                         lnPCommodity;t + Xtn +    n
                                                                                                   P P I;t

             n
where lnPCommodity;t   denotes the log-change of primary commodity price in local currency, and Xtn
indicates other control variables including log-change of nominal wage per hour, year dummies
denoting the Great Recession period, the interaction of Great Recession dummies with the log-
change in primary commodity price, domestic price index level and country …xed e¤ects. All the
variables are denominated in nominal terms and local currency. The estimation is conducted with
a quasi-maximum likelihood method.
   Appendix Table A:2 and A:3 show the responses of both CPI and PPI in‡ation to commodity
  1 4 More precisely, the food category within the primary commodity price index de…ned by IMF includes cereals,

vegetable oils or protein meals, meat, seafood, sugar, bananas, and oranges, while the category of beverages includes
co¤ee, cocoa beans, and tea.



                                                                 24
price changes. In both tables, the coe¢ cients before the log-change in the primary commodity
price index are signi…cantly positive in all columns. More importantly, both CPI and PPI in‡ation
respond less to changes in commodity prices after 2001, and the decline is greater for CPI.
    Comparing Columns 3 to 6 in Table 1 and Appendix Table A:2, the responsiveness of CPI and
PPI to commodity prices is indeed greater than to industrial input prices. Similar patterns hold
when comparing Columns 3 to 6 in Table 3 and Appendix Table A:3. These patterns are also
consistent with the model implications. Again, when we use the Arellano-Bond estimator or the
LSDV estimator, the results are robust.


6.3    Comments on alternative explanations
Two other factors could explain a secular decline in the correlation between CPI and PPI as well.
First, if the share of services in the consumption basket rises over time, it could drive an increasing
wedge between the two in‡ation measures over time and therefore a decline in their correlation.
Second, if globalization exerts more downward pressure on the prices of goods than on the prices of
services, it could also lead to a reduction in the correlation between the two measures of in‡ation.
    Note that the global value chain story and these two factors are not mutually exclusive. All three
could take place in the data. Nonetheless, we explore the implications of these two alternatives and
conclude that they do not play a big role in the documented decline in the CPI-PPI correlation.
    Recall that the dramatic decline in the CPI-PPI correlation took place around 2001, with virtually
no visible change in the correlation before. To be consistent with this pattern, both of the two
alternative stories would require a discrete increase in the rising trend of the service expenditure
share in the consumption basket around 2001. We check this prediction using data in WIOD.
Appendix Figure A:3 presents the results for the largest advanced and emerging market economies.
As shown in Appendix Figure A:3, this prediction is not supported in the data. In fact, in China,
Japan, United Kingdom, India, and the European Union as a whole, the change in the service share
after 2001 appears to be below the pre-2001 trend. (The dashed lines in Appendix Figure A:3
represent a country-speci…c trend constructed from the data from 1995 to 2001.) If we look at the
median share of service expenditures in the consumption basket across all countries in the sample
(the bottom-right graph), the post-2001 share also appears to be below the trend. Furthermore,
if the rising share of services explanation does matter a lot for the CPI-PPI correlation, the rising
trend of service share before 2001 as showed in Appendix Figure A:3 is not consistent with the fact
that, as illustrated in Figure 1, the correlation between CPI and PPI in‡ation is nearly constant
before 2001.
    Switching to data for OECD countries, the median share of services (excluding housing) in the
CPI basket, reported in Appendix Figure A:4; also shows that the post-2001 increase is below a
simple linear trend. These patterns suggest that the two alternative stories unlikely have played a
major role in explaining a dramatic decline in the correlation between CPI and PPI after 2001.
    The two alternative stories also carry predictions for the sensitivity of the CPI and PPI indices
to a change in the industrial input prices. In particular, if an increase in the service share in the
consumption basket is the only change (with no increase in the stages of production), then the PPI



                                                  25
responsiveness to a change in the industrial input prices should not change. This is not supported
by the evidence in all the regression tables so far.
    Under the globalization story (globalization reduces the markups on internationally trade goods
more than those on service items), the PPI index should become more responsive to a given change
in the global industrial input prices. This is also inconsistent with the results in all the regression
tables so far.


7    Quantitative Analysis of the Model
We have used the model to derive qualitative predictions about the average behavior of PPI and
CPI in the previous sections. In the previous section, we focus on the average behavior across all
countries. We now attempt something more ambitious, which is to derive variations across countries
in the theoretical PPI response to shocks and check them against the data. In particular, we (1) use
the theoretical model and the data on international trade to back out productivity realizations at
each stage of production in each country and trade costs for each country pair, under two assumed
lengths of manufacturing production, (2) derive the responses of PPI to a productivity shock in
the …rst-stage manufacturing production in each country, (3) empirically estimate country-speci…c
responses of PPI to changes in the global industrial input prices, and (4) compare the two country
rankings in terms of the model-implied versus empirically estimated sizes of PPI response.
    It is worth emphasizing that the test in (4) is demanding as (2) and (3) draw on two completely
di¤erent datasets. While (2) uses the input-output relationship in WIOD and bilateral trade data,
(3) uses nationally reported PPI data and the IMF-reported global industrial input price index. Our
theory is the only one in the literature that explicitly tie these two together.
    We have two objectives in mind for the exercise in this section. First, in the model calibrations,
we do not have to maintain symmetric assumptions as in Section 5. We verify that Proposition
2 that has been derived under the symmetric assumptions also holds in calibrations without these
assumptions. Second, while the previous empirical section investigates the average behavior of
the in‡ation measures across countries, this section attempts something more ambitious - checking
whether the empirical data patterns at the level of individual countries are consistent with the model
predictions that allow for country heterogeneity.
    Note that we choose to focus only on heterogeneity in PPI rather than that of CPI in this
exercise. The reason can be seen from Equation 1 and 2 in Section 4:4: while the PPI response
to a common productivity shock is country-speci…c, while CPI is not. Indeed, while the dispersion
in the empirically estimated elasticity of PPI to the industrial input price index is relatively big
(0.074), the dispersion of empirically estimated CPI response is much smaller (0.038). (An F-test
easily rejects the null that the two dispersions are the same in favor of the alternative that the PPI
elasticities are more dispersed.)
    To study the average behavior of PPI in response to a lengthening of the supply chain, one could
in principle derive the results in a closed economy model with no international trade in intermediate
goods. However, to study cross country heterogeneity in the PPI responses and to take into account
the observed data patterns in trade in intermediate goods, it becomes essential to use a multi-country


                                                  26
multi-stage model.
    There are three di¤erent types of parameters in the model: share parameters in the produc-
tion functions f ; g, bilateral trade costs f in g for 8i; n = 1; : : : ; N , and location parameters
   n
fTg=1;:::;G ; Tsn gN
                   n=1 and shape parameter for the productivity distributions.
    We use the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) in 1998 and 2005 to calibrate the model.
The database covers 40 countries, including the most important economies in the world in terms of
either GDP or volume of international trade. We use 1998 as a representative year for the pre-2001
period, and 2005 as a representative year for the post-2001 period. As a robustness check, we also
use 1997 and 2006 as a representative year in the pre-2001 and post-2001 periods, respectively, and
…nd the similar results.


7.1    Calibration
For the share parameters, since 1        is the labor share in manufacturing production, it is set at
  = 0:67 to match the median input share of manufactures following Johnson and Moxnes (2013).
We set the median share of manufactures in …nal expenditure over all countries, , to be 0:416 for
1998 and 0:402 for 2005, respectively.
    The model assumes that the productivity in a given stage, sector, and country is independently
drawn from a common Fréchet distribution, with a common shape parameter and di¤erent location
parameters for di¤erent countries. Following Simonnovska and Waugh (2014), we set the shape
parameter at = 4:12.
    Note that, re-scaling the location parameters for all countries does not alter comparative advan-
tages, and thus does not a¤ect the quantity assignment in equilibrium, nor bilateral trade shares.
Without loss of generality, we set the United States to be Country 1 and normalize its location
parameters in each stage to be one, i.e., Tg1 = 1 for g = 1; : : : ; G. In this sense, other country’s
technology parameters are measured relative to those of the United States. While the technology
parameters in the manufacturing sector will be estimated from the observed bilateral trade shares in
intermediate goods and …nal goods, we cannot do the same thing for the service sector productivity
since service output is not directly traded. Instead, we assume the location parameter for service
sector productivity in a given country to be a geometric average of the location parameters across
                                                                  PG
all manufacturing stages in the same country, i.e., Tsn = exp[( g=1 logTgn )=G] for 8n. This im-
plies that a country is assumed to be more productive in the service sector if its manufacturing is
more productive on average. This assumption does not a¤ect the estimated responses of PPI to a
…rst-stage productivity shock.
    We need some restrictions on the bilateral trade costs to keep the number of parameters man-
ageable. Following Head and Ries (2001), we back out the bilateral trade costs by bilateral trade
shares in …nal goods, i.e.,                         v
                                                    u ^ ^
                                                    u in ni
                                          ( in ) = t G G
                                                        ^ii ^nn
                                                       G G

        in
where   G is the bilateral trade share in terms of …nal goods, i.e, the spending by country n on the
…nal goods produced in country i divided by total spending of country n on …nal goods. Details on


                                                 27
the construction of the bilateral trade shares are described later. This method of calibrating trade
costs is also adopted by Antràs and De Gortari (2017).
    To summarize, there are G (N 1) number of location parameters for productivities that need
                                    n
to be backed out, and they are fTg=1;:::;G gN
                                            n=2 . To do so, we match the expenditure of country n
in purchasing country i’s intermediate and …nal goods, respectively, as a share of country n’s total
expenditure. The matching targets are de…ned as, for 8i; n,

                                                                     N
                                                                     X
                                       in                       in
                         InterShare         = (InterExpense =              InterExpensein )
                                                                     i=1

                                                                     N
                                                                     X
                         F inalSharein = (F inalExpensein =                F inalExpensein )
                                                                     i=1

                                     n
    For any speci…c values of      fTg=1;:::;G gN
                                                n=2 ,
                                               the model gives a matrix of bilateral trade shares in
terms of …nal goods and intermediate goods. The parameter values are chosen to minimize the sum
of the distances of bilateral trade shares between the model prediction and the data.
    The …rst 19 sectors in WIOD are de…ned as “manufacturing activities” and aggregated into a
single “manufacturing sector,” while the remaining 16 service sectors are aggregated into a single
“service sector.” Since the …nal shares and intermediate shares for any country n sum up to one,
there are 2(N 2 N ) moments. As long as 2(N 2 N ) G(N 1), the model can be identi…ed.15
    The number of manufacturing production stages is exogenous in the model. As a baseline case,
we set G = 2 for 1998, and G = 3 for 2005. As a robustness check, we also use G = 4 for 2005.16
The model is over-identi…ed in all cases.
    Table 4 summarizes the calibration for parameters not estimated from bilateral trade shares, and
Appendix Table A:4 and A:5 report the estimated results for productivity location parameters in
1998 and 2005, respectively.
    We will estimate the model by the method of moments. As there are around one hundred
parameters to be estimated in the nonlinear environment, one needs to search for a global optimum.
We adopt a simulated-annealing algorithm in optimization (Bertsimas and Tsitsiklis, 1993), which
introduces a probability of jumping out of local optimums, making it more likely to reach a global
optimum.
  1 5 When we estimate the bilateral trade shares predicted by the model, we use population data in 1998 and 2005,

respectively, from the Penn World Table 9.0 to proxy for labor supply. Following Johnson and Moxnes (2013), we
construct relative wages across countries by total household consumption (in WIOD) divided by total labor supply in
the estimation.
  1 6 This is consistent with Antràs and De Gortari (2017). In addition, for the pre-2001 period, the case of G = 1 can

be easily ruled out. Were it be the case that G = 1, the responses of PPI to the …rst-stage productivity shock would
have been same across all countries, which is obviously rejected by the data. Following Antràs and De Gortari (2017),
we set G = 2 for the pre-2001 period. Since Wang et al. (2017) show that the production length is greater after 2001,
we consider G=3 for the post-2001 period as the baseline. We have also conducted the calibration for the cases of
G = 2; 3 and 4 for the post-2001 period, the results in Section 7:4 suggest that G = 3 for the post-2001 period is most
appropriate.




                                                          28
7.2     The log-deviation of CPI and PPI in response to manufacturing pro-
        ductivity shock
Given the calibrated parameters in this section, we generate the model-predicted responses of PPI
in‡ation to a productivity shock in the …rst-stage of manufacturing production as shown in Equation
1 and 2. Table 5 shows the log-deviation of CPI and PPI in response to a …rst-stage productivity
shock, and illustrates the lnP P I= lnCP I ratio as the length of global value chain becomes larger.
(Recall from Equation 1, the CPI response in theory has no variations across countries, although
it is a declining function of the number of production stages. In comparison, the PPI response in
theory does have variations across countries, in addition to be a declining function of the number of
production stages.)
    From Table 5, as the number of production stages increases from 2 to 3, both the log-deviations
of CPI and PPI become less responsive as illustrated in Column 1 and 3 of Table 5. In addition,
the decline in sensitivity is greater for CPI than for PPI. Speci…cally, as shown in Columns 1 and
3 of Table 5, the median of lnP P I= lnCP I ratio increases from 2:408 in 1998 to 3:016 in 2005.
These patterns are in line with the theoretical predictions in Proposition 2.
    As a robustness check, we also generate the model-predicted response of CPI and PPI in‡ation
under the assumption of G = 4 in 2005. Appendix Table A:6 reports the estimated productivity
location parameters in this case, and Appendix Table A:7 reports the log-deviation of CPI and
PPI in response to a …rst stage productivity shock, respectively. The key message is that, as the
number of production stages increases, both CPI and PPI become less responsive, and the median
of lnP P I= lnCP I ratio increases from 2:408 in 1998 to 2:997 in 2005.


7.3     The empirical country-speci…c in‡ation responses to changes in global
        industrial input price prices
We next explore cross-country heterogeneity in the response of PPI in‡ation to changes in global
industrial input prices. Speci…cally, we run the following regression:

                   lnP P Itn =    1    lnP P Itn   1   +   n
                                                           2    In      n
                                                                     lnPIndustrial;t + Xtn +   n
                                                                                               P P I;t


where I n is a country dummy variable and Xtn indicates other control variables including log-change
in wage per hour and country …xed e¤ects. All the variables are denominated in nominal terms and
local currency.17
    Even though the CPI response in theory does not have variations across countries, we could still
  1 7 We adopt LSDV estimators for the regressions incorporating country-speci…c CPI and PPI responses. On the

one hand, the estimators for dynamic panel data like QML do not apply here. From econometric theory aspect, the
asymptotic assumptions for those dynamic panel estimators (i.e., given …nite time periods T, the number of groups
N goes to in…nity) does not hold. For the speci…c regressions in this subsection, if N goes to in…nity, the number of
independent variables goes to in…nity, which makes the estimators not applicable. On the other hand, since we are
interested in PPI responses, and, as showed in the tables in Section 6, the auto-correlation for PPI is very weak, the
LSDV estimator will not generate strong bias. In addition, we have also done the estimations using the corrected
LSDV estimators (Judson and Owen, 1999), and the results are robust.




                                                               29
estimate the CPI responses at the country level in a way that is parallel to the PPI regression:

                                                     n
                  lnCP Itn =   1    CP Itn   1   +   2   In      n
                                                              lnPIndustrial;t + Xtn +   n
                                                                                        CP I;t


    Appendix Figure A:5 summarizes the distribution of the estimated CPI and PPI elasticities to
industrial input prices for those countries included in WIOD. Going from Column 1 to Column 2 in
Appendix Figure A:5, we see that both CPI and PPI elasticities declined after 2001. In addition,
for the pre-2001 period, the dispersion of the CPI elasticity across countries, measured by standard
derivation, is 0:165, which is substantially smaller than the dispersion of the PPI elasticity at 0:266.
Similarly, for the post-2001 period, the dispersion of CPI elasticity (0:038), which is also substantially
smaller than the dispersion of PPI elasticity (0:074). We interpret the result that the cross-country
heterogeneity is much smaller for the CPI response as consistent with the implications of the model.


7.4    Model calibrations versus empirical results
We now examine the relationship between the model predictions and the regression estimates in
terms of the cross-country heterogeneity in the PPI response to the industrial input price shock.
    Table 6 reports the correlation between the model-implied and empirically estimated PPI elastic-
ities. It also includes the p-value for the one-sided T-test under the null hypothesis of zero correlation
or negative correlation against an alternative of a positive correlation. In Column 1 of Table 6, we
calibrate PPI elasticities across countries using 1998 data with the assumption of G = 2, and em-
pirically estimate PPI elasticities in the pre-2001 sample that allow for cross-country heterogeneity
as showed in Subsection 7:3. The correlation between the calibration results and empirics is 0:441;
one can reject the null of no correlation with a p-value 0:9%. This means that the cross-country
heterogeneity in the empirical PPI response is in line with the model predictions. In other words,
countries that are predicted to have a stronger PPI response by the model tend to have a stronger
PPI response from the regressions.
    We emphasize again that, this test is quite demanding since the model calibrations and empirical
regressions draw on two completely di¤erent (in fact, non-overlapping) sets of data. The model
predictions use the input-output relations in WIOD and bilateral trade data. In comparison, the
empirical PPI elasticities use nationally reported PPI statistics and IMF-reported global industrial
input prices, but do not use information from the input-output data nor the trade data. So a positive
correlation between the two that is statistically signi…cant is good news for the model.
    Column 3 in Table 6 presents the calibrated PPI elasticities across countries (under the as-
sumption of G = 3 and using the 2005 world input-output table) against the empirically estimated
post-2001 PPI elasticities. The correlation between the calibrated and empirically estimated elas-
ticities is 0:388, and it is signi…cantly greater than zero with a p-value 1:0%.
    To examine whether the use of data from other adjacent years would materially alter our infer-
ence, we also perform the exercise with the data in 1997 for the pre-2001 period under the assumption
of G = 2, and with the data in 2006 for the post-2001 period under the assumption of G = 3. Col-
umn 2 and 4 show the correlation between the calibrated PPI elasticities by the model and the
empirically estimated elasticities for these two cases, respectively. Similar pattern follows, and we


                                                         30
obtain a statistically signi…cant positive correlation, i.e., 0:498, with a p-value 0:3% for the pre-2001
period, and a statistically signi…cant positive correlation, i.e., 0:328, with a p-value 2:6% for the
post-2001 period. All of these results suggest that the model predictions (of the PPI response to
shocks) and regression estimates are consistent with each other.
    Another robustness check we perform is to assume G = 4 in the post-2001 period. Column 5 in
Table 6 reports the correlation between the model-calibrated PPI elasticities (using the 2005 world
input-output table under the assumption of G = 4) and the empirically estimated post-2001 PPI
elasticities. Even though the correlation is not statistically signi…cant, it is still positive.
    To summarize, in spite of the fact that the model predictions and regression estimation draw on
two di¤erent data sets, the patterns of cross-country heterogeneity from the two are consistent with
each other. In particular, those countries predicted to have a stronger PPI response from the model
also tend to be the ones with a stronger PPI response in the data. This bolters the case that the
model is informative and useful.


8    Concluding remarks
If PPI and CPI in‡ation diverge, the optimal monetary policy as suggested by the literature needs to
target PPI rather than CPI in‡ation. This paper documents two phases for the correlation between
the two in‡ation measures. In the last century, the correlation was very high, and as a consequence,
which in‡ation index to be put in the monetary policy rule is not important in practice. However,
since the start of this century, the two in‡ation indices have diverged. This provides gravitas to those
papers emphasizing welfare gains associated with targeting PPI in‡ation relative to CPI in‡ation.
    How important it is for central banks to revise their policy rules also depends on whether the
divergence of the two in‡ation indices is transitory or permanent. This paper proposes a theory for
the divergence of two in‡ation gauges based on a rise in the global value chains. This structural
explanation suggests that the decline in the correlation between PPI and CPI is likely to be per-
manent. The key idea is that, as the vertical fragmentation become stronger, i.e., with an increase
in the number of stages in the production process, more intermediate goods enter the national PPI
basket. As a result, the common component in the two price indexes (i.e., domestically consumed
…nal goods which are also domestically produced) becomes a smaller fraction of the PPI basket. This
means that the divergence between the two price indices is at least in part driven by a fundamental
force (increasing segmentation of the production process).
    We build a multiple-production-stage version of the Eaton-Kortum multi-country model to il-
lustrate this intuition, and take the model predictions to the data. Besides a fall in the correlation
between PPI and CPI (which is consistent with the model), we also …nd con…rmation of other pre-
dictions of the model. First, by using industrial input price as a proxy for upstream productivity
shocks, we …nd that both CPI and PPI in‡ation become less responsive to such shocks in the post-
2001 sample than in the pre-2001 sample. Second, the reduction in the sensitivity is greater for CPI
than for PPI. The results are robust from controlling for labor cost, price index level, and nominal
exchange rate changes.
    We also attempt a more demanding exercise by examining cross-country heterogeneity in the PPI


                                                   31
responses (among 40 countries covered in the WIOD) to global industrial input price changes. From
the model, observed bilateral trade shares in intermediate goods are used to back out realizations of
productivity shocks at every stage of production in each country. They are then used to calibrate
model-implied PPI responses to a global shock to the …rst-stage productivity in the manufacturing
production, which di¤er across countries. Separately, from nationally reported PPI series, we es-
timate country-speci…c PPI responses to changes in the global input price index. Putting the two
together, we can reject the null of zero correlation between the model-implied and empirically PPI
elasticities in favor of the alternative of a positive association.
    It is worth noting that the story proposed in this paper about the divergence between CPI and
PPI in‡ation can be told in a closed-economy setting. Nevertheless, the observed increase in the
segmentation of production after 2001 has been greatly facilitated by o¤shoring and international
trade, including the rise of China and Eastern Europe as a platform for production and exports.
Indeed, the patterns documented in Wang et al. (2017) suggest that a major part of the increase in
global production length is an increase in the length of the cross-border part of production. In any
case, an open-economy model is more general than a closed-economy model. For these reasons, the
main results in the paper can be viewed as implications of a rise in global value chains for in‡ation
indices and monetary policies.




                                                 32
References
Alfaro, Laura, Pol Antràs, Davin Chor, and Paola Conconi, 2019, “Internalizing global value chains:
A …rm-level analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, 127 (2): 508-559.
    Ambler, Steve, Emanuela Cardia, and Christian Zimmermann, 2002, “International transmission
of the business cycle in a multi-sector model.” European Economic Review, 46 (2): 273-300.
    Antràs, Pol, 2016. Global Production: Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton, NJ.
    Antràs, Pol, and Davin Chor, 2013, “Organizing the global value chain." Econometrica, 81 (6):
2127-2204.
    Antràs, Pol, and Alonso De Gortari, 2017, “On the Geography of Global Value Chains." No.
w23456. National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Antweiler, Werner, and Daniel Tre‡er, 2002, “Increasing Returns and All That: A View from
Trade." American Economic Review, 92 (1): 93-119.
    Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, 1991, “Some tests of speci…cation for panel data: Monte
Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations." Review of Economic Studies, 58 (2):
277-297.
    Auer, Raphael A, Claudio Borio and Andrew Filardo, 2017, “The globalisation of in‡ation: the
growing importance of global value chains." BIS Working Papers No. 602.
    Auer, Raphael A., Andrei A. Levchenko, and Philip Sauré, 2017, “International in‡ation spillovers
through input linkages." No. w23246. National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Baldwin, Richard, and Anthony Venables, 2013, “Spiders and snakes: o¤shoring agglomeration
in the global economy." Journal of International Economics, 90 (2): 245-254.
    Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno, 2003, “Price stability in open economies." Review of
Economic Studies, 70 (4): 743-764.
    Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen, 1999. In‡ation
targeting. Princenton University Press.
    Bertsimas, Dimitris, and John Tsitsiklis, 1993, “Simulated annealing." Statistical Science, 8 (1):
10-15.
    Boivin, Jean, and Marc Giannoni, 2008, “Global forces and monetary policy e¤ectiveness." No.
w13736. National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc, 2010, “Optimal monetary policy in open
economies." Handbook of Monetary Economics. Vol. 3. Elsevier, 861-933.
    Costinot, Arnaud, Jonathan Vogel, and Su Wang, 2013, “An elementary theory of global supply
chains." Review of Economic Studies, 80 (1): 109-144.
    Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, 2011, “What goods do countries trade?
A quantitative exploration of Ricardo’s ideas." Review of Economic Studies, 79 (2): 581-608.
    De Gregorio, José, 2012, “Commodity prices, monetary policy, and in‡ation." IMF Economic
Review, 60 (4): 600-633.
    De Paoli, Bianca, 2009, “Monetary policy and welfare in a small open economy." Journal of
International Economics, 77 (1): 11-22.


                                                 33
    Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum, 2002, “Technology, Geography, and Trade." Economet-
rica, 70 (5): 1741-1779.
    Edwards, Sebastian, 2006, “The relationship between exchange rates and in‡ation targeting
revisited." No. w12163. National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Feenstra, Robert, 1999, “Integration of trade and disintegration of production in the global
economy." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (4): 31-50.
    Feenstra, Robert, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010, China’s Growing Role in World Trade, University
of Chicago Press.
    Fort, Teresa C, 2017, “Technology and production fragmentation: Domestic versus foreign sourc-
ing." Review of Economic Studies, 84 (2): 650-687.
    Frankel, Je¤rey, and David Romer, 1999, “Does Trade Cause Growth?" American Economic
Review, 89 (3): 379-399.
    Gali, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli, 2005, “Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a
small open economy." Review of Economic Studies, 72 (3): 707-734.
    Ghironi, Fabio, and Marc Melitz, 2005, “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
Heterogeneous Firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (3): 865-915.
    Head, Keith, and John Ries, 2001, “Increasing returns versus national product di¤erentiation as
an explanation for the pattern of US-Canada trade." American Economic Review, 91 (4): 858-876.
    Hsiao, Cheng, M. Hashem Pesaran, and A. Kamil Tahmiscioglu, 2002, “Maximum likelihood
estimation of …xed e¤ects dynamic panel data models covering short time periods." Journal of
Econometrics, 109 (1): 107-150.
    Huang, Kevin XD, and Zheng Liu, 2001, “Production chains and general equilibrium aggregate
dynamics." Journal of Monetary Economics, 48 (2): 437-462.
    Huang, Kevin XD, and Zheng Liu, 2005, “In‡ation targeting: What in‡ation rate to target?"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 52 (8): 1435-1462.
    Huang, Kevin XD, and Zheng Liu, 2007, “Business cycles with staggered prices and international
trade in intermediate inputs." Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (4): 1271-1289.
    Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001, “The nature and growth of vertical special-
ization in world trade." Journal of International Economics, 54 (1): 75-96.
    Lombardo, Giovanni, and Federico Ravenna, 2014, “Openness and optimal monetary policy."
Journal of International Economics, 93 (1): 153-172.
    Jin, Keyu, and Nan Li, 2012, “International Transmission Through Relative Prices." CEPR
Discussion Paper 1090.
    Jasova, Martina, Richhild Moessner, and Elod Takats, 2016, “Exchange rate pass-through: what
has changed since the crisis?" BIS Working Papers No. 583.
    Johnson, Robert C., and Andreas Moxnes, 2013, “Technology, trade costs, and the pattern of
trade with multi-stage production." Working paper.
    Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera, 2016, “A portrait of trade in value added over four
decades." Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(5): 896-911.
    Judson, Ruth A., and Ann L. Owen, 1999, “Estimating dynamic panel data models: a guide for
macroeconomists." Economics Letters, 65 (1): 9-15.


                                                34
    Kalemli-Özcan, Sebnem, Se-Jik Kim, Hyun Song Shin, Bent E. Sensen, and Sevcan Yesiltas,
2014, “Financial shocks in production chains." Working paper.
    Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2014, “Tracing value-added and double count-
ing in gross exports." American Economic Review, 104 (2): 459-494.
    Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, 2003, “How does globalization a¤ect
the synchronization of business cycles?" American Economic Review, 93 (2): 57-62.
    Kose, M. Ayhan, and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001, “International trade and business cycles: is vertical
specialization the missing link?" American Economic Review, 91 (2): 371-375.
    Krugman, Paul, 1995, “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1995 (1): 327-362.
    Lombardo, Giovanni, and Federico Ravenna, 2014, “Openness and optimal monetary policy."
Journal of International Economics, 93 (1): 153-172.
    Matsumura, Misaki, 2019, “What Price Index Should Central Banks Target? An Open Economy
Analysis." Working paper, Columbia University.
    Monacelli, Tommaso, and Luca Sala, 2009, “The international dimension of in‡ation: evidence
from disaggregated consumer price data." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41 (s1): 101-120.
    Mumtaz, Haroon, and Paolo Surico, 2012, “Evolving international in‡ation dynamics: world and
country-speci…c factors." Journal of the European Economic Association, 10 (4): 716-734.
    Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogo¤, 2000, “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macro-
economics: Is There a Common Cause?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, 15 (1): 339-390.
    Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2013, “Trade, multinational production, and
the gains from openness." Journal of Political Economy, 121 (2): 273-322.
    Romer, David, 1993, “Openness and In‡ation: Theory and Evidence," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108 (4): 869-904.
    Simonovska, Ina, and Michael E. Waugh, 2014, “The elasticity of trade: Estimates and evidence."
Journal of International Economics, 92 (1): 34-50.
    Strum, Brad E, 2009, “Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Input–Output Economy." Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, 41 (4): 619-650.
    Timmer, Marcel P., Abdul Azeez Erumban, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries,
2014, “Slicing up global value chains." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28 (2): 99-118.
    Wang, Zhi, Shang-Jin Wei, Xinding Yu, and Kunfu Zhu, 2017, “Characterizing Global Value
Chains: Production Length and Upstreamness." No. w23261. National Bureau of Economic Re-
search.
    Wei, Shang-Jin, and Yinxi Xie, 2019, “Monetary Policy in a World of Global Supply Chains."
Working paper, Columbia University.
    Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
    Yi, Kei-Mu, 2003, “Can vertical specialization explain the growth of world trade?" Journal of
Political Economy, 111 (1): 52-102.




                                                35
                        Figure 1: The correlation between CPI and PPI over time
Notes : The top panel presents the correlation of the annual percentage changes of the two variables during the
period; the middle panel presents the correlation of the two in terms of changes over 5-years; the bottom panel gives
the correlation in terms of changes over 10-years. Each blue dot in this …gure is the cross-sectional correlation of CPI
and PPI in‡ation in a given year across all countries with available data. The red circles represent a constant sample
since 1995, i.e., a (maximum) common set of countries since 1995. The red vertical line represents the year of 2002.




    Figure 2: Time-series correlations across high-income countries, constant sample since 1995
Notes : This …gure displays the cross-country distributions of the country-speci…c time-series correlation between CPI
and PPI in‡ation for the two periods among high-income countries (de…ned by World Bank 2017) before 2008 …nancial
crisis. For comparability, we use the common set of countries for all three time periods, and thus 37 countries are
included in the sample.




                                                          36
     Figure 3: Time-series correlations across developing countries, constant sample since 1995
Notes : This …gure displays the cross-country distributions of the country-speci…c time-series correlation between CPI
and PPI in‡ation for the two periods among developing countries (consisting both of middle-income and low-income
countries, de…ned by World Bank 2017) before 2008 …nancial crisis. For comparability, we use the common set of
countries for all three time periods, and thus 25 countries are included in the sample.




  Figure 4: Cumulative distribution of 6-year time-series correlation, constant sample since 1995
Notes : This …gure displays the cumulative distribution of the 6-year country-speci…c time-series correlations across
countries for the pre-2001 and post-2001 periods. For comparability, we keep constant set of countries.




                                                         37
                                        Figure 5: Production structure
Notes : This …gure illustrates the production process of the manufacturing and service sectors for a country in the
model.

               Table 1: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to industrial input price

                                     (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)              (5)         (6)
                                   lnCPI         lnPPI            lnCPI        lnPPI            lnCPI       lnPPI
      VARIABLES                  1981-2001     1981-2001        2002-2014    2002-2014        2002-2014   2002-2014

        lnPIndustrial;t           0.557***      0.743***        0.034***      0.160***        0.043***     0.170***
                                   (0.106)       (0.094)         (0.009)       (0.020)         (0.010)      (0.022)
        lnCP It    1              0.329***                      0.471***                      0.504***
                                   (0.062)                       (0.073)                       (0.078)
        lnP P It   1                            0.170**                       0.173***                     0.218***
                                                (0.067)                        (0.055)                       (0.053)
      Y ear2008                                                                               0.047***     0.090***
                                                                                               (0.004)       (0.009)
      Y ear2009                                                                               -0.021*** -0.057***
                                                                                               (0.005)       (0.010)
      # Obs.                        1,459           883           1,407           1,046         1,407         1,046
      Ratio of Response (R)                 1.334                         4.706                        3.953
      Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                3.372                        2.619
      P -value, H0 : R 0                                                  0.1%                         0.2%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in industrial input prices. The
quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimators for dynamic panel data are adopted. Country …xed e¤ects have been
controlled (i.e., QML with …xed e¤ects). Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008;
otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2009 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Ratio of
Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI in‡ation in response to industrial input price change divided by the
                                                                                  @   lnP P I =@   lnP
coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to industrial input price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPIndustrial;t .
                                                                                       t       Industrial;t
Country-clustered robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05,
while * denotes p < 0:1.



                                                           38
Table 2: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to industrial input price with controlling nominal
                                            wage

                                        (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
                                      lnCPI         lnPPI          lnCPI        lnPPI        lnCPI         lnPPI
    VARIABLES                       1981-2001     1981-2001      2002-2014    2002-2014    2002-2014     2002-2014

      lnPIndustrial;t               0.412***      0.425***       0.031***      0.157***     0.042***      0.170***
                                     (0.142)       (0.075)        (0.009)       (0.021)      (0.010)       (0.023)
      lnCP It    1                  0.233***                     0.442***                   0.482***
                                     (0.046)                      (0.067)                    (0.074)
      lnP P It   1                                  0.053                      0.158***                  0.209***
                                                   (0.061)                      (0.049)                    (0.048)
    W ageDummy          lnwaget     0.456***      0.537***       0.178***      0.241***     0.114***       0.127*
                                     (0.141)       (0.087)        (0.030)       (0.085)      (0.028)       (0.074)
    Y ear2008                                                                              0.046***      0.089***
                                                                                             (0.004)       (0.009)
    Y ear2009                                                                              -0.019*** -0.055***
                                                                                             (0.005)       (0.009)
    # Obs.                            1,459           883          1,407           1,046      1,407         1,046
    Ratio of Response (R)                     1.032                        5.065                     4.048
    Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                   4.033                     3.016
    P -value, H0 : R 0                                                     1.6%                      2.3%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in industrial input prices. The
quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimators for dynamic panel data are adopted. Country …xed e¤ects have been
controlled (i.e., QML with …xed e¤ects). Variable, W ageDummy          lnwaget , equals lnwaget if wage data are
available; otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable
Y ear2009 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of
the coe¢ cient of PPI in‡ation in response to industrial input price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation
                                                    @ lnP P I =@ lnP
in response to industrial input price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPIndustrial;t . Country-clustered robust standard
                                                             t       Industrial;t
errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05, while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                            39
Table 3: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to industrial input price with controlling nominal
                                  wage and price index level

                                            (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
                                          lnCPI         lnPPI            lnCPI         lnPPI        lnCPI       lnPPI
   VARIABLES                            1981-2001     1981-2001        2002-2014     2002-2014    2002-2014   2002-2014

     lnPIndustrial;t                     0.397***      0.428***        0.032***       0.138***    0.037***     0.143***
                                          (0.130)       (0.077)         (0.009)        (0.016)     (0.010)      (0.019)
     lnCP It      1                      0.233***                      0.434***                   0.480***
                                          (0.044)                       (0.062)                    (0.071)
     lnP P It     1                                         0.053                     0.120***                 0.172***
                                                           (0.062)                     (0.045)                  (0.043)
   lnCP It    1                          -0.010***                       0.004                      0.007
                                          (0.004)                       (0.006)                    (0.006)
   lnP P It   1                                          -0.002                         -0.017                    -0.016
                                                        (0.005)                        (0.012)                   (0.011)
   W ageDummy              lnwaget       0.443***      0.523***        0.160***       0.202***    0.095***       0.101*
                                          (0.128)       (0.083)         (0.030)        (0.058)     (0.025)       (0.056)
   Y ear2008                                                                                      0.058***     0.101***
                                                                                                   (0.006)       (0.013)
   Y ear2009                                                                                        -0.004        -0.032
                                                                                                   (0.007)       (0.020)
   Y ear2008          lnPIndustrial;t                                                             0.167***      0.193**
                                                                                                   (0.049)       (0.086)
   Y ear2009          lnPIndustrial;t                                                             0.133***        0.191
                                                                                                   (0.041)       (0.170)
   # Obs.                                  1,448            881          1,407            1,046     1,407         1,046
   Ratio of Response (R)                           1.078                          4.313                    3.865
   Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                           3.235                    2.787
   P -value, H0 : R 0                                                             1.6%                     2.2%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in industrial input prices. The
quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimators for dynamic panel data are adopted. Country …xed e¤ects have been
controlled (i.e., QML with …xed e¤ects). Variable, W ageDummy          lnwaget , equals lnwaget if wage data are
available; otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable
Y ear2009 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Y ear2008     lnPIndustrial;t , is
the interaction of variable Y ear2008 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Y ear2009        lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction
of variable Y ear2009 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI
in‡ation in response to industrial input price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to
                                     @ lnP P I =@ lnP
industrial input price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPIndustrial;t . Country-clustered robust standard errors are
                                              t       Industrial;t
reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05, while * denotes p < 0:1.



                                        Table 4: Calibration of some parameters

              Value                                   Source/Target
              0.67       Median input share for manufactures following Johnson and Moxnes (2013)
              4.12                      Following Simonnovska and Waugh (2014)
              0.416          Median manufactures in household consumption in WIOD, 1998
              0.402          Median manufactures in household consumption in WIOD, 2005
      G         2                                  For the year of 1998
                3                                  For the year of 2005



                                                                  40
    Table 5: The log-deviation of CPI and PPI in response to a …rst-stage productivity shock:
                           two-stage in 1998 versus three-stage in 2005

                         Two-stage value chain (year 1998)           Three-stage value chain (year 2005)
                          (1)               (2)                       (3)                (4)
                           PPI           PPI/ CPI                      PPI            PPI/ CPI
 Australia               0.163             2.404                     0.120              2.744
 Austria                 0.163             2.404                     0.151              3.448
 Belgium                 0.163             2.404                     0.156              3.563
 Bulgaria                0.195             2.882                     0.155              3.537
 Brazil                  0.163             2.415                     0.136              3.113
 Canada                  0.163             2.404                     0.131              2.999
 China                   0.235             3.469                     0.173              3.956
 Cyprus                  0.163             2.405                     0.130              2.958
 Czech Republic          0.163             2.408                     0.129              2.935
 Germany                 0.163             2.404                     0.134              3.063
 Denmark                 0.163             2.404                     0.130              2.960
 Spain                   0.163             2.404                     0.125              2.862
 Estonia                 0.189             2.799                     0.129              2.949
 Finland                 0.163             2.404                     0.135              3.083
 France                  0.163             2.404                     0.113              2.582
 United Kingdom          0.163             2.404                     0.124              2.837
 Greece                  0.163             2.411                     0.119              2.718
 Hungary                 0.182             2.689                     0.133              3.028
 India                   0.226             3.338                     0.160              3.663
 Indonesia               0.227             3.354                     0.187              4.276
 Ireland                 0.163             2.404                     0.135              3.077
 Italy                   0.163             2.404                     0.125              2.847
 Japan                   0.163             2.404                     0.129              2.955
 Korea                   0.163             2.415                     0.129              2.943
 Lithuania               0.194             2.871                     0.121              2.754
 Luxembourg              0.163             2.405                     0.121              2.759
 Latvia                  0.192             2.842                     0.147              3.354
 Mexico                  0.173             2.563                     0.131              2.992
 Malta                   0.166             2.451                     0.136              3.115
 Netherlands             0.163             2.404                     0.132              3.019
 Poland                  0.165             2.444                     0.135              3.088
 Portugal                0.163             2.408                     0.125              2.864
 Romania                 0.197             2.911                     0.145              3.308
 Russian Federation      0.204             3.023                     0.141              3.212
 Slovakia                0.191             2.821                     0.132              3.012
 Slovenia                0.165             2.437                     0.133              3.027
 Sweden                  0.163             2.404                     0.131              2.982
 Turkey                  0.171             2.523                     0.133              3.036
 Taiwan                  0.163             2.404                     0.136              3.100
 United States           0.163             2.404                     0.132              3.012

Notes : Note: Column (1) and (2) are calibrated using WIOD 1998 data with G = 2. Column (3) and (4) are
calibrated using WIOD 2005 data with G = 3. CPI= 0:068 in Column (2), and      CPI= 0:044 in Column (4). The
median of PPI/ CPI in Column (2) is 2:408, and in Column (4) is 3:016.




                                                     41
     Table 6: The correlation between the calibrated and empirically estimated PPI elasticities

                                                 Empirics    pre-2001         Empirics post-2001
                                                  (1)          (2)            (3)    (4)      (5)
               Data in calibration (year)        1998         1997           2005 2006       2005
                                                 G=2          G=2            G=3 G=3         G=4
                      Correlation                0.441        0.498          0.388 0.328 0.186
                    P-value in T-test            0.9%         0.3%           1.0% 2.6% 14.3%
                         # Obs.                    29          29              36    36       35

Notes : The P-value is under the null hypothesis that the correlation between the calibrated and empirically
estimated PPI elasticities is no larger than zero. In Column (3) and (4), Lithuania is treated as an outlier; in
Column (5), both India and Lithuania are treated as outliers.




                                                          42
Appendix

A     Share of internationally traded intermediate goods in total
      intermediate goods
Using the data from WIOD, Appendix Figure A:1 presents the share of internationally traded
intermediate goods in total intermediate goods. We can see a clear upward trend in USA, Japan,
Germany, India, and the Euro Zone as a whole. Taking all the countries in WIOD as "Global",
there is also an upward trend in the share of internationally traded intermediate goods in total
intermediate goods.


B     Proof for the purchasing price distribution for a speci…c
      good produced in the …rst stage of manufacturing sector
Let p~n1 (u) = minfp1n              Nn            n
                    1 (u); : : : ; p1 (u)g and G1 (p) = P r(~  pn1 (u) p) be the purchasing price distrib-
ution of good u produced in stage 1, which are taken as inputs for stage 2 in country n. Then, we
have
                                          Gn1 (p) = P r(~
                                                        pn1 (u) p)
                                                      N        in
                                         =1           i=1 P r(p1 (u)                  p)
                                                       N
                                             =1        i=1 (1        Gin
                                                                      1 (p))
                                                                         i in
                                                          N    i w
                                             =1           i=1 F1 (                )
                                                                          p
                                                                         n
                                                 =1       exp[           1p   ]


C     Proof for the monotonicity of PPI in‡ation in response to
      a …rst-stage productivity shock in manufacturing sector
The response of PPI in‡ation to a …rst-stage productivity shock in the manufacturing sector is given
by
                                   \       d1 j = G (1      ) G 1
                                 jlnP P I=lnT                 G
                                                        1
                              G
                     1    G
    Denote f (G) =       1    G   , and then we have

                                             G        G                   G                G       G
                         @f   1          [       +G       ln ](1               ) G             (       ln )
                            =                                                 G 2
                         @G                                    (1               )

                                                       G             G
                                             1             [1            + Gln ]
                                         =                               G 2
                                                                (1        )


                                                            43
                        G                                                          G
   Denote h(G) = 1        + Gln . Since 2 (0; 1) and G 1, we have h0 = (1            )ln < 0. Note
that h(1) = 1     + ln , and then h(G) < 0 for 8G 1 as long as 1         + ln < 0. Since 2 (0; 1),
@h(1)=@ = 1 + 1= > 0, and h(1) = 0 when = 1, it indicates that h(1) = 1               + ln < 0 for
8 2 (0; 1).
   Therefore, 8G 1, we have h(G) < 0, and f (G) is strictly decreasing with respect to G. In other
words, the response of PPI in‡ation to a …rst stage productivity shock in manufacturing sector, i.e.,
                         G 1
  \
jlnP      d1 j = G (1 ) G , is strictly decreasing with respect to G for 8 2 (0; 1) and 8G 1.
     P I=lnT         1



D                                    \
      Proof for the monotonicity of lnP      \I in response to
                                        P I=lnCP
      a …rst-stage productivity shock in manufacturing sector
In response to a productivity shock in the manufacturing sector, the relative change of PPI over
CPI satis…es the following relation:

                                        \
                                       lnP PI   (1                 )(G       h + 1)
                                              =                              G
                                        \I
                                       lnCP                        (1         )

                                           G(1     )
    Note that   2 (0; 1). Denote f =       (1     G)   , and then we have

                                                             G                             G
                             @f   (1             )(1              ) G(1           )(           ln )
                                =                                    G 2
                             @G                                   (1   )

                                                                   G         G
                                           (1          )[1             +G        ln ]
                                       =                               G 2
                                                             (1         )
                        G        G                                                     G
   Denote h(G) = 1          +G       ln , and then we have h0 = G                          (ln )2 > 0 and h(1) = 1   + ln .
Also, note that
                                         @(1           + ln )
                                                                       = ln < 0
                                                   @
and h(1) = 0 when = 1. Therefore, 8 2 (0; 1), h(1) > 0, and 8G 1, h(G) > 0, which indicates
                                                  \
that @f =@G > 0. In other words, given 2 (0; 1), lnP      \I is strictly increasing in the number
                                                     P I=lnCP
of total stages, G.


E     Empirical tests using other estimators
As a robustness check for the empirical tests in Section 6, we have conducted the same regressions
by Arellano-Bond estimator and LSDV estimator. Since Arellano-Bond estimator gives almost the
same results with QML estimators, we only report the results by LSDV estimator, summarized in
Appendix Table A.8-A.13. The key inferences are the same as in the main text. Both CPI and PPI
in‡ation become less responsive to a 1% change in the industrial input price index in this century
relative to the last century. The decline in the responsiveness of CPI is bigger than that of PPI.
These empirical patterns are consistent with the predictions of the theoretical model.


                                                              44
                                USA                                                   China
         0.1                                                    0.1




        0.05                                                  0.05
               1995     2000          2005     2010                   1995     2000       2005        2010
                               Japan                                               Germany
         0.1                                                    0.4


        0.05                                                    0.2


           0                                                     0
               1995     2000          2005     2010                   1995     2000       2005        2010
                         United Kingdom                                               India
         0.2                                                    0.1


        0.15                                                  0.05


         0.1                                                     0
               1995     2000          2005     2010                   1995     2000       2005        2010
                            Euro Zone                                          Global (median)
        0.25                                                  0.25


         0.2                                                    0.2


               1995     2000          2005     2010                   1995     2000       2005        2010

  Appendix Figure A.1: Share of globally traded intermediate goods in total intermediate goods
    Notes : This …gure displays the cross-country distributions of the country-speci…c time-series correlation between
CPI and PPI in‡ation for the four periods among high-income countries (de…ned by World Bank 2017). For com-
parability, we use the common set of countries for all four time periods, and thus 28 countries are included in the
sample.




                                                         45
          Appendix Figure A.2: The number of countries with CPI and PPI data available

   Notes : This …gure displays the number of countries for which both CPI and PPI data are available in each year.
The red dotted lines represent the year of 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010, respectively.




                                                       46
                               USA                                                  China
       0.85                                                     1


         0.8                                                  0.5


       0.75                                                     0
               1995    2000          2005     2010                  1995     2000       2005       2010
                              Japan                                              Germany
         0.8                                                 0.65


       0.75                                                   0.6


         0.7                                                 0.55
               1995    2000          2005     2010                  1995     2000       2005       2010
                        United Kingdom                                              India
         0.8                                                    1


         0.6                                                  0.5


         0.4                                                    0
               1995    2000          2005     2010                  1995     2000       2005       2010
                           Euro Zone                                         Global (median)
       0.65                                                  0.65


         0.6                                                  0.6


       0.55                                                  0.55
               1995    2000          2005     2010                  1995     2000       2005       2010

                  Appendix Figure A.3: Service share in household consumption, WIOD
    Notes : This …gure displays the expenditure share of services in the consumption basket for WIOD countries. The
dashed lines represent a country-speci…c trend constructed from the data by using the period from 1995 to 2001. The
sub-…gure labeled as "global" indicates all the countries included in WIOD dataset.




                                                        47
            Appendix Figure A.4: Weight of service less housing in CPI (median), OECD
     Notes : This …gure displays the median share of services (excluding housing) in the CPI basket for OECD countries
(from OECD dataset). The blue dots represent the median of all countries with data available in OECD dataset. The
red triangles represent the case with keeping constant samples after 1995. The dashed line is …tted by median values
of service share in the full sample from 1980 to 2001.




                                                         48
   Appendix Figure A.5: Histogram of CPI and PPI elasticities to industrial input price, WIOD
                                          countries
    Notes : This …gure displays the distribution of the empirically estimated CPI and PPI elasticities to industrial
input prices for those countries included in WIOD with the pre-2001 and post-2001 periods, respectively.




                                                        49
     Appendix Table A.1: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to industrial input price with
                                         exchange rate

                                         (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                       lnCPI            lnPPI            lnCPI        lnPPI        lnCPI       lnPPI
   VARIABLES                         1981-2001        1981-2001        2002-2014    2002-2014    2002-2014   2002-2014

     lnPI;t (U SD)                      0.080***       0.198***        0.026***      0.155***    0.027***     0.145***
                                         (0.022)        (0.049)         (0.007)       (0.016)     (0.007)      (0.015)
     lnCP It    1                       0.214***                       0.432***                  0.479***
                                         (0.044)                        (0.064)                   (0.071)
     lnP P It   1                                        0.047                       0.156***                 0.193***
                                                        (0.056)                       (0.047)                   (0.048)
     lnExchangeRatet                    0.491***       0.532***        0.065**       0.189***     0.091**     0.241***
                                         (0.151)        (0.079)         (0.030)       (0.057)     (0.036)       (0.065)
   W ageDummy           lnwaget         0.400***       0.441***        0.188***      0.263***    0.123***       0.153**
                                         (0.138)        (0.091)         (0.029)       (0.079)     (0.026)       (0.068)
   Y ear2008                                                                                     0.051***     0.091***
                                                                                                  (0.006)       (0.013)
   Y ear2009                                                                                     -0.020**      -0.058**
                                                                                                  (0.009)       (0.024)
   Y ear2008        lnPI;t (U SD)                                                                  0.078         0.060
                                                                                                  (0.056)       (0.098)
   Y ear2009        lnPI;t (U SD)                                                                  0.059         0.068
                                                                                                  (0.053)       (0.190)
   # Obs.                                1,459              883          1,407           1,046     1,407         1,046
   Ratio of Response (R)                         2.475                           5.962                    5.370
   Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                          3.487                    2.895
   P -value, H0 : R 0                                                            1.1%                     1.6%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in industrial input prices. The
quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimators for dynamic panel data are adopted. Country …xed e¤ects have been
controlled (i.e., QML with …xed e¤ects). Variable, W ageDummy          lnwaget , equals lnwaget if wage data are
available; otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable
Y ear2009 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Y ear2008     lnPIndustrial;t , is
the interaction of variable Y ear2008 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Y ear2009       lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction
of variable Y ear2009 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI
in‡ation in response to industrial input price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to
                                    @    lnP P I =@   lnP
industrial input price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPIndustrial;t . Country-clustered robust standard errors are
                                             t       Industrial;t
reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05, while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                                  50
          Appendix Table A.2: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to commodity price

                                     (1)           (2)                (3)          (4)              (5)         (6)
                                   lnCPI         lnPPI              lnCPI        lnPPI            lnCPI       lnPPI
      VARIABLES                  1993-2001     1993-2001          2002-2014    2002-2014        2002-2014   2002-2014

        lnPCommodity;t            0.427***      0.694***          0.093***      0.258***        0.073***     0.240***
                                   (0.119)       (0.140)           (0.010)       (0.029)         (0.015)      (0.035)
        lnCP It    1              0.319***                        0.605***                      0.575***
                                   (0.047)                         (0.049)                       (0.052)
        lnP P It   1                                0.089                       0.175***                     0.150***
                                                   (0.127)                       (0.052)                       (0.053)
      Y ear2008                                                                                 0.031***     0.036***
                                                                                                 (0.004)       (0.006)
      Y ear2009                                                                                   -0.006        -0.000
                                                                                                 (0.007)       (0.013)
      # Obs.                         684            438             1,384           1,023         1,384         1,023
      Ratio of Response (R)                1.625                            2.774                        3.288
      Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                  1.149                        1.663
      P -value, H0 : R 0                                                    2.0%                         1.8%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in commodity prices. The
quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimators for dynamic panel data are adopted. Country …xed e¤ects have been
controlled (i.e., QML with …xed e¤ects). Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008;
otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2009 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Ratio of
Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI in‡ation in response to industrial input price change divided by the
                                                                               @ lnP P I =@ lnP
coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to industrial input price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPCommodity;t .
                                                                                            t        Commodity;t
Country-clustered robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05,
while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                             51
 Appendix Table A.3: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to commodity price with controlling
                             nominal wage and price index level

                                         (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
                                       lnCPI        lnPPI           lnCPI        lnPPI        lnCPI          lnPPI
    VARIABLES                        1993-2001    1993-2001       2002-2014    2002-2014    2002-2014      2002-2014

      lnPC;t                         0.218***      0.352***       0.091***      0.244***     0.070***      0.224***
                                      (0.057)       (0.073)        (0.010)       (0.026)      (0.016)       (0.032)
      lnCP It      1                 0.189***                     0.551***                   0.531***
                                      (0.056)                      (0.042)                    (0.048)
      lnP P It     1                                   -0.027                   0.145***                   0.130***
                                                      (0.106)                    (0.047)                    (0.046)
    lnCP It    1                     0.189***                     0.551***                   0.531***
                                      (0.056)                      (0.042)                    (0.048)
    lnP P It   1                                   -0.148***                     -0.004                      -0.009
                                                    (0.050)                     (0.011)                     (0.010)
    W ageDummy             lnwaget   0.553***      0.445***       0.106***      0.127**      0.093***       0.103*
                                      (0.090)       (0.131)        (0.023)      (0.060)       (0.021)       (0.059)
    Y ear2008                                                                                0.041***     0.050***
                                                                                              (0.007)       (0.012)
    Y ear2009                                                                                  0.004         0.010
                                                                                              (0.007)       (0.020)
    Y ear2008          lnPC;t                                                                0.126***       0.152*
                                                                                              (0.049)       (0.086)
    Y ear2009          lnPC;t                                                                  0.063         0.093
                                                                                              (0.046)       (0.166)
    # Obs.                              683            437          1,384           1,023      1,384         1,023
    Ratio of Response (R)                     1.615                         2.681                     3.200
    Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                    1.066                     1.585
    P -value, H0 : R 0                                                      5.9%                      3.9%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in commodity prices. The
quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimators for dynamic panel data are adopted. Country …xed e¤ects have been
controlled (i.e., QML with …xed e¤ects). Variable, W ageDummy          lnwaget , equals lnwaget if wage data are
available; otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable
Y ear2009 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Y ear2008     lnPIndustrial;t , is
the interaction of variable Y ear2008 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Y ear2009       lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction
of variable Y ear2009 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI
in‡ation in response to industrial input price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to
                                     @ lnP P I =@ lnP
industrial input price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPCommodity;t . Country-clustered robust standard errors are
                                              t       Commodity;t
reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05, while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                             52
     Appendix Table A.4: Calibration of two-stage location parameters using 1998 data

                                                   Stage 1   Stage 2
                            Australia               0.489     0.392
                            Austria                 0.637     0.714
                            Belgium                 1.220     0.853
                            Bulgaria                1.074     1.026
                            Brazil                  0.689     0.714
                            Canada                  1.177     0.715
                            China                   1.096     0.131
                            Cyprus                  1.132     0.914
                            Czech Republic          0.491     0.967
                            Germany                 0.932     0.806
                            Denmark                 1.199     1.049
                            Spain                   1.083     0.765
                            Estonia                 1.525     0.925
                            Finland                 0.768     0.775
                            France                  1.208     1.024
                            United Kingdom          1.360     1.043
                            Greece                  1.456     0.861
                            Hungary                 1.223     0.878
                            India                   1.250     0.274
                            Indonesia               1.014     0.222
                            Ireland                 0.572     1.066
                            Italy                   1.314     0.468
                            Japan                   0.893     1.039
                            Korea                   1.454     1.173
                            Lithuania               0.958     0.560
                            Luxembourg              1.414     0.849
                            Latvia                  0.966     0.919
                            Mexico                  1.223     0.721
                            Malta                   1.395     0.941
                            Netherlands             1.313     1.074
                            Poland                  0.730     0.790
                            Portugal                1.010     0.561
                            Romania                 1.160     0.562
                            Russian Federation      1.482     0.347
                            Slovakia                1.480     0.881
                            Slovenia                1.354     1.065
                            Sweden                  0.312     1.082
                            Turkey                  1.297     0.898
                            Taiwan                  1.265     0.893
                            United States           1.000     1.000
Note: The table reports the geometric mean of the Fréchet distribution, i.e., exp( = )(Tgn )1= ,
 where is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. It is a monotonic transformation of productivity
                     location parameters measuring average technology.




                                              53
     Appendix Table A.5: Calibration of three-stage location parameters using 2005 data

                                             Stage 1   Stage 2   Stage 3
                      Australia               1.076     0.469     0.718
                      Austria                 1.964     0.982     0.832
                      Belgium                 2.250     1.117     0.935
                      Bulgaria                2.772     0.753     1.742
                      Brazil                  2.001     1.305     1.861
                      Canada                  2.221     1.325     1.665
                      China                   2.727     0.250     1.092
                      Cyprus                  2.622     1.127     1.621
                      Czech Republic          2.330     0.953     2.097
                      Germany                 2.161     1.155     1.550
                      Denmark                 2.216     1.028     1.761
                      Spain                   2.362     0.909     1.900
                      Estonia                 2.262     0.866     2.011
                      Finland                 1.922     1.201     1.693
                      France                  1.800     0.587     1.895
                      United Kingdom          2.091     0.894     1.540
                      Greece                  2.032     0.716     0.954
                      Hungary                 2.994     0.924     1.640
                      India                   3.064     0.436     1.163
                      Indonesia               2.484     0.086     1.554
                      Ireland                 2.339     1.221     1.563
                      Italy                   1.755     0.651     0.912
                      Japan                   1.355     1.008     1.307
                      Korea                   1.836     0.695     1.172
                      Lithuania               1.612     0.641     1.824
                      Luxembourg              2.657     1.266     1.621
                      Latvia                  2.698     0.814     2.002
                      Mexico                  2.515     1.017     1.568
                      Malta                   1.628     1.245     1.126
                      Netherlands             1.890     0.936     1.345
                      Poland                  2.664     0.983     1.416
                      Portugal                2.484     0.891     1.622
                      Romania                 2.537     0.689     1.343
                      Russian Federation      2.006     1.063     1.315
                      Slovakia                1.785     1.080     2.090
                      Slovenia                1.982     1.050     1.399
                      Sweden                  2.153     1.045     1.715
                      Turkey                  2.609     1.183     1.754
                      Taiwan                  2.527     1.199     1.514
                      United States           1.000     1.000     1.000
Note: The table reports the geometric mean of the Fréchet distribution, i.e., exp( = )(Tgn )1= ,
 where is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. It is a monotonic transformation of productivity
                     location parameters measuring average technology.




                                              54
     Appendix Table A.6: Calibration of four-stage location parameters using 2005 data

                                       Stage 1     Stage 2   Stage 3   Stage 4
                     Australia          0.548       0.322     0.420     0.426
                      Austria           1.010       0.234     1.098     0.690
                      Belgium           1.145       0.791     0.986     1.015
                      Bulgaria          0.858       0.666     1.021     0.963
                        Brazil          1.156       0.734     1.345     0.693
                      Canada            1.440       0.581     0.862     1.363
                        China           0.715       0.756     0.331     0.939
                       Cyprus           0.705       0.586     0.862     0.622
                  Czech Republic        0.809       0.807     1.151     1.141
                     Germany            1.157       0.607     1.055     1.034
                     Denmark            1.200       0.370     1.166     1.101
                        Spain           1.600       0.752     1.317     1.197
                      Estonia           1.462       0.707     1.206     1.077
                      Finland           0.300       0.676     0.794     1.237
                       France           1.451       0.663     0.485     0.933
                  United Kingdom        1.082       0.138     1.282     1.049
                       Greece           1.107       0.529     1.058     1.061
                      Hungary           1.594       0.740     0.749     1.069
                        India           1.134       0.864     0.446     0.913
                     Indonesia          0.121       0.004     1.262     0.961
                       Ireland          1.403       0.945     0.919     1.169
                         Italy          0.853       0.523     1.063     0.900
                        Japan           1.393       0.701     1.027     1.025
                        Korea           0.722       0.704     0.365     0.986
                     Lithuania          0.254       0.563     0.861     0.936
                   Luxembourg           1.284       0.549     0.916     1.184
                       Latvia           1.144       0.492     1.108     1.191
                       Mexico           1.520       0.688     1.003     1.273
                        Malta           1.105       0.705     1.149     0.985
                    Netherlands         1.520       0.645     1.051     0.826
                       Poland           1.193       0.761     0.863     1.041
                      Portugal          1.317       0.598     1.276     0.885
                      Romania           0.967       0.980     1.206     1.359
                 Russian Federation     1.259       0.949     1.089     1.299
                      Slovakia          1.209       0.632     0.962     1.200
                      Slovenia          1.104       0.510     1.187     0.986
                      Sweden            1.058       0.986     1.205     1.038
                       Turkey           0.780       0.499     1.186     1.371
                       Taiwan           0.836       0.893     0.983     0.862
                   United States        1.000       1.000     1.000     1.000
Note: The table reports the geometric mean of the Fréchet distribution, i.e., exp( = )(Tgn )1= ,
 where is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. It is a monotonic transformation of productivity
                     location parameters measuring average technology.




                                              55
 Appendix Table A.7: The log-deviation of CPI and PPI in response to a …rst-stage productivity
                      shock: two-stage in 1998 versus four-stage in 2005

                       Two-stage value chain (year 1998)   Four-stage value chain (year 2005)
                        (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
                         PPI           PPI/ CPI              PPI            PPI/ CPI
       Australia       0.163             2.404             0.082              2.809
        Austria        0.163             2.404             0.093              3.176
        Belgium        0.163             2.404             0.090              3.076
        Bulgaria       0.195             2.882             0.124              4.233
          Brazil       0.163             2.415             0.120              4.079
        Canada         0.163             2.404             0.080              2.718
          China        0.235             3.469             0.147              4.994
        Cyprus         0.163             2.405             0.086              2.947
   Czech Republic      0.163             2.408             0.097              3.290
       Germany         0.163             2.404             0.085              2.910
       Denmark         0.163             2.404             0.086              2.939
          Spain        0.163             2.404             0.087              2.977
        Estonia        0.189             2.799             0.110              3.741
        Finland        0.163             2.404             0.080              2.728
         France        0.163             2.404             0.077              2.609
   United Kingdom      0.163             2.404             0.087              2.948
         Greece        0.163             2.411             0.081              2.770
        Hungary        0.182             2.689             0.100              3.416
          India        0.226             3.338             0.151              5.153
       Indonesia       0.227             3.354             0.088              2.992
         Ireland       0.163             2.404             0.084              2.869
           Italy       0.163             2.404             0.084              2.869
          Japan        0.163             2.404             0.085              2.902
          Korea        0.163             2.415             0.079              2.700
       Lithuania       0.194             2.871             0.087              2.956
     Luxembourg        0.163             2.405             0.077              2.619
         Latvia        0.192             2.842             0.103              3.508
         Mexico        0.173             2.563             0.099              3.384
          Malta        0.166             2.451             0.092              3.125
     Netherlands       0.163             2.404             0.095              3.232
         Poland        0.165             2.444             0.098              3.354
        Portugal       0.163             2.408             0.088              3.001
       Romania         0.197             2.911             0.119              4.063
  Russian Federation 0.204               3.023             0.122              4.170
        Slovakia       0.191             2.821             0.099              3.377
        Slovenia       0.165             2.437             0.088              2.984
        Sweden         0.163             2.404             0.096              3.277
         Turkey        0.171             2.523             0.088              2.992
        Taiwan         0.163             2.404             0.099              3.366
    United States      0.163             2.404             0.087              2.960
 Note: Column (1) and (2) are calibrated using WIOD 1998 data with G = 2. Column (3) and (4)
are calibrated using WIOD 2005 data with G = 4. CPI= 0:068 in Column (2), and CPI= 0:029
 in Column (4). The median of PPI/ CPI in Column (2) is 2:408, and in Column (4) is 2:997.



                                              56
        Appendix Table A.8: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to industrial input price

                                    (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)
                                   lnCP I        lnP P I            lnCP I        lnP P I        lnCP I      lnP P I
      VARIABLES                  1981-2001     1981-2001          2002-2014     2002-2014      2002-2014   2002-2014

        lnPIndustrial;t           0.533***      0.749***          0.029***       0.142***      0.040***     0.156***
                                   (0.104)       (0.095)           (0.009)        (0.019)       (0.010)      (0.022)
        lnCP It    1              0.329***                        0.373***                     0.415***
                                   (0.056)                         (0.057)                      (0.062)
        lnP P It   1                            0.171**                               0.065                  0.124**
                                                (0.075)                              (0.054)                  (0.054)
      Y ear2008                                                                                0.047***     0.088***
                                                                                                (0.004)       (0.010)
      Y ear2009                                                                                -0.018*** -0.052***
                                                                                                (0.004)       (0.010)
      # Obs.                        1,580            943             1,412           1,051       1,412         1,051
      Adj:R2                        0.839           0.834            0.627           0.375       0.698         0.508
      Ratio of Response (R)                 1.405                            4.897                      3.900
      Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                   3.492                      2.495
      P -value, H0 : R 0                                                     0.1%                       0.3%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in industrial input prices. The LSDV
estimators are adopted. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable
Y ear2009 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of
the coe¢ cient of PPI in‡ation in response to industrial input price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation
                                                    @   lnP P I =@   lnP
in response to industrial input price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPIndustrial;t . Country …xed e¤ects have been
                                                            t       Industrial;t
controlled. Country-clustered robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes
p < 0:05, while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                             57
     Appendix Table A.9: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to industrial input price with
                                   controlling nominal wage

                                       (1)              (2)               (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
                                      lnCP I           lnP P I           lnCP I        lnP P I      lnCP I      lnP P I
    VARIABLES                       1981-2001        1981-2001         2002-2014     2002-2014    2002-2014   2002-2014

      lnPIndustrial;t               0.408***          0.553***           0.026***     0.139***    0.039***     0.155***
                                     (0.123)           (0.094)            (0.009)      (0.020)     (0.010)      (0.023)
      lnCP It    1                  0.255***                             0.348***                 0.395***
                                     (0.045)                              (0.051)                  (0.058)
      lnP P It   1                                      0.115                          0.047                    0.115**
                                                       (0.084)                        (0.048)                    (0.048)
    W ageDummy          lnwaget     0.442***          0.362***           0.185***     0.211**     0.122***        0.085
                                     (0.113)           (0.108)            (0.034)     (0.096)      (0.031)       (0.084)
    Y ear2008                                                                                     0.045***     0.087***
                                                                                                   (0.004)       (0.010)
    Y ear2009                                                                                     -0.016*** -0.051***
                                                                                                   (0.004)       (0.010)
    # Obs.                            1,580                943            1,412           1,051     1,412         1,051
    Adj:R2                            0.880               0.856           0.639           0.385     0.704         0.509
    Ratio of Response (R)                         1.355                           5.346                    3.974
    Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                          3.991                    2.619
    P -value, H0 : R 0                                                            1.1%                     2.2%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in industrial input prices. The LSDV
estimators are adopted. Variable, W ageDummy          lnwaget , equals lnwaget if wage data are available; otherwise,
0. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2009 equals 1 if
the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI
in‡ation in response to industrial input price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to
                                     @ lnP P I =@ lnP
industrial input price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPIndustrial;t . Country …xed e¤ects have been controlled.
                                              t           Industrial;t
Country-clustered robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05,
while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                                  58
    Appendix Table A.10: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to industrial input price with
                         controlling nominal wage and price index level

                                         (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)
                                       lnCPI          lnPPI            lnCPI         lnPPI          lnCPI       lnPPI
    VARIABLES                        1981-2001      1981-2001        2002-2014     2002-2014      2002-2014   2002-2014

      lnPI;t                         0.389***       0.537***         0.025***       0.121***      0.034***    0.135***
                                      (0.117)        (0.095)          (0.009)        (0.016)       (0.010)     (0.019)
      lnCP It      1                 0.253***                        0.347***                     0.394***
                                      (0.041)                         (0.053)                      (0.060)
      lnP P It     1                                     0.118                           0.046                 0.110**
                                                        (0.083)                         (0.043)                (0.043)
    lnCP It    1                     -0.017***                         -0.005                       -0.003
                                      (0.005)                         (0.008)                      (0.008)
    lnP P It   1                                     -0.010*                        -0.053***                  -0.045***
                                                     (0.005)                         (0.013)                     (0.012)
    W ageDummy             lnwaget   0.422***       0.353***         0.179***        0.191**      0.119***         0.071
                                      (0.114)        (0.107)          (0.035)        (0.077)       (0.030)       (0.067)
    Y ear2008                                                                                     0.055***      0.097***
                                                                                                   (0.006)       (0.014)
    Y ear2009                                                                                       -0.001        -0.027
                                                                                                   (0.006)       (0.022)
    Y ear2008          lnPI;t                                                                     0.124***       0.141*
                                                                                                   (0.046)       (0.084)
    Y ear2009          lnPI;t                                                                     0.122***        0.176
                                                                                                   (0.041)       (0.183)
    Observations                        1,580            943           1,412            1,051       1,412         1,051
    R-squared                           0.886           0.858          0.640            0.410       0.704         0.527
    Ratio of Response (R)                       1.380                           4.840                      3.971
    Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                        3.460                      2.591
    P -value, H0 : R 0                                                          1.3%                       2.4%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in industrial input prices. The LSDV
estimators are adopted. Variable, W ageDummy        lnwaget , equals lnwaget if wage data are available; otherwise,
0. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2009 equals 1 if
the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Y ear2008     lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction of
variable Y ear2008 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Y ear2009        lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction of variable
Y ear2009 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI in‡ation in
response to industrial input price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to industrial input
                    @ lnP P I =@ lnP
price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPIndustrial;t . Country …xed e¤ects have been controlled. Country-clustered robust
                                t    Industrial;t
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05, while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                                59
    Appendix Table A.11: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to industrial input price with
                                        exchange rate

                                       (1)           (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                     lnCPI         lnPPI             lnCPI        lnPPI        lnCPI       lnPPI
    VARIABLES                      1981-2001     1981-2001         2002-2014    2002-2014    2002-2014   2002-2014

      lnPI;t (U SD)                 0.061***      0.214***         0.021***      0.135***    0.024***     0.133***
                                     (0.021)       (0.053)          (0.007)       (0.015)     (0.007)      (0.015)
      lnCP It    1                  0.236***                       0.340***                  0.395***
                                     (0.046)                        (0.049)                   (0.055)
      lnP P It   1                                  0.095                          0.043                   0.106**
                                                   (0.073)                        (0.046)                   (0.046)
      lnExchangeRatet               0.488***      0.684***         0.062**       0.156***    0.087**      0.208***
                                     (0.133)       (0.091)          (0.031)       (0.059)     (0.037)       (0.069)
    W ageDummy           lnwaget    0.386***       0.257**         0.197***       0.219**    0.132***        0.106
                                     (0.112)       (0.102)          (0.033)       (0.088)     (0.029)       (0.075)
    Y ear2008                                                                                0.050***     0.093***
                                                                                              (0.007)       (0.015)
    Y ear2009                                                                                  -0.015       -0.046*
                                                                                              (0.009)       (0.026)
    Y ear2008        lnPI;t                                                                    0.077         0.094
                                                                                              (0.059)       (0.107)
    Y ear2009        lnPI;t                                                                    0.070         0.114
                                                                                              (0.053)       (0.198)
    # Obs.                            1,580            943           1,412           1,051     1,412         1,051
    Adj:R2                            0.899           0.871          0.643           0.385     0.715         0.517
    Ratio of Response (R)                     3.508                          6.429                    5.442
    Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                     2.921                    2.484
    P -value, H0 : R 0                                                       7.7%                     12.5%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in industrial input prices. The LSDV
estimators are adopted. Variable, W ageDummy          lnwaget , equals lnwaget if wage data are available; otherwise,
0. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2009 equals 1 if
the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Y ear2008     lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction of
variable Y ear2008 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Y ear2009        lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction of variable
Y ear2009 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI in‡ation in
response to industrial input price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to industrial input
                    @ lnP P I =@ lnP
price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPIndustrial;t . Country …xed e¤ects have been controlled. Country-clustered robust
                             t       Industrial;t
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05, while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                              60
          Appendix Table A.12: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to commodity price

                                    (1)           (2)                 (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)
                                   lnCP I        lnP P I             lnCP I        lnP P I        lnCP I      lnP P I
      VARIABLES                  1993-2001     1993-2001           2002-2014     2002-2014      2002-2014   2002-2014

        lnPCommodity;t            0.439***      0.772***           0.086***       0.246***      0.070***     0.232***
                                   (0.134)       (0.133)            (0.010)        (0.029)       (0.016)      (0.036)
        lnCP It    1              0.350***                         0.480***                     0.464***
                                   (0.050)                          (0.044)                      (0.049)
        lnP P It   1                                0.161*                            0.092*                    0.079
                                                    (0.096)                           (0.050)                  (0.051)
      Y ear2008                                                                                 0.032***     0.037***
                                                                                                 (0.004)       (0.007)
      Y ear2009                                                                                   -0.002        0.002
                                                                                                 (0.007)       (0.014)
      Observations                   792             505             1,386            1,025       1,386         1,025
      R-squared                     0.799           0.763            0.686            0.539       0.712         0.556
      Ratio of Response (R)                 1.759                            2.860                       3.314
      Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                   1.101                       1.555
      P -value, H0 : R 0                                                     7.9%                        6.8%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in commodity prices. The LSDV
estimators are adopted. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable
Y ear2009 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of
the coe¢ cient of PPI in‡ation in response to primary commodity price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI
                                                                     @   lnP P I =@    lnP
in‡ation in response to primary commodity price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPCommodity;t . Country …xed e¤ects
                                                                      t       Commodity;t
have been controlled. Country-clustered robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01,
** denotes p < 0:05, while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                              61
Appendix Table A.13: The response of CPI and PPI in‡ation to commodity price with controlling
                             nominal wage and price index level

                                         (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                       lnCPI        lnPPI             lnCPI        lnPPI        lnCPI       lnPPI
    VARIABLES                        1993-2001    1993-2001         2002-2014    2002-2014    2002-2014   2002-2014

      lnPC;t                         0.262***      0.562***         0.083***      0.231***    0.063***    0.211***
                                      (0.100)       (0.111)          (0.010)       (0.027)     (0.016)     (0.033)
      lnCP It      1                 0.239***                       0.459***                  0.443***
                                      (0.046)                        (0.042)                   (0.048)
      lnP P It     1                                   0.117*                     0.081*                    0.069
                                                       (0.068)                    (0.043)                  (0.043)
    lnCP It    1                     -0.085***                        0.002                     -0.001
                                      (0.024)                        (0.006)                   (0.007)
    lnP P It   1                                   -0.097***                      -0.028**                 -0.031***
                                                    (0.027)                        (0.011)                   (0.011)
    W ageDummy             lnwaget   0.427***       0.228**         0.126***        0.108     0.107***        0.090
                                      (0.121)       (0.107)          (0.032)       (0.070)     (0.029)       (0.069)
    Y ear2008                                                                                 0.040***      0.047***
                                                                                               (0.007)       (0.012)
    Y ear2009                                                                                   0.008         0.011
                                                                                               (0.007)       (0.022)
    Y ear2008          lnPC;t                                                                  0.105**        0.084
                                                                                               (0.048)       (0.085)
    Y ear2009          lnPC;t                                                                  0.087*         0.086
                                                                                               (0.045)       (0.180)
    Observations                        792             505           1,386           1,025     1,386         1,025
    R-squared                          0.882           0.801          0.691           0.549     0.717         0.567
    Ratio of Response (R)                      2.145                          2.783                    3.350
    Rpost;2001 Rpre;2001                                                      0.638                    1.204
    P -value, H0 : R 0                                                        24.4%                   17.4%

Notes : This table estimates the responses of CPI and PPI in‡ation to changes in commodity prices. The LSDV
estimators are adopted. Variable, W ageDummy          lnwaget , equals lnwaget if wage data are available; otherwise,
0. Variable Y ear2008 equals 1 if the observation is in the year of 2008; otherwise, 0. Variable Y ear2009 equals 1 if
the observation is in the year of 2009; otherwise, 0. Variable, Y ear2008     lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction of
variable Y ear2008 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Y ear2009        lnPIndustrial;t , is the interaction of variable
Y ear2009 and lnPIndustrial;t . Variable, Ratio of Response, is the ratio of the coe¢ cient of PPI in‡ation in
response to primary commodity price change divided by the coe¢ cient of CPI in‡ation in response to primary
                              @ lnP P I =@ lnP
commodity price change, i.e., @ lnCP It =@ lnPCommodity;t . Country …xed e¤ects have been controlled.
                                       t       Commodity;t
Country-clustered robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes p < 0:01, ** denotes p < 0:05,
while * denotes p < 0:1.




                                                               62
