NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LABOR MARKET IMPACTS OF UNIVERSAL AND PERMANENT CASH TRANSFERS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE ALASKA PERMANENT FUND
Damon Jones
Ioana Marinescu
Working Paper 24312
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24312

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018, Revised January 2020

We would like to thank Kohei Matsumoto, Robert Ross, and Joaquin Lennon Sabatini for
excellent research assistance. We are also thankful for comments from Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
and Lorenz Kueng, and workshop participants at the Harris School, ENSAI, Temple University,
the University of Pennsylvania, NBER Labor Studies, the AEA Annual Meetings, the University
of Wisconsin Institute for Research on Poverty, and the OECD Paris. Any opinions expressed
here are those of the authors and not of any institution, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Damon Jones and Ioana Marinescu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Labor Market Impacts of Universal and Permanent Cash Transfers: Evidence from the
Alaska Permanent Fund
Damon Jones and Ioana Marinescu
NBER Working Paper No. 24312
February 2018, Revised January 2020
JEL No. H24,I38,J21,J22
ABSTRACT
How would universal and permanent cash transfers affect the labor market? Since 1982, all
Alaskan residents have received a yearly cash dividend from the Alaska Permanent Fund. Using
data from the Current Population Survey and a synthetic control method, we show that the
dividend had no effect on employment, and increased part-time work by 1.8 percentage points
(17%). We calibrate expected micro and macro effects of the cash transfer using prior literature,
and find our results to be consistent with cash stimulating the local economy — a general
equilibrium effect. We further show that non-tradable sectors have a more positive employment
response than tradable sectors. Overall, our results suggest that a universal and permanent cash
transfer does not significantly decrease aggregate employment.

Damon Jones
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
damonjones@uchicago.edu
Ioana Marinescu
University of Pennsylvania
School of Social Policy & Practice
3701 Locust Walk
Philadelphia PA, 19104-6214
and NBER
ioma@upenn.edu

1

Introduction

The effect of cash transfers on labor market outcomes is of central interest in a number of areas, including the design of tax policy, means-tested transfers, and public pension programs.
One key concern is that cash transfers could discourage work through an income effect. A
number of studies based on the Negative Income Tax experiments of the 1970s (Robins,
1985; Price and Song, 2016) and evidence from lottery winners (Imbens et al., 2001; Cesarini
et al., 2017) reliably estimate an income effect of approximately -0.1 in developed countries,
implying that a 10 percent increase in unearned income will reduce earned income by about
1 percent (see Marinescu, 2018, for an overview). In contrast, a study of the Eastern Band
of Cherokee Indians, who receive an unconditional transfer from casino profits, found no
labor supply effect (Akee et al., 2010). While lottery studies leverage ideal exogeneity and
the case study of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians involved a permanent dividend,
these transfers accrue to small shares of the total population and therefore identify a micro
effect. Although the NIT experiments included a treatment group comprised of an entire
municipality, the experiments generally lasted only three to five years. A universal and unconditional cash transfer will affect the labor market equilibrium and likely alter long-term
expectations, yet little is known about the long-run, macro impact of this policy.
To analyze the long-run impact of a universal and unconditional cash transfer on the
labor market, we examine the case of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend. The fund,
worth $65 billion as of June, 2018, is a diversified portfolio of invested oil reserve royalties.1
Since 1982, all Alaskan residents of any age are entitled to a yearly dividend payment from
the Alaska Permanent Fund; in recent years, the payment is about $2,000 per person. The
dividend only requires that a recipient reside in Alaska for at least a year. Relative to prior
studies, ours features a cash transfer that is universal, unconditional, and permanent.
In our setting, everyone within the same state receives a transfer, leaving no natural
within-state control group. Furthermore, the universality of the transfer may have macro1

http://www.apfc.org/

1

level effects on the economy and labor market. We therefore need to consider the entire state
as the unit of observation. Estimating the effect of a policy change in one particular state,
Alaska, presents us with the methodological challenge of constructing an appropriate counterfactual. We rely on the synthetic control method proposed in Abadie and Gardeazabal
(2003) and Abadie et al. (2010), using data from Current Population Survey. The synthetic
control method chooses a weighted average of control states to best match Alaska for the
outcome of interest and other observable characteristics before the dividend payments begin.
This method therefore combines elements of matching and difference-in-differences (DD) estimators, and allows us to measure labor market outcomes in Alaska relative to matched
controls after the beginning of the Alaska Permanent Fund dividend payments. We employ
permutation methods to assess the statistical likelihood of our results given our sample.
As with all methods, our synthetic control has strengths and weaknesses, and, in
particular, relies on our ability to construct a credible counterfactual for Alaska. Our primary
analysis, therefore, focuses on two outcomes for which well-matched synthetic controls could
be constructed: the employment to population ratio and the population share working part
time. For these two outcomes, better controls could be found for Alaska than for at least
68% of other states. In our preferred specification, we do not detect any effect of the Alaska
Permanent Fund dividend on employment, i.e. the extensive margin. We do, however,
estimate a positive increase of 1.8 percentage points, or 17 percent, in the share of all
Alaskans who work in part-time jobs. Analysis of secondary outcomes, i.e. labor force
participation and hours worked, are qualitatively consistent with and confirm our primary
results.
Our preferred interpretation of the empirical patterns we observe is that the null employment effect could be explained a by positive general equilibrium response offsetting a
negative income effect. The unconditional cash transfer results in consumption increases
that stimulate labor demand and could mitigate potential reductions in employment. While
we do not directly test this channel, we do show indirect evidence for this general equilib-

2

rium effect in two ways: first, we compare our empirical employment effect to the expected
micro and macro effects of the Alaska Permanent Fund dividend based on estimates from
prior literature, and second we compare the impact of the cash transfer on the tradable and
non-tradable sectors.
First, if the dividend only operated through the income effect estimated in Cesarini
et al. (2017), the dividend should reduce the employment to population ratio in Alaska by
about 0.6 percentage points. On the other hand, given estimates of the response of statelevel employment to local wealth shocks (Chodorow-Reich et al., 2019) and federal spending
(Chodorow-Reich, 2019), the spending of the dividend should increase employment by 0.5
percentage points. Our point estimates range between a 0.1 percentage point increase in
employment for our main specification to about 2.8 percentage point in a few alternative
specifications. Our point estimates are therefore larger than what is predicted by the income
effect alone and suggest a multiplier effect similar to what was measured in prior studies
of federal stimulus spending. Overall, what is clear is that the estimated macro effects of
an unconditional cash transfer on the labor market are inconsistent with large aggregate
reductions in employment, though there may be intensive margin reductions.
Second, the impact on labor demand should be especially pronounced in the nontradable sector. We show suggestive evidence consistent with this hypothesis — the estimated effects of the dividend on both employment and part-time work are sizeable in the
tradable sector and suggest a reduction in labor, but are close to zero in the non-tradable
sector. These estimates are only suggestive, but are consistent with a macro feedback effect
on employment.
An alternative interpretation of our extensive margin results is that the size of the
average Alaska Permanent Fund dividend is too small to affect labor supply on the extensive
margin. However, it should be noted that the dividend is paid on a per person basis —
the average family receives about $3,900, or, in present value terms, about $119,000 over
one’s lifetime. By comparison, in the lottery study by Cesarini et al. (2017), 90% of winners

3

received a one-time payment of $1,400 or less. The transfer is thus larger than most of the
transfers received in Cesarini et al. (2017). In addition, Cesarini et al. (2017) do not find
strong evidence of nonlinearities in the income effect, which suggests that our evidence might
be relevant for cash transfers of a larger magnitude.
With respect to our findings on the rate of part-time employment, the results suggest
that there is a reduction in labor supply on the intensive margin. However, our confidence
intervals for the extensive margin of labor supply do not rule out positive employment
effects, and a number of our alternative specifications find significantly positive extensive
margin responses. We therefore cannot rule out the possibility that the increase in part-time
work represents workers moving into the labor force on a part-time basis.
Our work makes three key contributions to the literature. First, we analyze the impact
of a universal, unconditional cash transfer, which allows us to estimate the macro effect of the
policy on the labor market. The fact that we do not detect significant employment reductions
suggests that the policy could have general equilibrium effects that offset the income effect of
a cash transfer. Second, the Alaskan policy is permanent and we are therefore in a position
to estimate the long-run labor market response to such a policy. Finally, while previously
studies have focused on the intertemporal consumption response to the Alaska Permanent
Fund (Hsieh, 2003; Kueng, 2018), ours is the first, to our knowledge, to examine the macro
labor market impacts of this policy. In a recent study, Feinberg and Kuehn (2018) estimate
hours responses to Permanent Fund Dividend, using year-to-year fluctuation and variation
by family size. In contrast to our results, they find negative income effects. However, their
research design, which either compares Alaskans to other Alaskans or controls for state-level
fixed effects, does not capture macro-effects of the policy, and is more akin to prior studies
that estimate micro elasticities.
In addition to the literature on income effects and labor supply mentioned above,
our work is relevant to a number of other areas of research. In the public finance and
optimal income tax literature, an unconditional cash transfer can essentially be thought

4

of as a demogrant, e.g. the intercept of an NIT schedule. Although a trade-off between
redistribution and labor supply disincentives is considered, the standard Mirrlees (1971)
model does not take into account the potential general equilibrium effects of cash transfers.
Kroft et al. (2015) show that, in a model with unemployment and endogenous wages, the
optimal tax formula resembles an NIT more than an Earned Income Tax Credit when the
macro effect of taxes on employment is smaller that the micro effect. Our empirical results
are consistent with this setting. Finally, Cunha et al. (Forthcoming) provide evidence that
cash transfers result in a outward shift in demand for local goods, which is consistent with
our preferred interpretation of our results.
An unconditional cash transfer may share properties with means-tested transfers, and
thus our results are related to studies on the labor supply effects of these programs. Recent
studies of the labor supply effects of Medicaid have varied widely depending on the state
under consideration (see Buchmueller et al., 2016, for a review). The Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC) has generally been found to produce large, positive extensive margin labor
supply responses, and a likely small or negligible intensive margin response (see Nichols
and Rothstein, 2016, for further discussion). Welfare reform is typically shown to reduce
take-up of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and increase employment and
earnings, while reducing total income, taking into account lower benefits (Ziliak, 2016).
Recent studies have found large income effects in the specific setting of the Supplemental
Security Income Program (SSI) and Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) (Deshpande,
2016; Gelber et al., 2017). Finally, our work is related to the literature on unconditional cash
transfers in developing countries. A review by Banerjee et al. (2015) concludes that these
cash transfers do not affect labor supply in developing countries. In many cases, though not
all, these analyses rely on a framework that focuses on labor supply responses, while our
results suggest that general equilibrium factors may matter.
From a policy perspective, our results are relevant to understanding the potential labor
market impacts of a universal basic income, an unconditional and universal cash transfer.

5

For example, Hillary Clinton considered a universal basic income modeled after the Alaska
Permanent Fund — which we study here — as part of her 2016 presidential campaign
proposals.2 . The Democratic primary for the 2020 presidential election in the United States
includes a candidate – Andrew Yang – who made a universal basic income his key campaign
proposal.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional context for
the Alaska Permanent Fund. In section 3, we discuss the synthetic control method, and
then describe our data in section 4. We present the main results in section 5. We provide
additional results and a discussion in section 6. Section 7 concludes.

2

Policy background: The Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend

During the 1970s, when the production and sale of oil from Alaska’s North Slope region
began in earnest, the state experienced a massive influx of revenue. However, concerns arose
after a large windfall of nearly $900 million was quickly spent down by state legislators (see
O’Brien and Olson, 1990, for a history of the fund). Furthermore, residents worried that
a heavy reliance on oil revenue during a boom would lead to undesirable shortfalls during
slowdowns in production. In response, voters established the Alaska Permanent Fund. The
general design of the fund is laid out in an amendment to the state constitution:
At least twenty-five percent of all mineral lease rentals, royalties, royalty sale
proceeds, federal mineral revenue sharing payments and bonuses received by the
State shall be placed in a permanent fund, the principal of which shall be used
only for those income-producing investments specifically designated by law as eligible for permanent fund investments. All income from the permanent fund shall
2

https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/9/12/16296532/hillary-clinton-universal-basic-incomealaska-for-america-peter-barnes

6

be deposited in the general fund unless otherwise provided by law. (Amendment
to Alaska Constitution, Article IX, Section 15)
The purpose of the fund was to diversify Alaska’s revenue streams by investing a portion
of royalties more broadly; to ensure that current revenue was in part preserved for future
residents; and to constrain discretionary spending by state government officials (O’Brien and
Olson, 1990). The fund is managed by the Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation, and the
current value of the fund as of June 2018 is $64.9 billion.3
Since 1982, a portion of the returns to the fund have been distributed to residents of
Alaska in the form of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend. The dividend is approximately
10 percent of the average returns to the fund during the last 5 years, spread out evenly among
the current year’s applicants. The fund is invested in a diversified manner across public and
private assets, and is designed to generate long-term risk-adjusted returns. Moreover, oil
revenues as a share of the total value of the fund have decreased from 12.2 percent in 1982
to 0.6 percent in 2016 (Kueng, 2018). For these reasons, the level of dividend payments in
a given year are generally independent of the local Alaskan economy and contemporary oil
production and revenue.
The nominal value of the dividend was as low as $331 in 1984, but has generally
exceeded $1,000 since 1996, and peaked in 2015 at $2,072 (see Figure 1 for yearly nominal
and real amounts of the dividend).4 In order to qualify for a payment, a resident must have
lived in Alaska for at least 12 months. There are some exceptions to eligibility. For example,
people who were incarcerated during the prior year as a result of a felony conviction are
not eligible. On the other hand, non-citizens who are permanent residents or refugees are
eligible. Therefore, the payment is essentially universal, with each adult and child receiving
a separate payment, generally around October of the year via direct deposit.
A representative survey of Alaskans conducted in March and April of 2017 (Harstad,
2017) shows that the dividends are popular and significant to Alaskan residents. For example,
3
4

http://www.apfc.org/
https://pfd.alaska.gov/Division-Info/Summary-of-Applications-and-Payments

7

40 percent of respondents say the yearly dividends have made a great deal or quite a bit
of difference in their lives over the past five years, while only 20 percent say it has made
no difference. Interestingly, Alaskans were also asked about how the dividend affects work
incentives and willingness to work: 55 percent report no effect, 21 percent a positive effect,
and 16 percent a negative effect. Thus, the majority of Alaskans report that the dividend
has little to no effect on work.
A key feature of our policy setting is that nearly all residents of Alaska receive the
dividend. We therefore do not have a natural control group within the state itself. In the
next section, we outline an empirical method that allows to treat the entire state as a treated
unit, by constructing a counterfactual for Alaska using a weighted average of other states.

3

Empirical method

We aim to compare the evolution of labor market outcomes in Alaska after the introduction of
the dividend payments to a set of control states that proxy for the counterfactual outcomes in
the absence of the Alaska Permanent Fund dividend payments. Relative to typical Differencein-Differences (DD) approaches, which feature multiple treatment units, we are faced with
the challenge of constructing a counterfactual for exactly one state, which complicates the
selection of a suitable set of control states as well as statistical inference. We therefore adopt
the synthetic control method of Abadie et al. (2010), which features a data-driven method
for choosing a weighted average of potential control states as a comparison for a treated unit.
We direct readers to that text for a detailed explanation of the method and briefly outline
the method here.
Suppose we have a panel of S + 1 states, indexed by s and observed for T periods.
There is one treatment state with s = 0, while all other states are controls. The variable
dst indicates whether a state s is receiving treatment in period t and it takes the following

8

values:



 0 if s ≥ 1 or t ≤ T0
dst =

 1 if s = 0 and t > T0

(1)

In other words, all states are untreated during the pre-intervention period, i.e. t ∈ {1, . . . , T0 },
and the treatment state becomes treated starting in period T0 + 1.
We adopt a potential outcomes framework (Rubin, 1974):

yst (0) = δt + θt Zs + λt µs + εst
yst (1) = αst + yst (0)

(2)

where yst (0) is the outcome of interest in the untreated condition and yst (1) is the outcome of
interest in the treated condition. The parameter δt is a time-varying factor common across
states, Zs is an observable (r × 1) vector of covariates (in our case: average pre-period
female share, industry shares, age category shares, and educational categories shares), θt is
a (1 × r) vector of time-varying coefficients, µs is an unobservable (m × 1) vector of factor
loadings, and λt is a (1 × m) vector of common time-varying factors. The error terms εst
are unobservable, mean zero, state-by-time shocks. Note that the presence of the λt µs term
allows for time-varying and state-specific unobservable factors.
Our parameter of interest is α0t = y0t (1) − y0t (0) for t ∈ {T0 + 1, . . . , T }, i.e. the
effect of treatment for the treated state in the post-intervention period. However, for each
state and time period, we only observe yst = dst yst (1) + (1 − dst ) yst (0). In particular,
we do not observe the counterfactual outcome for the treated state, y0t (0), during periods
t ∈ {T0 + 1, . . . , T }.
We therefore seek a set of S weights, w = (w1 , . . . , wS ), in order to combine the
untreated outcomes among control states and provide a reasonable approximation for the
counterfactual. Following Abadie et al. (2010) we choose the set of weights that solve the

9

following:
w∗ (V ) = arg min X0 −
w

S
X

!0
ws · X s

V X0 −

s=1

S
X

!
ws · Xs

(3)

s=1

where Xs (K × 1) is a vector consisting of some or all of the elements of (Z0s , ys1 , . . . , ysT0 )0 ,
and V is a positive definite and diagonal K × K matrix. In our application, the matching
vector Xs is comprised of a set of variables Zs realized in the pre-intervention period and the
P 0
yst .5 Through an iterative
average outcome over the pre-intervention period, ȳsp = T10 Tt=1
process, the matrix V is chosen as follows:
T0
S
X
1 X
∗
V = arg min
y0t −
ws∗ (V ) · yst
T0 t=1
V
s=1

We additionally constrain the weights so that

P

!2
(4)

ws = 1 and ws ≥ 0 for al s ∈ {1, . . . , S}.

Once we have arrived at a set of weights, our estimator for α0t is:

α̂0t = y0t −

S
X

ws∗ (V∗ ) · yst

(5)

s=1

for t ∈ {T0 + 1, . . . , T }.6 In practice, we report the average difference between the treatment
unit and the synthetic control during the period where the dividend is in place in Alaska
(the treatment period):
T
X
1
α̂0 =
α̂0t
T − T0 t=T +1

(6)

0

For comparison to other methods, we can frame the synthetic control method as a
member of a family of more widely used estimators. Doudchenko and Imbens (2016) present
the following general model for the counterfactual outcome for the treated unit in period t:
5

Our results are largely unchanged if we instead use the last realized outcome in the pre-intervention
period ys,T0 instead. Note, as demonstrated by Kaul et al. (2015), if the outcomes for each pre-intervention
period are used to estimate the weights, the iterative process mechanically sets the elements of V that
correspond to Zs to zero, and thus, these additional covariates cease to inform the procedure.
6
The synthetic control estimator can be easily implemented by using the “synth" package in either MATLAB, Stata, or R.

10

ŷ0t (0) = µ +

S
X

ws · yst

(7)

s=1

They note that the synthetic control method can be thought of as imposing a set of conP
straints on (7): namely, µ = 0, s ws = 1, and ws ≥ 0. Relative to the synthetic control
method, a DD estimator relaxes the constraint that µ = 0, while imposing a constraint that
ws = w̄ = 1 /S . On the other hand, many matching estimators relax the constraint that
ws ≥ 0, while imposing "perfect balance." That is, X0 = Xc W M atch , where W M atch is an
(S × 1) vector of the weights ws and Xc = (X1 , . . . , XS )0 is the (K × S) matrix of matching
vectors for control states. Finally, Abadie et al. (2015) show that OLS regression similarly
relaxes ws ≥ 0, while imposing perfect balance, with W OLS = X0c (Xc X0c )−1 X0 . Thus, the
various methods can all be framed as using weighted averages of control states, with constant
weights in the case of the DD, and possibly negative weights, i.e. extrapolation, in the case
of matching or OLS.
Although the synthetic control method avoids extrapolation, the constraint that ws ≥
0 means that the estimator is not guaranteed to deliver a great fit for the treated unit.
This depends on whether or not X0 lies within the convex hull of the Xs vectors of the
control states. In that respect, we do have to subjectively evaluate whether or not the
pre-intervention fit is sufficiently close. Following Abadie et al. (2010) we estimate the rootmean-square error (RMSE) for pre-intervention outcomes, i.e. the square root of (4), for our
main estimate and for each of our placebo estimates. We then rank the fit across all placebos
and adopt the conservative approach of focusing on outcomes where the fit for Alaska using
the true treatment period as a low rank. For example, the fit for our two primary outcomes,
employment and part-time work, is at or below the 32nd percentile in our main specification.
To quantify the significance of our estimates, we implement a permutation method
suggested by Abadie et al. (2010), comparing our synthetic control estimate to a distribution
of placebo estimates. That is, we implement the above synthetic control procedure for all 50
states and the District of Columbia, and repeat this exercise as if the treatment year occurred
11

in each of our observed time periods. In our setting, we use “placebo” treatment years between
1978 and 2013, and for each placebo treatment year, we find synthetic controls for the treated
state based on 5 years of data prior to treatment (or the maximum number of available pre
treatment years, if this is less than 5 years). We define α̂st as the estimate for state s with
placebo treatment year t. We then conduct a two-tailed test of the null hypothesis of no effect
in our treatment state by comparing the observed estimate for s = 0 and true treatment
year, t = 1982, to the empirical distribution of placebo estimates. Specifically, our “p-value”
is defined as follows:
P P
s

p0 =

t

1 {|α̂0,1982 | ≤ |α̂st |}
Nst

(8)

where Nst is the total number of placebo estimates. The statistic p0 therefore measures the
share of the placebo effects that are larger in absolute value than that of Alaska. If treatment
status is randomly assigned, this procedure comprises randomization inference (Abadie et al.,
2015). Although randomization is unlikely to describe the data generating process in our
setting, we nonetheless implement the permutation method, in the spirit of Bertrand et al.
(2002).7
We additionally calculate confidence intervals by inverting our permutation test (e.g.
Imbens and Rubin, 2015). For a given null hypothesis effect of α∗ we transform the data as
follows:
∗
yst
=




y

for s 6= 0 or t ≤ T0



yst − α∗

for s = 0 and t > T0

st

(9)

Using this transformed data, we recalculate a p-value using equations (5), (6) and (8): p0,α∗ .
Our 95% confidence interval is then defined as the set {α∗ | p0,α∗ > 0.05}, i.e. the set of null
effects we cannot reject given the data.
The synthetic control method has a number of attractive features in our empirical
setting. First, the selection of the control states is carried out using a data-driven process.
7

We do not cite the published version here, since randomization inference is only featured in the working
paper.

12

In a setting such as ours, where the treatment unit does not have a natural set of comparison
states, it is useful to have a process that minimizes the extent to which researcher degrees
of freedom confound the analysis. Second, the restrictions on the optimal set of weights
renders our “synthetic Alaska” time series immediately interpretable as a weighted average
of other states. The reader can easily determine which states are contributing most to the
estimates. Moreover, the method provides for transparent visual inspection of the goodness
of matching in the pre-period. Third, the synthetic control method uses a framework similar
to the DD approach, but is potentially robust to relaxing the parallel trends assumptions.
Abadie et al. (2010) note that this is most likely the case when a relatively long pre-period
is used for matching. Finally, the method naturally implies a set of placebo exercises to
determine whether any significant effects are simply artifacts of the methodology.

4

Data

We analyze data drawn from the monthly Current Population Surveys (CPS). Every household that enters the CPS is surveyed each month for 4 months, then ignored for 8 months,
then surveyed again for 4 more months. Labor force and demographic questions, known as
the "basic monthly survey," are asked every month. Usual weekly hours questions are asked
only of households in their fourth and eighth month of the survey. Because the Permanent
Fund Dividend was initiated in June 1982, we aggregate the data into years defined as twelve
month intervals beginning in July and ending in June. We restrict our analysis to data for
those who are 16 years old or above and collapse the data using survey weights, to create
annual averages for the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
We use data on active labor force, employment status, and part-time employment status
from the monthly CPS surveys. Specifically, we use the Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series (IPUMS) CPS (Flood et al., 2015) provided by the Minnesota Population Center for
the analysis of employment outcomes. We do not have data for the state of Alaska for the

13

months of February, March, April, July, September, and November of 1977. Therefore, we
eliminate these months from all states in 1977. Although IPUMS-CPS is available from 1962
onward, separate data for Alaska is only available from 1977 onward. Using data between
July 1977 and June 2015 results in a total of 48,686,169 observations.
For the analysis of hours worked, we use the CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups
(MORG) provided by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Specifically, we
use reported hours worked last week at all jobs. These data are only available beginning in
1979. Focusing only on employed respondents, we obtain a total of 7,206,411 observations
between July 1979 and June 2015. This sample size is considerably smaller because it only
uses two of the 8 total survey months for each respondent.8
We define a set of synthetic control states that collectively best match Alaska in the
pre-period based on a number of state characteristics observed during the pre-treatment
period (the Z variables in equation (2) above). We calculate the share of population in
three educational categories: less than a high school degree, high school degree, and at least
some college. We additionally measure the share female and the share of the population in
four age groups: age 16 to age 19, age 20 to age 24, age 25 to age 64, and age 65 or older.
Finally, we take into account the industrial composition of the workforce using five broad
categories of industry codes: (1) agriculture, forestry, fisheries, mining, and construction; (2)
manufacturing; (3) transportation, communications, utilities, wholesale, and retail trade; (4)
finance, insurance, real estate, business, repair, and personal services; and (5) entertainment
and recreation, professional and related services, public administration, and active duty
military.
For a subset of specifications, we augment our primary data in order to conduct robustness checks. To assess the sensitivity of our analysis to the number of pre-treatment
years used, we merge our CPS data with deccennial Census data from 1970 and 1960. In
8

CPS MORG also has data on earnings, and it would be interesting to analyze this outcome. However,
it is very hard to find a good control group for Alaska in terms of hourly earnings: the pre-period match is
at the 98th percentile. For this reason, we cannot have much confidence in results concerning earnings.

14

this case, we focus on the employment rate, which is most consistently defined across the
surveys. Second, we conduct limited analysis of state spending, using data from a harmonized collection of US Census of Government survey data (Pierson et al., 2015). Third, we
merge oil production data from State Energy Data System (SEDS)9 , in combination with
oil prices series from BP Statistical Review of World Energy,10 and use oil production to
GDP ratios as a matching variable. Finally, we combine intercensal population estimates
with natality and mortality measures to further use net migration as a matching variable.

5

Main results

We separately consider two margins of response to the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend.
First, we examine extensive margin outcomes, the employment rate and labor force participation. We then turn to the intensive margin by examining the effect of the PFD on
the part-time working rate and hours per week. In each case, we pay special attention to
those outcomes for which we are able to achieve a particularly good synthetic match: the
employment and part-time rates. Finally, we consider a number of robustness checks and
alternative specifications.

5.1

Employment and labor force participation

We begin our analysis with a focus on extensive margin outcomes. In Table 1 we compare
Alaska to its synthetic control using variables averaged over the pre-treatment period. We
use monthly CPS data from 1977 to 1981 in Panel A and column (1) features actual data
for Alaska. In column (2) we present a weighted average of these characteristics using the
set of control states selected by our method from Section 3. In particular, the key outcome
variable used to construct the V matrix from equation (4) is the employment rate in each
pre-treatment year for column (2), the labor force participation in each pre-treatment year for
9
10

https://www.eia.gov/state/seds/seds-data-complete.php
https://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy.html

15

column (3), and so forth. Meanwhile, the X variables used in equation (3) include age, female
share, industry, education and average employment or average labor force participation in
the pre-period. We are generally able to match Alaska across these key observables. The
combination of states and weights underlying the synthetic Alaska in column (2) are detailed
in Panel A of Appendix Table A.10 — the states include Utah, Wyoming, Washington,
Nevada, Montana, and Minnesota.11 It is interesting to see that many of the chosen states
are mountainous like Alaska, even though this is not something we explicitly matched on.
Figure 2a plots the employment rate (employment12 to population) for Alaska and
synthetic Alaska from 1977 to 2014. The vertical, dashed line indicates 1981, the last year
before the introduction of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend. By construction, we see
that Alaska and the synthetic control track each other in the pre-period. This pattern
generally continues during the post-period — even though we only use five years of data for
matching, the two time series continue to line up closely for several decades. In Table 2,
column (1) we calculate virtually no difference — 0.001 percentage points — in the average
employment rate between Alaska and synthetic Alaska during the post-period. The data
suggest that the dividend did not have a meaningful impact on employment in Alaska.
Following the details outlined in Section 3, we conduct a a total of 1,836 placebo
synthetic control comparisons, using time periods other than the true onset of treatment
and states other than Alaska. Figure 2b plots the difference between each “treatment” state
and its synthetic control. The actual treatment state, Alaska, is highlighted in black, while
the remaining placebos are plotted in grey. Since each series relies on a different placebo
treatment year, we use event time on the x-axis, i.e. time relative to the placebo treatment
year. As expected, the mean of the placebo differences is very close to zero — -0.002 —
suggesting that the method is not in systematically prone to finding differences. Moreover,
the actual treatment difference for employment in Alaska lies squarely inside the range of
11

For interested readers, the appendix provides synthetic control states and their weights for each of the
outcomes and specifications we use.
12
Employment includes the self-employed, as long as they work for pay.

16

placebo differences.
Using our placebos, we can assess the analysis in several ways. First, we calculate a
measure of synthetic control quality, the root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the difference in
each pre-period year between treatment and synthetic control. We then rank this measure for
our actual treatment state and year relative to all placebos, and find a relatively high quality
match. In Table 2, column (1), the actual treatment ranks within the top 32 percent match
of quality when using employment as an outcome. Second, we use the empirical distribution
of placebo treatment effects to assess the quantitative significance of our estimate, which we
loosely refer to as a p-value. Just over 94 percent of the placebos generate a larger estimate,
underscoring our null conclusion. Finally, we construct a confidence interval using a series
of placebo exercises under various null hypotheses — the resulting confidence interval in the
case of employment contains zero.
We complement our analysis of extensive margin effects by also considering labor force
participation as an outcome. We summarize the results for this outcome in Table 2, column
(3). In this case, we do not achieve as great a fit in the pre-period as when employment is
used at the outcome — the RMSE is in the bottom ten percent of the pre-period fit rankings.
Nonetheless, the treatment for labor force participation is similarly indistinguishable from
zero. Descriptive statistics during the pre-period for the synthetic Alaska constructed using
labor force participation are provided in Table 1, column (3). A graphical depiction of the
estimates, as well as a list of synthetic control states and weights are provided in Appendix
A, Table A.10, and Figure A.1. In both instances, our analysis suggests a negligible impact
of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on extensive margin labor market outcomes.

5.2

Part-time work and hours

We now turn to intensive margin effects of the Permanent Fund Dividend. Table 1, column
(4) indicates that in the case of part-time employment, we continue to achieve balance with
respect to our set of pre-period observable characteristics. Put more rigorously, our pre17

period RMSE for the part-time rate is in the top 25 percent when compared to our placebos.
We therefore consider the part-time rate to be on par with the employment rate when it
comes to quality of pre-period match. The synthetic Alaska in this case is comprised of
mostly Nevada and Wyoming (see Appendix Table A.10).
Figure 3a plots the part-time rate (part-time employment as a share of the population)
from 1977 to 2014 for both Alaska and the synthetic Alaska. The two time series track each
other well in the pre-period, and there continues to be little difference between the two in the
first few treatment years. However, the estimated treatment effect grows over time, and the
rate of part-time work in Alaska exceeds that of the synthetic control for the overwhelming
majority of the post-period. In Table 2, column (2) we estimate an average increase in the
part-time rate of 1.8 percentage points. This represents an increase of 17 percent relative
to the average part-time rate in the pre-period. When compared to placebo estimates, this
difference has a p-value of 0.020 and the confidence interval allows us to rule out a treatment
effect of zero at the 95 percent confidence level. This is visually demonstrated in Figure
3b, where the actual difference in Alaska is generally found near the upper limit of placebo
differences.
The increase in part-time employment, in combination with our null result on employment, suggests that some workers moved from full-time to part-time work. However,
we cannot rule out that increase in part-time may also be driven by workers moving into
the labor force on a part-time basis. First, the confidence intervals on our extensive margin estimates cannot rule out a positive employment response. Second, in a number of our
alternative specifications below, our point estimate on employment becomes positive and
significant.
As a secondary measure of intensive margin effects, we examine reported hours worked
in the prior week for those who are employed. We can only observe this outcome in the CPS
MORG data, and thus the data are based on a smaller number of underlying observations
and a shorter per-period starting in 1979. In this case, our pre-period fit is not as well

18

ranked — the RMSE is now just within the bottom 25 percent of the placebo rankings.
We therefore place relatively less weight on this outcome. Consistent with our results for
the part-time rate, we estimate a reduction on intensive margin, albeit less than 1 hour per
week. Furthermore, we are not able to rule out a null effect on hours given our confidence
intervals. Once again, details on the pre-period match can be found in Panel B of Table 1,
and additional figures and synthetic control states and weights are available in Appendix A,
Table A.10, and Figure A.2.

6
6.1

Additional results and discussion
Heterogeneity Analysis

In Table 3 we conduct heterogeneity analysis among the men and women, separately by
marital status. We remind the reader that each estimate uses a different group of states
with different weights for the synthetic control. We again focus on the employment rate and
the part-time rate. The estimates suggest that the increase in part-time work among the
full population may be driven by adjustments among married women — the treatment effect
on part-time for married women is relatively large (3.5 percentage points) and significant
(p = 0.001), while the estimate for all men is trivial (0.8 percentage points) and insignificant
(p = 0.192). Among all groups, the extensive margin responses are at best marginally
significant. Our results are reminiscent of Kimball and Shapiro (2008), who likewise find
relatively larger income effects among married women.
It may be the case that the dividend has a stronger effect among older workers, who are
closer to retirement (Price and Song, 2016). In Appendix Table A.2, we compare workers
under and over age 55. Splitting the data results in poorer relative pre-period matches,
but taken at face value, the results do not imply a particularly more negative labor supply
response among the older group.

19

6.2

Robustness tests

In our main specification, we allow a different set of control states to be chosen, depending on
the outcome variable. An alternative approach to constructing our synthetic control involves
using a common set of weights across our two main outcomes, the employment to population
and part-time to population rates. This is to ensure that differences across outcomes are
not simply a result of heterogeneous control states. To that end, we amend the method
outlined in Section 3 to jointly estimate a set of weights using both the employment rate
and the part-time rate. In Table 4 we present the results of this alternative approach. The
relative fit of our match during the pre-period is now at the 31st percentile, which lies just in
between the two the RMSE percentile when we consider employment (32nd percentile) and
part-time (25th percentile) separately. In this case, we estimate a positive and significant
effect of the dividend on the employment rate. On the other hand, our point estimate for the
part-time rate is slightly smaller than in our main specification, and becomes just marginally
insignificant. Under this specification, the results imply that on net the number of workers
in full-time jobs increased, and thus, the increase in part-time work did not occur at the
expense of full-time work.
In our Online Appendix, we consider several other robustness checks and alternative
specifications. In Appendix Table A.3, we use an “in-space” set of placebos (Abadie et al.,
2015), holding the treatment period fixed at 1982. Our conclusions are changed significantly,
although this leads to wider confidence intervals given the use of a smaller number of placebos.
In Appendix Table A.4, we follow Kaul et al. (2015) and consider only using the outcome
in the last pre-period to select synthetic control states. Our results remain very similar in
this case. We also test the robustness of our results using a longer pre-period to construct
our synthetic control by combining our data with decennial Census data from 1960 and
1970. Though this results in a weaker pre-period match than our main estimates, the results
in Appendix Table A.5 now feature a positive employment effect, and thus reinforce our

20

conclusion that the dividend is unlikely to have reduced employment rates.13
The long run, average effect of the Permanent Fund Dividend could potentially differ
from the immediate effect, for a number of reasons. We therefore report the average difference
between Alaska and synthetic Alaska during the first four years of the dividend in Appendix
Table A.6. Using only placebos during this time period results in a poorer relative fit in
the pre-period for all outcomes14 . Furthermore, the confidence intervals include zero in all
cases, consistent with a negligible impact in the very short run. Focusing on the employment
and part-time rates, the effect on employment has a more positive point estimate, while the
opposite is true for the part-time rate.
One potential concern is that the unique local economy of Alaska and its dependence
on oil production and oil prices may confound our analysis. As stated earlier, any worry in
this regard should be limited by the fact that the level of the dividend is mechanically decoupled form fluctuations in yearly oil production, due to the diversified nature of the fund’s
investments and the 5-year averaging involved in the formula for dividends. Nonetheless,
we can add the total value of oil production as a share of state GDP to the list of variables
we use to find a synthetic control for Alaska in the pre period.15 We present those results
in Appendix Table A.7. We find a more positive estimate on the employment rate and a
part-time effect closer to zero. If anything, we are less likely to conclude any negative impact
on the employment rate when using a set of control states that are chosen to better match
Alaska’s reliance on oil production.
In Appendix B, we explore how sensitive our results are to differential migration that
may have coincided with the introduction of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend. We implement three potential adjustments for differential migration. We use average net migration
13

We only conduct this analysis for the employment rate, as the measure for part-time status is inconsistently measured between the Census and the CPS.
14
The ranking of the pre-period fit differs for this specification, even though we use the same pre-period in
our main estimate for Alaska. The reason is that the restriction to a shorter post period results in a different
set of placebo estimates to which our main estimate is compared.
15
James (2016) shows that the cumulative effect of oil discovery on real Alaskan income was positive until
about 1985, then negative or null, which would bias us toward finding a negative effect on employment in
the later period when not taking account the effects of oil.

21

and annual net migration in the pre-period as matching variables. Additionally, we use the
CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) to assign respondents to their place
of residence in the prior year and focus on outcomes in the short-term, i.e. until 1985. We
show in Appendix B that while there is a relative increase in migration to Alaska during
the period just prior to 1982, our results for the employment rate and part-time rate are
qualitatively similar when we attempt to adjust for migration using these methods.
Finally, we consider a simpler, difference-in-differences (DD) estimate by comparing
Alaska to only Washington State. Kueng (2018), for example, finds Washington to provide
a suitable control for consumption patterns. We present the results in Appendix Table C.1,
and continue to find negligible effects on employment. Under this specification, the effects
on part-time work is now much closer to zero as well.

6.3

From micro to macro effects

How do our quantitative results compare to prior empirical evidence on micro and macro
effects of transfers? Although theory and prior estimates suggest that the individual level
labor supply response to positive income shocks leads to reductions in both the probability
of being employed and hours worked, we do not find strong evidence of a decrease on the
extensive margin. We reconcile our results with these prior findings by considering the
general equilibrium effects of transferring income universally. In the case of Alaska, the
consumption response to the dividend could result in an outward shift in labor demand,
offsetting the partial equilibrium effects of cash transfers.
In prior lottery studies, the micro-level income effect of a $140K transfer has been
estimated to generate a 2 percentage point reduction in employment (Cesarini et al., 2017).
Applying this estimate using the average, per-person present value of all future Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend payments ($45,000) implies a 0.6 percentage point decline in the
employment to population ratio (Table 5).16
16

We estimate a present value of $45,000 by assuming an annual dividend payment of $1,495, over the

22

In order to calibrate a macro effect on employment, we must consider several factors:
the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend may not be completely spent by consumers, and our
setting is one of a small, open economy, where many goods are purchased from other markets.
We draw on two existing estimates of the effect of fiscal stimulus at the state level. First,
we can consult the estimates of Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019), who model and estimate the
effect of wealth shocks on consumption, and by extension, local labor markets.17 We draw
on two key equations (Chodorow-Reich et al., 2019, Eqs. (9) and (10)), which imply the
following relationship between dividend payments and log labor supply:

∆ log LaborSupply =

P F Dividends
1
M (1 − α) η × M P C ×
.
1+κ
LaborIncome

(10)

Here κ is a wage adjustment parameter capturing both sticky wages and the elasticity of
labor supply, M the local Keynesian income multiplier, (1 − α) the labor share of income,
η the share of non-tradables in spending, and M P C the marginal propensity to consume.
We choose a value of 0.25 for the M P C out of the PFD, following Kueng (2018). Using
data from the BLS, we calculate an average ratio of total dividend payments to total labor
income of 0.0725. The analysis of Chodorow-Reich (2019) implies a multiplier, M of 1.8.
We choose a value of 0.69 for the home-bias parameter, η, following Nakamura and Steinsson
(2014). Based on Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019), we choose values of 1.2 and 0.667 for κ and
(1 − α), respectively. Finally, we multiply the change in log labor supply from (10) by the
average Alaskan employment to population ratio, 0.66, and obtain a macro-driven increase
in employment rates of 0.5 percentage points. Our results are summarized in Table 5.
Alternatively, we can calibrate with state-level, government spending multipliers for
employment estimated using the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA)
and other similar shocks, as summarized by Chodorow-Reich (2019). Here we must make two
adjustments, to reflect the fact that government spending impacts the economy differently
course of the average Alaska lifespan of 79 years, and assuming an interest rate of 3%.
17
We refer the reader to the original manuscript and appendix for more details on their model.

23

than a cash transfer to consumers. We account for less than full spending of the transfer and
the share of spending spent in the home state. Amending a key equation of (Chodorow-Reich,
2019, p. 15), we have the following relationship between the employment to population ratio
(EP OP ) and the dividend:

∆EP OP = η × M P C × β ×

P F Dividend
,
$100, 000

(11)

where η is again a home-bias parameter, β is the number of jobs added per $100,000 in
government spending, M P C is the marginal propensity to consume, P F Dividend is now
the per-capita dividend, and we scale by $100,000 given the definition of β. Chodorow-Reich
(2019) finds a median value of 1.9 for β. Using the values above for η and M P C, and
an average dividend amount of $1,495 (2010 dollars), we again predict an employment rate
increase of 0.5 percentage points. We summarize this in Table 5 as well.
When combined, the predicted micro and macro effects imply a slight decrease in
the employment to population ratio -0.001 (= -0.006 + 0.005), which is in line with our
main estimate Table 2, but lower than the positive employment effects we estimate in other
specifications (e.g. Table 4 and Appendix Table A.5). Overall, our estimates imply a statelevel fiscal multiplier on par with or possibly greater than those in the literature. Based on
cross-sectional state-level multiplier effects, Chodorow-Reich (2019) concludes in his review
that a national closed economy, deficit financed, no monetary response output multiplier
would be 1.7 or above. Since our estimates of the employment effects of a stimulus are at or
above the levels found in Chodorow-Reich (2019), they imply a slightly higher lower bound
on the national output multiplier than 1.7.18
To further explore the possibility that our estimates are driven by macro effect, we
inspect a related prediction: the macro employment effect should be concentrated in the
18

Although our primary estimate are in line with multipliers from the literature, we might expect, all things
equal, to see smaller macro effects in Alaska because the policy is not counter-cyclical (Aghion and Marinescu,
2007). The effects in Di Maggio and Kermani (2016) and Chodorow-Reich (2019) may be expected to be
larger because they were estimated during a period of economic slack when stimulus is more effective.

24

non-tradable sector. Di Maggio and Kermani (2016) show evidence for this channel by
exploiting the increase in unemployment insurance transfers during the Great Recession,
and Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019) show evidence of this using the consumption response to
regional wealth shocks.
We indirectly test for the plausibility of this demand channel by re-estimating the
impact of the dividend on employment and part-time status separately for industries in the
tradable and the non-tradable sector.19 The results are presented in Appendix Table A.8.
While the pre-period match is relatively poor, we find reductions in the employment rate
and increases in the part-time rate only among the tradable sectors. Meanwhile, the nontradable sector exhibits essentially no impact. This result, albeit suggestive, is consistent
with an increase in consumption of non-tradable goods contributing to a positive labor
demand effect, offsetting any negative labor supply effects of the cash transfer in the nontradable sector.
An alternative interpretation of our results is that the size of the Alaska Permanent
Fund dividend is too small to generate significant changes in labor supply. However, since
the dividend is paid on a per person basis, the average household receives about $3,900 per
year. These amounts may still be smaller than what would be expected under a universal
basis income policy. However, Cesarini et al. (2017) found little evidence of nonlinearities
in income effects, and, thus, our estimates may still speak to the potential impacts of a fullscale universal basic income. Moreover, the present value of these transfers at the household
level are about $120,000, and therefore are larger than a majority of the lottery winnings in
Cesarini et al. (2017). When considered in that light, our null employment effects may be
considered a meaningful departure from individual-level income effect estimates, potentially
driven by marco feedback factors.
A final consideration involves the financing of a universal basic income. In order
19

We use the same definitions of tradable and non-tradable sectors as Di Maggio and Kermani (2016),
which are themselves taken from Mian and Sufi (2014). We include construction in the non-tradable sector.
A full list of the industries can be found in Appendix Table 1 of the Online Appendix of Mian and Sufi
(2014)

25

to provide these transfers, governments must ultimately raise taxes or reduce other types
of spending. The impact of a universal basic income will thus depend on the method of
financing. While the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend is not explicitly financed by taxes, it
is also not entirely a "helicopter drop" of money: the dividend was introduced in 1982, but
the discovery of the underlying reserves had already been established earlier in the 1970s.
Therefore, there are potentially other types of spending that were forfeited when the fund
was committed to dividends.
To get a sense of these counterfactual spending patterns, we repeat our synthetic control
analysis, using as an outcome the share of government spending in four key areas: health and
hospitals, education, highways, and welfare and transfer spending. We report these results in
Table A.9. With these data, our pre-period fit is less than ideal, and thus the evidence is at
best suggestive. We find no significant difference in health and hospital spending, a potential
decrease in educational spending, and smaller increase in highway spending. Importantly,
we do not find a significant change in welfare and transfer spending, which is most likely to
confound our analysis of the labor market. The lack of an effect of the dividends on welfare
and transfer spending also alleviates the concern that the dividends crowded out other forms
of redistribution.

6.4

Implications for a universal basic income

Recently, the notion of a universal basic income, i.e. an unconditional cash transfer that is
given to all, has generated renewed interest both in the US and around the world. Besides
Hillary Clinton and Andrew Yang, whom we mentioned in the introduction, former president
Barack Obama argued that the combination of advances in artificial intelligence, substitution
away from labor-intensive technology, and rising wealth call for a new social compact; and
he sees a universal basic income as something worth debating in this context.20 . In France,
mainstream left presidential candidate Benoît Hamon included a universal basic income as a
20

https://www.wired.com/2016/10/president-obama-mit-joi-ito-interview/

26

key proposal of his electoral program in 2017. Finally, Finland21 , the Canadian province of
Ontario22 , and the city of Stockton, California23 have been running basic income experiments
for various subset populations.
Our study speaks most closely to the likely labor market impacts of a small universal
basic income. Most universal basic income proposals, however, involve amounts significantly
higher than the Permanent Fund dividend. For example, 2020 Democratic primary candidate
Andrew Yang proposes $1,000 a month. The effect of a larger sum of money on the labor
market is therefore uncertain. On the one hand, with larger transfers, the income effect
may lead to larger decreases in labor supply. According to the results for lottery winners in
Cesarini et al. (2017), the income effect is linear in the amount of the prize. On the other
hand, to the extent that cash transfers create jobs through an aggregate demand effect, a
larger transfer would also produce a countervailing positive effect on employment. Egger
et al. (2019) use a randomized controlled trial to show that an unconditional cash transfer
equal to 15% of local GDP leads to a local fiscal multiplier of 2.6 in Kenyan villages, with
no decrease in employment. Where exactly this effect would fall in the US is still an open
question for future research.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we have investigated the impact of an unconditional and universal cash transfer
on the labor market. We analyze the case of the Alaska Permanent Fund dividend, introduced
in 1982 and still ongoing — this is a unique setting to learn about potential effects of a
universal basic income. The employment to population ratio in Alaska after the introduction
of the dividend is similar to that of synthetic control states. On the other hand, the share of
people employed part-time in the overall population increases by 1.8 percentage points after
21

https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/feb/19/basic-income-finland-low-wages-fewer-jobs
https://www.ontario.ca/page/ontario-basic-income-pilot
23
https://www.stocktondemonstration.org/
22

27

the introduction of the dividend and relative to the synthetic controls. The unconditional
cash transfer thus has no significant effect on employment, yet increases part-time work.
Given prior findings on the magnitude of the income effect, it is somewhat surprising
for an unconditional cash transfer not to decrease employment. General equilibrium effects
could explain why we do not find a negative effect on employment. Indeed, in our unique
setting, the whole population in the state receives the dividend. Therefore, it is plausible that
the dividend increases labor demand through its effects on consumption. And indeed, when
we calibrate the expected micro and macro effects of the transfer, our empirical estimates are
generally in line with prior studies. In addition, we find suggestive evidence that the nontradable sector shows more favorable effects than the tradable sector. In the tradable sector,
employment decreases and part-time work increases, while in the non-tradable sector the
effects on both employment and part-time work are close to zero and insignificant. Overall,
we find indirect evidence of positive macro effects offsetting negative micro effects, and
leading to an overall null effect of an unconditional cash transfer on aggregate employment,
at least on the extensive margin.
In a world where trade, technology, and secular stagnation threaten people’s incomes,
there is growing interest in a universal basic income to promote income security. Our study
of Alaska contributes to our understanding of the likely impacts of a small universal basic
income on the labor market. Our results show that adverse labor market effects are limited,
and, importantly, a small universal and unconditional cash transfer does not significantly
reduce aggregate employment. Future research might investigate how the mode of financing
of a universal basic income affects its impact, how the transfer may affect prices of consumer
goods, how a universal basic income interacts with existing social welfare programs, how
these effects might scale with a significantly larger transfer.

References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010): “Synthetic Control Methods
for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
28

Program,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105, 493–505.
——— (2015): “Comparative Politics and the Synthetic Control Method,” American Journal
of Political Science, 59, 495–510.
Abadie, A. and J. Gardeazabal (2003): “The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study
of the Basque Country,” American Economic Review, 93, 113–132.
Aghion, P. and I. Marinescu (2007): “Cyclical Budgetary Policy and Economic Growth:
What Do We Learn from OECD Panel Data?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 22, 251–
297.
Akee, R. K. Q., W. E. Copeland, G. Keeler, A. Angold, and E. J. Costello
(2010): “Parents’ Incomes and Children’s Outcomes: A Quasi-experiment Using Transfer
Payments from Casino Profits,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 86–
115.
Banerjee, A. V., R. Hanna, G. Kreindler, and B. A. Olken (2015): “Debunking
the Stereotype of the Lazy Welfare Recipient: Evidence from Cash Transfer Programs
Worldwide,” http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2703447.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2002): “How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Working Paper 8841, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Buchmueller, T., J. C. Ham, and L. D. Shore-Sheppard (2016): “The Medicaid
Program,” in Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. by
R. A. Moffitt, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, vol. 1, chap. 1, 21–136.
Cesarini, D., E. Lindqvist, M. J. Notowidigdo, and R. Östling (2017): “The effect
of wealth on individual and household labor supply: evidence from Swedish lotteries,”
American Economic Review, 107, 3917–46.
Chodorow-Reich, G. (2019): “Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Spending Multipliers:
What Have We Learned?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11, 1–34.
Chodorow-Reich, G., P. T. Nenov, and A. Simsek (2019): “Stock Market Wealth
and the Real Economy: A Local Labor Market Approach,” Tech. rep., National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Cunha, J., G. De Giorgi, and S. Jayachandran (Forthcoming): “The Price of Effects
of Cash Versus In-Kind Transfers,” Review of Economic Studies.
Deshpande, M. (2016): “The Effect of Disability Payments on Household Earnings and
Income: Evidence from the SSI Children’s Program,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
98, 638–654.
Di Maggio, M. and A. Kermani (2016): “The Importance of Unemployment Insurance
as an Automatic Stabilizer,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2575434, Social Science Research
Network, Rochester, NY.
29

Doudchenko, N. and G. W. Imbens (2016): “Balancing, Regression, Difference-InDifferences and Synthetic Control Methods: A Synthesis,” Working Paper 22791, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Egger, D., J. Haushofer, E. Miguel, P. Niehaus, and M. Walker (2019): “General
equilibrium effects of cash transfers: experimental evidence from Kenya,” .
Feinberg, R. M. and D. Kuehn (2018): “Guaranteed Nonlabor Income and Labor Supply:
The Effect of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend,” The B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy, 18.
Flood, S., S. Ruggles, and J. R. Warren (2015): “Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series, Current Population Survey: Version 4.0. [Machine-readable database],” http://
doi.org/10.18128/D030.V4.0.
Gelber, A., T. J. Moore, and A. Strand (2017): “The Effect of Disability Insurance
Payments on Beneficiaries’ Earnings,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9,
229–61.
Harstad, P. (2017):
“Executive Summary of Findings from a Survey of
Alaska Voters on the PFD,” https://www.scribd.com/document/352375988/
ESP-Alaska-PFD-Phone-Survey-Executive-Summary-Spring-2017#download.
Hsieh, C.-T. (2003): “Do consumers react to anticipated income changes? Evidence from
the Alaska permanent fund,” The American Economic Review, 93, 397–405.
Imbens, G. W. and D. B. Rubin (2015): Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sciences, Cambridge University Press.
Imbens, G. W., D. B. Rubin, and B. I. Sacerdote (2001): “Estimating the Effect of
Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey
of Lottery Players,” American Economic Review, 91, 778–794.
James, A. (2016): “The long-run vanity of Prudhoe Bay,” Resources Policy, 50, 270–275.
Kaul, A., S. Klößner, G. Pfeifer, and M. Schieler (2015): “Synthetic control
methods: Never use all pre-intervention outcomes as economic predictors,” Unpublished.
http://www.oekonometrie.uni-saarland.de/papers/SCM_Predictors.pdf.
Kimball, M. S. and M. D. Shapiro (2008): “Labor supply: Are the income and substitution effects both large or both small?” Tech. rep., University of Michigan Working Paper,
http://www-personal.umich.edu/~shapiro/papers/labor-29jun2010-for-www.pdf.
Kroft, K., K. J. Kucko, E. Lehmann, and J. F. Schmieder (2015): “Optimal Income
Taxation with Unemployment and Wage Responses: A Sufficient Statistics Approach,”
Working Paper 21757, National Bureau of Economic Research, dOI: 10.3386/w21757.
Kueng, L. (2018): “Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics.
30

Marinescu, I. (2018): “No Strings Attached: The Behavioral Effects of U.S. Unconditional
Cash Transfer Programs,” Working Paper 24337, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2014): “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?”
Econometrica, 82, 2197–2223.
Mirrlees, J. A. (1971): “An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation,” The
review of economic studies, 38, 175–208.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014): “Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence
from US regions,” American Economic Review, 104, 753–92.
Nichols, A. and J. Rothstein (2016): “The Earned Income Tax Credit,” in Economics
of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. by R. A. Moffitt, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, vol. 1, chap. 2, 137–218.
O’Brien, J. P. and D. O. Olson (1990): “The Alaska Permanent Fund and Dividend
Distribution Program,” Public Finance Quarterly, 18, 139–156.
Pierson, K., M. L. Hand, and F. Thompson (2015): “The Government Finance
Database: A Common Resource for Quantitative Research in Public Financial Analysis,”
PloS one, 10, e0130119.
Price, D. J. and J. Song (2016): “The Long-Term Effects of Cash Assistance: A
Forty-Year Follow-up of the Income Maintenance Experiments,” Unpublished, http:
//web.stanford.edu/~djprice/papers/djprice_jmp.pdf.
Robins, P. K. (1985): “A Comparison of the Labor Supply Findings from the Four Negative
Income Tax Experiments,” The Journal of Human Resources, 20, 567–582.
Rubin, D. B. (1974): “Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies.” Journal of educational Psychology, 66, 688.
Ziliak, J. P. (2016): “Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,” in Economics of MeansTested Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. by R. A. Moffitt, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, vol. 1, chap. 4, 303–394.

31

$0

Dividend Amount
$1,000 $2,000 $3,000

$4,000

Figure 1: Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend: nominal and real amounts

1980

1990

Year

2000

2010

Nominal payout in USD
Real payout in 2014 Anchorage USD

32

.62

.64

Employment Rate
.66
.68

.7

Figure 2: Employment Rate, 1977-2014

1977

1986

1996
Year

2005

Alaska

2014

Synthetic Alaska

-.15

Difference in Employment Rate
-.1
-.05
0
.05

.1

(a) Employment Rate: Alaska vs. Synthetic Alaska

0

10

20

30

Event Time
Alaska

Placebo States/Years

(b) Synthetic Difference in Employment Rate, Alaska vs. Placebo States
Notes: Panel (a) plots the synthetic control estimates of the employment rate for Alaska from 1977 to
2014. The solid line plots the actual employment rate in Alaska, while the dotted line plots the synthetic
control estimate. The vertical dashed line indicates 1981, the year before the onset of the Alaska
Permanent Fund Dividend. Panel (b) plots the results of a permutation test of the significance of the
difference between Alaska and synthetic Alaska. The solid dark line plots the difference for Alaska using
the true introduction of the treatment in 1982. The light grey lines plot the difference using other states
and or other treatment years. See Appendix Table A.10 for the combination of states and weights that
comprise each synthetic control.

33

.09

.1

Part-Time Rate
.11
.12

.13

.14

Figure 3: Part-Time Rate, 1977-2014

1977

1986

1996
Year

2005

Alaska

2014

Synthetic Alaska

-.05

Difference in Part-Time Rate
0

.05

(a) Part-Time Rate: Alaska vs. Synthetic Alaska

0

10

20

30

Event Time
Alaska

Placebo States/Years

(b) Synthetic Difference in Part-Time Rate, Alaska vs. Placebo States
Notes: Panel (a) plots the synthetic control estimates of the part-time rate for Alaska from 1977 to 2014.
The solid line plots the actual employment rate in Alaska, while the dotted line plots the synthetic control
estimate. The vertical dashed line indicates 1981, the year before the onset of the Alaska Permanent Fund
Dividend. Panel (b) plots the results of a permutation test of the significance of the difference between
Alaska and synthetic Alaska. The solid dark line plots the difference for Alaska using the true introduction
of the treatment in 1982. The light grey lines plot the difference using other states and or other treatment
years. See Appendix Table A.10 for the combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic
control.

34

Table 1: Pre-Treatment Covariate Balance
(1)

(2)

Panel A: Monthly CPS

Employment Labor Force Part-Time
Rate Participation
Rate

0.639
0.712
0.103
0.108
0.154
0.691
0.503
0.361
0.097
0.035
0.191
0.078
0.229
0.396

0.639
0.102
0.137
0.636
0.509
0.361
0.126
0.069
0.187
0.090
0.239
0.386

Panel B: CPS MORG

Hours Worked Last Week
Age 16 - 19
Age 20 - 24
Age 25 - 65
Share Women
Industry Group 1
Industry Group 2
Industry Group 3
Industry Group 4
Education ≤ 11 years
Education = 12 years

(4)

Synthetic Control Outcome
Alaska

Employment Rate
Labor Force Participation
Part-Time Rate
Age 16 - 19
Age 20 - 24
Age 25 - 65
Share Women
Industry Group 1
Industry Group 2
Industry Group 3
Industry Group 4
Industry Group 5
Education ≤ 11 years
Education = 12 years

(3)

0.706
0.098
0.130
0.658
0.503
0.331
0.122
0.064
0.189
0.124
0.252
0.413

0.104
0.096
0.127
0.677
0.503
0.337
0.106
0.035
0.185
0.161
0.265
0.406

Synthetic Control Outcome
Alaska

Hours Worked
Last Week

37.980
0.074
0.155
0.759
0.435
0.148
0.051
0.292
0.123
0.110
0.387

37.935
0.067
0.144
0.755
0.432
0.185
0.090
0.255
0.150
0.170
0.362

Notes: Table reports average value of variables during the pre-treatment period for Alaska and the
synthetic control constructed using the method in Section 3. Columns (2) - (4) differ in the outcome
matched on in equation (4). Panel A features data from Monthly CPS surveys and Panel B features data
from the CPS MORG. The omitted category for age groups is 65 and older. The omitted category for
industry groups are not working in Panel A and industry group 5 in Panel B (since everyone is working by
construction in Panel B). The omitted group for education is more than 12 years. The pre-treatment
period covers 1977-1981 in Panel A and 1979-1981 in Panel B. See Appendix Table A.10 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

35

Table 2: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

Labor Force
Participation

Hours Worked
Last Week

α̂0

0.001

0.018

0.012

-0.796

p-value

0.942

0.020

0.331

0.084

95% CI

[-0.030,0.033]

[0.004,0.032]

[-0.019,0.042]

[-1.751,0.191]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,734

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.005
0.322

0.003
0.252

0.013
0.903

0.394
0.753

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.10 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

36

Table 3: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, by Gender and Marital Status
Employment Rate - Men
(1)

(2)

Part-Time Rate - Men
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

All

Married

Unmarried

All

Married

Unmarried

α̂0

0.029

0.032

-0.004

0.008

0.003

0.012

p-value

0.093

0.081

0.846

0.192

0.571

0.190

95% CI

[-0.008,0.065]

[-0.008,0.071]

[-0.045,0.037]

[-0.004,0.019]

[-0.008,0.014]

[-0.008,0.031]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,836

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.024
0.972

0.011
0.609

0.038
0.981

0.003
0.259

0.007
0.845

0.008
0.466

37

Employment Rate - Women
(7)

(8)

Part-Time Rate - Women
(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

All

Married

Unmarried

All

Married

Unmarried

-0.019

0.015

0.007

0.022

0.035

0.003

p-value

0.234

0.364

0.697

0.032

0.001

0.743

95% CI

[-0.055,0.017]

[-0.020,0.050]

[-0.032,0.046]

[0.003,0.042]

[0.016,0.054]

[-0.019,0.026]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,836

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.026
0.978

0.015
0.735

0.030
0.966

0.004
0.291

0.009
0.680

0.006
0.286

α̂0

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using the synthetic control method outlined in
Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to 2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation
test also described in Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and percentile is based on
a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Tables A.12 and A.13 for the combination of states and weights that comprise each
synthetic control.

Table 4: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, Common Weights
(1)

(2)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

α̂0

0.032

0.011

p-value

0.040

0.101

95% CI

[0.003,0.065]

[-0.006,0.028]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.005
0.312

0.005
0.312

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.11 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

38

Table 5: Expected Micro and Macro Effects on Employment Rates
A: Parameters
Parameter

Description

39

Income Effect
EP OP Change per $140K of Income
MP C
Marginal Propensity to Consume
η
Home-Bias
(1 − α)
Labor Share of Income
M
Fiscal Multiplier
κ
Wage Adjustment
β
Jobs per $100K of Spending
EP OP
Average Employment to Population Ratio
PF Dividend
Average Per Capita Dividend (2010 Dollars)
PF Dividend (PDV)
PDV of Lifetime Dividends
PF Dividends/Labor Income Ratio of Total Dividends to Total Labor Income

Value

Source

0.02
0.25
0.69
0.667
1.8
1.2
1.9
0.66
$1,495
$45,000
0.0725

Cesarini et al. (2017)
Kueng (2018)
Nakamura and Steinsson (2014)
Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019)
Chodorow-Reich (2019)
Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019)
Chodorow-Reich (2019)
Authors’ calc.
Authors’ calc.
Authors’ calc.
Authors’ calc.

Predicted
Effect

Source

B: Labor Effects

Channel

Formula

Micro Effect

Income Effect × PF Dividend (PDV) / $140K

-0.006

Cesarini et al. (2017)

Macro Effect (version 1)

1
M (1
1+κ

0.005

Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019)

Macro Effect (version 2)

η × MP C × β ×

0.005

Chodorow-Reich (2019)

− α) η × M P C ×
P F Dividend
$100,000

P F Dividends
LaborIncome

× EP OP

Notes: The table presents estimates of the expected effect of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend using prior studies. The “Micro Effect”
corresponds to the direct income effect on labory supply of a lifetime of PF dividend payments. The “Macro Effect” corresponds to the multiplier
effect of more spending on employment, using estimates from two different methods. See Section 6.3 for more details.

Appendix A: Appendix Tables and Figures

40

.66

Labor Force Participation
.68
.7
.72

.74

Figure A.1: Labor Force Participation, 1977-2014

1977

1986

1996
Year
Alaska

2005

2014

Synthetic Alaska

Difference in Labor Force Participation
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1

(a) Labor Force Participation: Alaska vs. Synthetic Alaska

0

10
Event Time
Alaska

20

30

Placebo States/Years

(b) Synthetic Difference in Labor Force Participation, Alaska vs. Placebo States
Notes: Panel (a) plots the synthetic control estimates of labor force participation for Alaska from 1977 to
2014. The solid line plots the actual employment rate in Alaska, while the dotted line plots the synthetic
control estimate. The vertical dashed line indicates 1981, the year before the onset of the Alaska
Permanent Fund Dividend. Panel (b) plots the results of a permutation test of the significance of the
difference between Alaska and synthetic Alaska. The solid dark line plots the difference for Alaska using
the true introduction of the treatment in 1982. The light grey lines plot the difference using other states
and or other treatment years. See Appendix Table A.10 for the combination of states and weights that
comprise each synthetic control.

41

36

Hours Worked Last Week
37
38

39

Figure A.2: Hours Worked Last Week, 1977-2014

1979

1988

1997
Year
Alaska

2006

2014

Synthetic Alaska

Difference in Hours Worked Last Week
-4
-2
0
2
4

(a) Hours Worked Last Week: Alaska vs. Synthetic Alaska

0

10

Event Time

Alaska

20

30

Placebo States/Years

(b) Synthetic Difference in Hours Worked Last Week, Alaska vs. Placebo States
Notes: Panel (a) plots the synthetic control estimates of hours worked last week for Alaska from 1977 to
2014. The solid line plots the actual employment rate in Alaska, while the dotted line plots the synthetic
control estimate. The vertical dashed line indicates 1981, the year before the onset of the Alaska
Permanent Fund Dividend. Panel (b) plots the results of a permutation test of the significance of the
difference between Alaska and synthetic Alaska. The solid dark line plots the difference for Alaska using
the true introduction of the treatment in 1982. The light grey lines plot the difference using other states
and or other treatment years. See Appendix Table A.10 for the combination of states and weights that
comprise each synthetic control.

42

Table A.1: Pre-Treatment Covariate Balance, Common Weights

Employment Rate
Part-Time Rate
Age 16 - 19
Age 20 - 24
Age 25 - 65
Share Women
Industry Group 1
Industry Group 2
Industry Group 3
Industry Group 4
Industry Group 5
Education ≤ 11 years
Education = 12 years

(1)

(2)

Alaska

Synthetic Alaska

0.639
0.103
0.108
0.154
0.691
0.503
0.361
0.097
0.035
0.191
0.078
0.229
0.396

0.639
0.105
0.095
0.127
0.664
0.506
0.361
0.121
0.048
0.177
0.122
0.278
0.393

Notes: Table reports average value of variables during the pre-treatment period for Alaska and the
synthetic control constructed using the method in Section 3. The omitted category for age groups is 65 and
older. The omitted category for industry groups is not working. The omitted group for education is more
than 12 years. The pre-treatment period covers 1977-1981. See Appendix Table A.11 for the combination
of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

43

Table A.2: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, by Age
55 and Over
(1)

Under 55

(2)

(3)

(4)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

α̂0

0.046

0.015

0.009

0.013

p-value

0.020

0.053

0.494

0.105

95% CI

[0.005,0.086]

[-0.000,0.030]

[-0.020,0.039]

[-0.004,0.031]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,836

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.021
0.895

0.005
0.389

0.007
0.511

0.004
0.427

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.14 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

44

Table A.3: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, in-space placebos
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

Labor Force
Participation

Hours Worked
Last Week

α̂0

0.001

0.018

0.012

-0.796

p-value

0.980

0.059

0.431

0.118

95% CI

[-0.062,0.064]

[-0.001,0.038]

[-0.041,0.065]

[-1.681,0.165]

51

51

51

51

0.005
0.275

0.003
0.294

0.013
0.882

0.394
0.706

Number of placebos
Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.10 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

45

Table A.4: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, Last Year Method
(1)

(2)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

-0.002

0.017

p-value

0.880

0.034

95% CI

[-0.034,0.031]

[0.001,0.032]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.006
0.610

0.003
0.199

α̂0

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.15 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

46

Table A.5: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, longer pre-period
(1)

(2)

(3)

Employment Rate
Earliest Year

1977

1970

1960

α̂0

0.001

0.030

0.030

p-value

0.942

0.047

0.052

95% CI

[-0.030,0.033]

[0.000,0.061]

[-0.001,0.061]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.005
0.322

0.011
0.662

0.011
0.564

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.10 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise the synthetic control for column (1) and Appendix Table
A.16 for columns (2) and (3).

47

Table A.6: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-1985
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

Labor Force
Participation

Hours Worked
Last Week

α̂0

0.026

0.003

0.021

0.372

p-value

0.104

0.669

0.092

0.306

95% CI

[-0.009,0.061]

[-0.012,0.016]

[-0.007,0.048]

[-0.618,1.298]

357

357

357

255

0.005
0.471

0.003
0.468

0.013
0.936

0.394
0.800

Number of placebos
Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
1985. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.10 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

48

Table A.7: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, controlling for oil
production
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

Labor Force
Participation

Hours Worked
Last Week

α̂0

0.025

0.009

0.018

-0.824

p-value

0.097

0.141

0.169

0.082

95% CI

[-0.006,0.058]

[-0.004,0.023]

[-0.014,0.048]

[-1.776,0.177]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,734

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.006
0.335

0.003
0.298

0.014
0.932

0.538
0.881

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.17 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

49

Table A.8: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, by tradability
(1)

(2)
Tradable

(3)

(4)

Non-Tradable

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

-0.048

0.015

0.002

-0.007

p-value

0.005

0.119

0.859

0.670

95% CI

[-0.072,-0.025]

[-0.007,0.038]

[-0.024,0.027]

[-0.040,0.025]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,836

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.060
0.997

0.014
0.865

0.044
0.995

0.012
0.595

α̂0

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.18 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

50

Table A.9: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014 Government Spending
Shares
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Health/Hospitals

Education

Highways

Welfare/Transfers

-0.006

-0.074

0.030

-0.018

p-value

0.679

0.011

0.032

0.416

95% CI

[-0.034,0.024]

[-0.127,-0.020]

[0.002,0.056]

[-0.072,0.034]

Number of placebos

1,800

1,800

1,800

1,800

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.012
0.966

0.019
0.919

0.022
0.979

0.007
0.381

α̂0

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table A.19 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

51

Table A.10: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate
Utah
Wyoming
Washington
Nevada
Montana
Minnesota

0.428
0.342
0.092
0.079
0.034
0.025

Panel B: Part-Time Rate
Nevada
Wyoming
Louisiana
Maryland
District of Columbia

0.729
0.160
0.060
0.033
0.019

Panel C: Labor Force Participation
Nevada
Minnesota
Wyoming
Wisconsin

0.373
0.306
0.301
0.020

Panel D: Hours Worked Last Week
Wyoming
Oklahoma
District of Columbia
Nevada

0.384
0.358
0.248
0.011

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through D correspond to columns (1) through (4) in
Table 2.

Table A.11: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, Common Weights
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment and Part-Time Rate, Common Weights
Nevada
Wyoming
West Virginia
Washington
District of Columbia

0.392
0.324
0.125
0.099
0.060

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panel A corresponds to columns (1) and (2) in Table 4.

52

Table A.12: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, for Men, by Marital Status
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate - All Men
0.511
0.371
0.081
0.037

Montana
Washington
District of Columbia
Florida
Panel B: Employment Rate - Married Men
Montana
Maryland
Colorado
Utah
Washington
Nevada

0.496
0.150
0.149
0.086
0.079
0.041

Panel C: Employment Rate - Unmarried Men
Hawaii
Montana
Pennsylvania

0.479
0.289
0.232

Panel D: Part-Time Rate - All Men
Wyoming
Maryland
District of Columbia
Washington
Nevada
Pennsylvania

0.340
0.191
0.185
0.133
0.095
0.055

Panel E: Part-Time Rate - Married Men
Colorado
Nevada
New Mexico
Wyoming
Maryland

0.725
0.167
0.080
0.026
0.002

Panel F: Part-Time Rate - Unmarried Men
District of Columbia
Pennsylvania
Wyoming
Nevada

0.396
0.264
0.243
0.096

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through F correspond to columns (1) through (6) in
Table 3.

53

Table A.13: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, for Women, by Marital Status
Weight

State

Panel A: Employment Rate - All Women
0.848
0.110
0.041

Minnesota
Wyoming
Nevada
Panel B: Employment Rate - Married Women

0.362
0.195
0.153
0.137
0.103
0.049

Wyoming
Maryland
Hawaii
Kansas
North Carolina
District of Columbia
Panel C: Employment Rate - Unmarried Women
Wyoming
Minnesota
Nevada

0.511
0.417
0.073

Panel D: Part-Time Rate - All Women
Nevada
Wyoming
Texas
District of Columbia
Louisiana
Hawaii
New Mexico

0.352
0.262
0.222
0.075
0.037
0.029
0.023

Panel E: Part-Time Rate - Married Women
Nevada
Kansas
Louisiana

0.609
0.272
0.119

Panel F: Part-Time Rate - Unmarried Women
Wyoming
Nevada
District of Columbia
Maryland
New Jersey

0.500
0.240
0.205
0.033
0.022

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through F correspond to columns (7) through (12) in
Table 3.

54

Table A.14: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, by Age
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate - 55 and Over
Wyoming
Nevada

0.614
0.386

Panel B: Part-Time Rate - 55 and Over
Nevada
Hawaii
West Virginia

0.576
0.359
0.066

Panel C: Employment Rate - Under 55
New Mexico
Montana
New York
West Virginia
Hawaii

0.385
0.342
0.187
0.058
0.028

Panel D: Part-Time Rate - Under 55
Wyoming
Nevada
District of Columbia
West Virginia
Hawaii
Oklahoma
Pennsylvania

0.238
0.188
0.187
0.166
0.100
0.073
0.049

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through D correspond to columns (1) through (4) in
Table ??.

55

Table A.15: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, Last Year Method
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate, Last Year Method
Utah
Wyoming
Washington
Nevada
Montana
Minnesota

0.428
0.342
0.092
0.079
0.034
0.025

Panel B: Part-Time Rate, Last Year Method
Nevada
Wyoming
Louisiana
Maryland
District of Columbia

0.729
0.160
0.060
0.033
0.019

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through B correspond to columns (1) through (2) in
Table ??.

Table A.16: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, longer pre-period
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate - Additional pre-period from 1970
Hawaii
Nevada
Wyoming

0.737
0.256
0.006

Panel B: Employment Rate - Additional pre-period from 1960
Hawaii
Nevada

0.752
0.248

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A and B correspond to columns (2) and (3) in Table A.5.

56

Table A.17: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, controlling for oil production
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate, controlling for oil production
0.653
0.234
0.114

Wyoming
New Mexico
Louisiana
Panel B: Part-Time Rate, controlling for oil production

0.620
0.294
0.086

Wyoming
District of Columbia
West Virginia
Panel C: Labor Force Participation, controlling for oil production
Wyoming
Nevada
Michigan

0.830
0.137
0.033

Panel D: Hours Worked Last Week, controlling for oil production
Wyoming
District of Columbia
Oklahoma

0.543
0.308
0.149

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through D correspond to columns (1) through (4) in
Table A.7.

57

Table A.18: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, by tradability
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate - Tradable Sectors
0.987
0.013

Oregon
Montana
Panel B: Part-Time Rate - Tradable Sectors
North Dakota
Hawaii
Arkansas

0.454
0.448
0.097

Panel C: Employment Rate - Non-tradable Sectors
West Virginia
District of Columbia

0.899
0.101

Panel D: Part-Time Rate - Non-tradable Sectors
0.759
0.123
0.118

Louisiana
Nevada
District of Columbia

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through D correspond to columns (1) through (4) in
Table A.8.

58

Table A.19: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska Government Spending Shares
State

Weight

Panel A: Health/Hospitals
1.000

Nevada
Panel B: Education
Wyoming
Maryland
Nevada
New Jersey

0.456
0.230
0.185
0.130

Panel C: Highways
Utah
California
Wyoming
Hawaii

0.518
0.329
0.136
0.017

Panel D: Welfare/Transfers
Wyoming
Nevada
Arizona

0.386
0.347
0.267

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through D correspond to columns (1) through (4) in
Table A.9.

59

B

Migration

In this section, we address the potential for differential migration to confound our results.
In Figure B.1 we plot annual net migration, using intercensal estimates on state population
growth form the Census Bureau, combined with natality and mortality records from the
CDC. As can be seen Alaska has greater variation net migration, especially in the early
period, and in particular, near the timing of the Alaska PFD in 1981. This is most likely
a result of growth in the oil industry during the mid- to late 1970s. To assess how our
sensitive our results are to this in-migration, we present three sets of results that account
for migration: (1) we control for average net imigration in the pre-period, (2) we control
for annual net migration in each pre-period year, and (3) we also use CPS data to reassign
recent in-migrants to their home states.
First, In Table B.1 we replicate our main analysis, while introducing average net migration in between 1977 to 1981 as an additional matching variable. Compared to Table 2,
we find that our conclusions are largely the same.
Second, in Table B.2, we take a further step and control for net migration in each
year between 1977 and 1981, to not only match overall net migration, but also year to year
changes in the pre-period. Again, we find very similar results to our main analysis in Table
2.
Third, we propose an adjustment using the Annual Social and Economic Supplement
(ASEC) conducted in March that asks one’s residence in the previous year. Figure B.2 shows
in-migration as share of population over time for Alaska and the rest of the US. Similar to
Figure B.1, Alaska experienced a relative influx of new residents during the time just before
the introduction of the Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. Because the CPS is not a long
panel, we cannot completely drop new migrants from the sample. To partially net out new
migrants, we assign each respondent to their state of residence in the prior year. Our data
from the ASEC begin in March of 1980.
Column (1) of Table B.3 is reproduced from column (2) of Table ??. To benchmark
our adjustment, we first do not adjust for migration but simply restrict analysis to just the
months of March (column 2), and we see a more positive effect on the employment rate, owing
to seasonal heterogeneity in our estimates. In column (3), the estimates are very similar to
column 2 with a positive employment effect when we adjust for migration by reassigning
respondents to their state of residence in the previous year. In columns (4) through (6),
we implement the same adjustment for the part-time rate. In that case, we see even less
movement in the point estimates, and again draw similar qualitative conclusions after the
adjustment.

60

-.1

Net Migration Rate
-.05
0
.05

.1

Figure B.1: Annual Net Migration: 1970 - 2014

1970

1980

1990
Year
Alaska

2000
Other States

61

2010

Table B.1: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, controlling for average net migration
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

Labor Force
Participation

Hours Worked
Last Week

α̂0

0.008

0.015

0.014

-0.772

p-value

0.548

0.038

0.278

0.092

95% CI

[-0.022,0.039]

[0.002,0.029]

[-0.018,0.043]

[-1.723,0.227]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,734

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.004
0.216

0.003
0.224

0.012
0.867

0.421
0.783

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table B.4 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

62

Table B.2: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, controlling for annual
net migration
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

Labor Force
Participation

Hours Worked
Last Week

-0.006

0.011

-0.007

-0.792

p-value

0.658

0.068

0.581

0.085

95% CI

[-0.040,0.027]

[-0.001,0.024]

[-0.040,0.025]

[-1.733,0.164]

Number of placebos

1,836

1,836

1,836

1,734

Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

0.009
0.695

0.002
0.161

0.021
0.975

0.477
0.842

α̂0

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table B.5 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

63

0

In-Migration Rate
.05
.1

.15

Figure B.2: Share of Residents Living in a Different State Last Year

1980

1990

2000
Year
Alaska

Other States

64

2010

Table B.3: Synthetic Control Estimates, Average Difference 1982-2014, adjusting for inmigration
(2)

(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment Rate

(6)

Part-Time Rate

12 Months

March

March
Adjusted

12 Months

March

March
Adjusted

α̂0

0.026

0.067

0.050

0.003

-0.008

0.004

p-value

0.104

0.029

0.029

0.669

0.436

0.662

95% CI

[-0.009,0.061]

[0.027,0.110]

[0.005,0.095]

[-0.012,0.016]

[-0.032,0.013]

[-0.019,0.025]

357

204

204

357

204

204

0.005
0.471

0.003
0.471

0.019
0.931

0.003
0.468

0.003
0.475

0.011
0.887

Number of placebos
Pre-Period RMSE
RMSE Percentile

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using
the synthetic control method outlined in Section 3. The treatment effect is averaged over the years 1982 to
2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using the permutation test also described in
Section 3. Root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated using up to 5 years of pre-treatment data, and
percentile is based on a comparison among all placebo estimates. See Appendix Table B.6 for the
combination of states and weights that comprise each synthetic control.

65

Table B.4: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, controlling for average net migration
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate, controlling for average net migration
Colorado
Montana
Nevada
Minnesota
Wyoming

0.496
0.393
0.064
0.033
0.014

Panel B: Part-Time Rate, controlling for average net migration
0.354
0.309
0.214
0.107
0.017

Wyoming
Nevada
District of Columbia
Maryland
West Virginia
Panel C: Labor Force Participation, controlling for average net migration
Nevada
Minnesota
Michigan

0.591
0.395
0.015

Panel D: Hours Worked Last Week, controlling for average net migration
Wyoming
Oklahoma
District of Columbia

0.413
0.325
0.262

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through D correspond to columns (1) through (4) in
Table B.1.

66

Table B.5: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, controlling for annual net migration
State

Weight

Panel A: Employment Rate, controlling for annual net migration
Colorado
North Dakota
Minnesota
District of Columbia

0.337
0.235
0.223
0.205

Panel B: Part-Time Rate, controlling for annual net migration
District of Columbia
Montana
Wyoming
Nevada

0.449
0.307
0.235
0.009

Panel C: Labor Force Participation, controlling for annual net migration
Minnesota
Nevada

0.952
0.048

Panel D: Hours Worked Last Week, controlling for annual net migration
Wyoming
District of Columbia
Oklahoma
New Mexico

0.425
0.311
0.261
0.003

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through D correspond to columns (1) through (4) in
Table B.2.

67

Table B.6: State Weights for Synthetic Alaska, adjusting for in-migration
Weight

State

Panel A: Employment Rate, adjusting for in-migration
Utah
Wyoming
Washington
Nevada
Montana
Minnesota

0.428
0.342
0.092
0.079
0.034
0.025

Panel B: Part-Time Rate, adjusting for in-migration
Alabama
Wyoming
North Dakota

0.494
0.471
0.035

Panel C: Labor Force Participation, adjusting for in-migration
New Mexico
Washington
Nevada
Montana
Hawaii

0.618
0.259
0.057
0.039
0.027

Panel D: Hours Worked Last Week, adjusting for in-migration
Nevada
Wyoming
Louisiana
Maryland
District of Columbia

0.729
0.160
0.060
0.033
0.019

Notes: Table reports the combination of states and weights chosen using the method in Section 3 to
construct a synthetic control for Alaska. Panels A through D correspond to columns (2), (3), (5), and (6)
in Table B.3.

68

C

Simple Difference-in-Differences Estimates

In this section, we present results using only Washington State as a control for Alaska. We
use a difference-in-differences (DD) estimator. Inference is performed using a permutation
method, as discussed in Bertrand et al. (2002), where we estimate placebo DD regressions
in each of the other 50 states, using only the neighboring state that shares longest boundary
with the primary state. Figures C.1 and C.2 present visual analogs to the DD estimators. In
the figures with placebo plots, each DD series is shifted by the average level in the pre-period.
In that case, the patterns in the pre-period can be used to asses parallel pre-trends, and the
patterns in the post period preview the DD estimate.

69

.55

Employment Rate
.6
.65

.7

Figure C.1: Employment Rate, 1977-2014

1977

1986

1996
Year

2005

Alaska

2014

Washington

-.1

Difference in Employment Rate
-.05
0
.05
.1

.15

(a) Employment Rate: Alaska vs. Washington State

0

10

20

30

Event Time
Alaska

Placebo States/Years

(b) Difference in Employment Rate, Alaska vs. Washington State
Notes: Panel (a) plots the employment rate for Alaska and Washington State, from 1977 to 2014. The
vertical dashed line indicates 1981, the year before the onset of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend.
Panel (b) plots the results of a permutation test of the significance of the difference between Alaska and
Washington State. The solid dark line plots the difference for Alaska using the true introduction of the
treatment in 1982. The light grey lines plot the difference using other states and or other treatment years.
Each series is shifted by the average level in the pre-period, as described in Section C.

70

.1

.11

Part-Time Rate
.12
.13

.14

Figure C.2: Part-Time Rate, 1977-2014

1977

1986

1996
Year

2005

Alaska

2014

Washington

-.05

Difference in Part-Time Rate
0

.05

(a) Part-Time Rate: Alaska vs. Washington State

0

10

20

30

Event Time
Alaska

Placebo States/Years

(b) Difference in Part-Time Rate, Alaska vs. Washington State
Notes: Panel (a) plots the part-time rate for Alaska and Washington State, from 1977 to 2014. The vertical
dashed line indicates 1981, the year before the onset of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend. Panel (b)
plots the results of a permutation test of the significance of the difference between Alaska and Washington
State. The solid dark line plots the difference for Alaska using the true introduction of the treatment in
1982. The light grey lines plot the difference using other states and or other treatment years. Each series is
shifted by the average level in the pre-period, as described in Section C.

71

Table C.1: Difference-in-Differences Estimates, 1982-2014, Washington Control
(1)

(2)

Employment
Rate

Part-Time
Rate

-0.008

0.008

p-value

0.617

0.276

95% CI

[-0.042,0.026]

[-0.007,0.022]

1,836

1,836

α̂0

Number of placebos

Notes: Table presents estimates of effect of Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend on several outcomes, using a
difference-in-differences estimator outlined in Section 3. The pre-perid is defined from 1977 to 1981, and
the post period is defined from 1982 to 2014. The p-value and confidence intervals are constructed using a
permutation test similar to the one described in Section 6.2.

72

