                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE SKILLS TO PAY THE BILLS:
                  RETURNS TO ON-THE-JOB SOFT SKILLS TRAINING

                                      Achyuta Adhvaryu
                                        Namrata Kala
                                      Anant Nyshadham

                                     Working Paper 24313
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24313


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2018




We are very grateful to Anant Ahuja, Chitra Ramdas, Raghuram Nayaka, Sudhakar Bheemarao,
and Paul Ouseph for their coordination, enthusiasm, and guidance. Thanks to Dotti Hatcher,
Lucien Chan, Noel Simpkin, and others at Gap, Inc. for their support and feedback on this work.
We acknowledge funding from Private Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries
(PEDL) initiative, and Adhvaryu’s NIH/NICHD (5K01HD071949) career development award.
This research has benefited from discussions with Michael Boozer, Robert Gibbons, Paul Gertler,
Markus Goldstein, Rocco Macchiavello, David McKenzie, Dilip Mookherjee, Claudia Olivetti,
Antoinette Schoar, Tavneet Suri, Chris Udry, John Van Reenen, and Chris Woodruff, and
seminar audiences at NBER, Penn, MIT, USC, Madrid, PEDL, IGC, World Bank, AEA,
Northeastern, NEUDC, Chicago, Michigan, McGill, Georgetown, and Copenhagen. Many thanks
to Lavanya Garg, Robert Fletcher, and Aakash Mohpal for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein do not represent PEDL, NIH, Gap, Inc., or Shahi Exports. All errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Achyuta Adhvaryu, Namrata Kala, and Anant Nyshadham. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Skills to Pay the Bills: Returns to On-the-job Soft Skills Training
Achyuta Adhvaryu, Namrata Kala, and Anant Nyshadham
NBER Working Paper No. 24313
February 2018
JEL No. J24,M53,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

We evaluate the causal impacts of on-the-job soft skills training on the productivity, wages, and
retention of female garment workers in India. The program increased women’s extraversion and
communication, and spurred technical skill upgrading. Treated workers were 20 percent more
productive than controls post-program. Wages rise very modestly with treatment (by 0.5 percent),
with no differential turnover, suggesting that although soft skills raise workers’ marginal
products, labor market frictions are large enough to create a substantial wedge between
productivity and wages. Consistent with this, the net return to the firm was large: 258 percent
eight months after program completion.

Achyuta Adhvaryu                                 Anant Nyshadham
Ross School of Business                          Department of Economics
University of Michigan                           Boston College
701 Tappan Street                                Maloney Hall, 324
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                              Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER                                         and NBER
adhvaryu@umich.edu                               nyshadha@bc.edu

Namrata Kala
Harvard University
27 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven, CT 06511
namrata.kala@gmail.com




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24313
1        Introduction
Soft skills – e.g., teamwork, leadership, relationship management, personality factors, effective time
allocation, and the ability to assimilate information – are highly predictive of success in the labor
market (Bassi et al., 2017; Borghans et al., 2008; Deming, 2015; Groh et al., 2015; Guerra et al., 2014;
Heckman and Kautz, 2012; Heckman et al., 2006; Montalvao et al., 2017). Surveys of employers from
around the world corroborate that soft skills are in great demand, and that firms often struggle to find
workers with high levels of these skills (Cunningham and Villaseñor, 2016).
        Studies from psychology and economics demonstrate that it is possible to inculcate soft skills in
early childhood, via, for example, home-based stimulation and high quality preschool programs (At-
tanasio et al., 2014; Gertler et al., 2014; Grantham-McGregor et al., 1991; Ibarrarán et al., 2015). But how
malleable soft skills are in adulthood, and whether training programs that aim to increase the stock
of these skills can indeed generate causal impacts on productivity, have only begun to be explored
(Acevedo et al., 2017; Ashraf et al., 2017; Campos et al., 2017; Groh et al., 2012). It is not obvious that
inculcating these skills in a meaningful way is possible: structural estimates of dynamic human capital
accumulation models suggest that it may indeed be difficult to affect non-cognitive skill levels at later
ages, particularly for those with low baseline stocks, due to dynamic complementarities (Aizer and
Cunha, 2012; Cunha et al., 2010; Heckman and Mosso, 2014).
        Moreover, when general training is delivered within the firm (as it often is1 ), it is imperative to
know the firm’s returns to training in addition to worker productivity effects. This impact, in turn, is
governed by labor market structure. In perfectly competitive markets, workers’ wages would need to
increase commensurate to their marginal products; any firm that paid below marginal product would
lose the newly trained workers as they received higher wage offers at other firms. As Becker (1964)
famously noted, this implies that with perfect labor markets, even general training programs that
generate large productivity returns may not be appealing investments for firms. On the other hand, if
asymmetric information and search frictions play a role in the labor market, then the resulting wedge
between workers’ marginal products and their wages in equilibrium may create positive productivity
rents from general training for firms (Acemoglu, 1997; Acemoglu and Pischke, 1998, 1999; Autor, 2001;
Chang and Wang, 1996; Katz and Ziderman, 1990). Since most soft skills are “general,” the extent of
labor market frictions thus likely polices the ability to deliver soft skills training through firms, even
when training raises productivity.
        The questions that motivate our study, then, are threefold. First, is it possible to improve soft skills
meaningfully for workers with low stocks of these skills? Second, if skills do improve, what are the
causal impacts on workplace outcomes, including productivity, wages, and retention? Finally does it
pay for firms to provide on-the-job soft skills training to workers, and what does this rate of return tell
us about the nature of labor market frictions as pertains to soft skills?
        To answer these questions, we partnered with the largest ready-made garment export firm in India
to evaluate an intensive, workplace-based soft skills training program. The initiative, which is named
Personal Advancement and Career Enhancement (P.A.C.E.), aims to empower female garment workers
via training in a broad variety of life skills, including modules on communication, time management,
    1
        See, e.g., Bassanini et al. (2007).


                                                         2
financial literacy, successful task execution, and problem-solving. These skills are important inputs
into production in the ready-made garments context. Workers need effective communication to resolve
throughput issues with other team members (e.g., identifying and working through bottlenecks in
real time). They need relationship management skills to relay information in a productive way to
supervisors (e.g., machine malfunction, requesting breaks or help to complete tasks, etc.). And they
need problem-solving frameworks to effectively deal with daily shocks to production.
    We conducted a randomized controlled trial (RCT) in five garment factories in urban Bengaluru,
India. We assessed the impacts of soft skills training on 1) direct and indirect measures of the stock of
these skills; and 2) administrative data on retention, productivity, wages, task complexity, and other
workplace outcomes. Finally, we compute the firm’s returns, combining our point estimates with data
on the program’s costs and the firm’s accounting profits.
    We enrolled female garment workers in a lottery for the chance to take part in the P.A.C.E. program
and used a two-stage randomization procedure to assign workers to treatment. In the first stage, we
randomized production lines to treatment. In the second stage, within treatment lines, we randomized
workers who had enrolled in the lottery to either direct P.A.C.E. training or spillover treatment. We
thus estimate treatment effects by comparing trained workers (on treatment lines) to control workers
on control lines (who enrolled in the lottery but whose lines were assigned to control). We estimate
spillovers by comparing untrained workers on treatment lines to control workers on control lines.
    Endline survey results for treated and control workers and pre/post-module testing of treated
workers indicate that stocks of soft skills improved in several important dimensions. Specifically,
treated women showed a pronounced increase in extraversion, which may impact productivity via
improvements in the ability to communicate and solve issues collaboratively with peers and supervi-
sors. These women were also more likely to request and complete technical skill development train-
ings, generating complementary improvements in “hard” skills. Survey results indicate greater self-
assessment of workplace quality (relative to peers of the same technical skill grade), consistent with an
increase in self-regard. Finally, pre/post data from assessment tools designed to measure learning in
each of the program’s modules show that initial stocks of knowledge in each of the program’s target
areas were low, and that treated workers substantially improved these stocks through the program
(most markedly for communication skills).
    Direct impacts on workplace outcomes, measured using the firm’s administrative data, are con-
sistent with the acquisition of soft skills by workers. Treated workers are more productive by about
11 percentage points (20% higher than the control mean) and more likely to be assigned to complex
tasks. Impacts last up to 8 months after program completion (when we ceased data collection), sug-
gesting that learned skills translated into persistent improvements in workplace outcomes. Workers
on treatment lines who did not receive the program are also more productive and are assigned to more
complex operations, generating team-level (production line) impacts on productivity post-program
completion. Wages went up very slightly as a result of treatment: an increase of about 0.5 percent. The
program had no sustained impact on turnover. Retention was actually higher in the treatment group
relative to control during the program period; this effect diminished after program completion.2
   2
     We use a dynamic inverse probability weighting procedure, described in detail in section 4, throughout our analysis to
correct for potential changes in the size and composition of the treatment and control groups over time.


                                                            3
    Taken in sum, we interpret the results to indicate that the program increased workers’ stocks of
soft skills, which in turn led to productivity improvements.3 Combined with the fact that there was
essentially no impact on wage or long-run turnover, our results suggest the presence of substantial
labor market frictions that prevent workers from capturing more of the productivity rents that ensue
from training (Acemoglu, 1997; Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999). The nature of the hiring process in this
labor market helps to rationalize this result. Specifically, sewing machine operators are evaluated – and
accordingly are given wage offers – based only on stitching skills. Soft skills are largely unobserved
in this hiring process and therefore are not priced into the wage, in line with other hiring processes
for frontline workers in low-income country contexts (Bassi et al., 2017). This information friction
likely generates the observed difference in impacts of soft skills training on marginal productivity as
compared to wage.
    We use our estimates of impacts on workplace outcomes along with program cost and accounting
profit data to calculate the costs and benefits of the program to the firm. The net rate of return was 73%
by the end of the program period. Eight months after program completion, fueled by post-program
increases in productivity, the return climbed to over 250%. These large returns are rationalized by the
relatively low costs of the program combined with the accumulated effects on productivity and person
days, and are consistent with other recent interventions in garment factories in South Asia (Menzel,
2015).
    Our main contribution is to the study of soft skills in the labor market. We join a handful of recent
studies that evaluate the causal impacts of soft skills training on economic outcomes (Acevedo et al.,
2017; Ashraf et al., 2017; Campos et al., 2017; Groh et al., 2012; Schoar, 2014). We add to this work
by studying training within the firm, which emphasizes estimating firms’ returns, tying our work to
the literature on the role of labor market frictions in firms’ decisions to train their workers (Acemoglu,
1997; Acemoglu and Pischke, 1998, 1999; Autor, 2001). We are also able to directly estimate impacts on
individual productivity, which is missing from previous work.4
    Other previous work quantifying the productivity impacts of on-the-job training generally uses ob-
servational data on firms and workers in the United States and Western Europe (Barrett and O’Connell,
2001; Barron et al., 1999; Dearden et al., 2006; Konings and Vanormelingen, 2015; Mincer, 1962). These
studies tend to find that training increases productivity, but there is disagreement on the magnitude
of this increase (Blundell et al., 1999). Specifically, when endogeneity of training is accounted for (e.g.,
using matching methods), productivity returns become quite small (Goux and Maurin, 2000; Leuven
and Oosterbeek, 2008). We add to this literature in three ways. First, we estimate causal effects by
exploiting randomized assignment to training, which overcomes potential self-selection bias (Altonji
and Spletzer, 1991; Bartel and Sicherman, 1998). Second, we estimate impacts on retention in addition
to productivity; retention is crucial to understanding firms’ overall returns to training but has not been
examined thus far. Third, we carry out our experiment in a low-income country setting, where training
frontline workers might have large potential given low levels of baseline skills.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the garment production context
   3
     We address several other possible mechanisms in section 6, including potential changes to mental and physical health,
reciprocity, and social capital.
   4
     Campos et al. (2017) measure microenterprise profits, which of course are in part a function of productivity.



                                                            4
and reviews the details of the training program and the experimental design. Section 3 discusses
the data sources and the construction of key variables, and section 4 describes the estimation strategy.
Section 5 describes the results of the estimation. Section 6 discusses and evaluates possible mechanisms
and presents an analysis of the costs and benefits to the firm. Section 7 concludes.


2       Context, Program Details, and Experiment Design
2.1       Context

2.1.1      Ready-made Garments in India

Apparel is one of the largest export sectors in the world, and vitally important for the economies of
several large developing countries (Staritz, 2010). India is one of the world’s largest producers of textile
and garments, with export value totaling $10.7 billion in 2009-2010. The size of the sector and the labor-
intensity of the garment production process make the sector well-suited to absorb the influx of young,
unskilled and semi-skilled labor migrating from rural self-employment to wage labor in urban areas,
especially women (World Bank, 2012). Women comprise the majority of the workforce in garment
factories, and new labor force entrants tend to be disproportionately female, particularly in countries
like India where the baseline female labor force participation rate is low (Staritz, 2010). Shahi Exports,
Private Limited, the firm with which we partnered to do this study, is the largest private garment
exporter in India, and the single largest private employer of unskilled and semi-skilled female labor in
the country.


2.1.2      The Garment Production Process

There are three broad stages of garment production: cutting, sewing, and finishing. In this study, we
estimate program impacts on workers from the sewing department only, as measures of individual
productivity and task complexity are only available for sewing workers.5 Sewing department workers
make up about 80% of the factory’s total employment.
        In the sewing department of the study factories (as in most medium and large garment factories),
garments are sewn in production lines consisting of around 50-70 workers arranged in sequence. Most
of the workers on the line are assigned to machines completing sewing tasks (one person to a ma-
chine). The remaining workers perform complementary tasks to sewing, such as folding or aligning
the garment to feed it into a machine. Each line produces a single style of garment at a time.6
        The line is subdivided into smaller groups of operations that produce subsections of the garment
(e.g., collar, sleeve, or pocket). These groups are separated by “feeding points” at which the prepared
materials for each subsection of the garment are fed in bundles (e.g., materials for 20 pockets or collars
of the current shirt will be fed at one point and materials for 40 sleeves will be fed at the next point).
This structure of subdivisions, multiple feeding points, and bundles of materials is very common in
    5
     This is because a standardized measure of output is recorded for each worker in each hour on the sewing floor, but such
a measure is not recorded for workers in other departments.
   6
     The color and size of the garment might vary but the design and style will be the same for every garment produced by
that line until the ordered quantity for that garment is met.


                                                             5
the industry (and in fact mirrored in many other manufacturing industries) and is used explicitly to
decouple, as much as is possible, productivity at adjacent operations or subdivisions and allow time
for rebalancing of productivity across the line.
      Completed sections of garments pass between machine operators in these bundles, are attached
to each other in additional operations along the way, and emerge at the end of the line as completed
garments. These completed garments are then transferred to the finishing floor. In the finishing de-
partment, garments are checked, ironed, and packed for shipping. Most quality checking is done on
the sewing floor during production, but final checks are done in the finishing stage. Any garments
with quality issues are sent back to the sewing floor for rework or, if irreparably ruined, are discarded
before packing.7 Orders are then packed and sent to ports for export.


2.2    Program Details

The Personal Advancement and Career Enhancement (P.A.C.E.) program was designed and first im-
plemented by Gap, Inc. for female garment workers in low-income contexts. Shahi Exports partici-
pated in the original design and piloting of the program as one of the largest suppliers to Gap. The
intervention we study involved the implementation of the P.A.C.E. program in five factories in the
Bengaluru area which had not yet adopted the program. The goal of this 80-hour program was to
improve life skills such as time management, effective communication, problem-solving, and financial
literacy for its trainees. The program began with an introductory ceremony for participants, trainers,
and firm management. The core modules were: Communication (9.5 hours); Problem Solving and
Decision-Making (13 hours); Time and Stress Management (12 hours); Execution Excellence (5 hours);
Financial Literacy (4.5 hours); and Legal Literacy and Social Entitlements (8.5 hours).8 Table A1 pro-
vides an overview of the topics covered in each module. After all modules had been completed, there
were two review sessions (3 hours in total) reiterating concepts from early modules and discussing
how participants would apply their learning to personal and professional situations. At the close of
the program there was a graduation ceremony.
      Workers participated in two hours of training per week. Management allocated one hour of work-
ers’ production time a week to the program, and workers contributed one hour of their own time.
Training sessions were conducted at the beginning of the production day in designated classroom
spaces in the factories, with workers assigned to groups corresponding to different days of the work
week. That is, a worker assigned to the Monday group would be expected to attend training starting
one hour before production starts on each Monday and ending after the first production hour of the
day is completed (two hours in total). Production constraints required that each day’s group be com-
posed of workers from across production lines so as not to produce large, unbalanced absences from
any one line in the first hour of any production day. Accordingly, the training groups were balanced
in size with roughly 50 trainees per class and no more than 3-4 from a given line in each group.
    7
      Completed quantities of garments recorded in the production data reflect only pieces which have passed quality checks,
so quantity produced reflects both quantity and minimum quality combined.
    8
      Additional modules on Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (6 hours) and General and Reproductive Health (10 hours) were
also included, but were not considered core modules. Pre/post assessments were not conducted for ancillary modules such
as sanitation.



                                                             6
      Due to holidays and festivals (which are times of high absenteeism), sessions were conducted in
practice somewhat more flexibly with respect to timing. Catch-up sessions were conducted for workers
who were unable to attend a session. This flexibility is reflected in average attendance (of non-attrited
workers) to the core program modules, which was very high, ranging between 94 and 99 percent (see
Figure A12). With these adjustments, overall program implementation took about 12 months: the
introductory ceremony was in July 2013, training was conducted between July 2013 and June 2014,
and the closing ceremony in July 2014.


                                    Figure 1A: Experimental Design



                     5 factories; 112
                    production lines;
                      2703 workers                                     Treated=
                                           Treatment= 80 lines
                    (signed up for a                                 1087 workers
                    P.A.C.E. lottery)
                                                                      Spillover (on
                                                                        treatment
                                            Control= 32 lines         line, but not
                                                                        enrolled)=
                                                                      837 workers

                                                                      Control (on
                                                                     control lines)=
                                                                      779 workers




                          Figure 1B: Timeline of Experiment and Data Collection


    January 2013    •   Salary and Attendance Data Collection Starts
       June 2013    •   Treatment Assignment Announcement and Productivity Data Collection Starts
        July 2013   •   Training Program Starts (Pre and Post Module Testing During Training)
       June 2014    •   Training Program Ends and Worker Survey Conducted
  December 2014     •   Salary Data Collection Ends
   February 2015    •   Attendance and Production Data Collection Ends




2.3     Experimental Design

Participants were chosen from a pool of workers who expressed interest and committed to enroll in
the program. The workers were informed that the training was oversubscribed and that a subset of
workers would be chosen at random from a lottery to actually receive the training, with untreated


                                                   7
                                       Figure 1C: Data Type and Availability


           Attendance & Late-coming        •   Daily (January 2013-February 2015)
                        Productivity       •   Daily (June 2013-February 2015)
                              Salary       •   Monthly (January 2013-December 2014)
                   Survey Outcomes         •   Cross-sectional (June 2014)
                           Retention       •   Daily from Productivity Data, Monthly from Salary Data



workers granted the right to enroll in a later lottery for the next training batch.9 Randomization was
conducted at two levels: line level (stratified by factory unit, above- and below-median baseline effi-
ciency and above- and below-median baseline attendance, and above- and below-median enrollment
in the lottery), and then at the individual level within treatment lines. The five factory units had 112
production lines in total. In the first stage of randomization, roughly two-thirds of production lines
within each factory unit were randomized to treatment, yielding 80 treatment lines and 32 control
lines across units. In the second stage of randomization, within lines randomized to treatment, a fixed
number of workers (13-14) from each treatment line were randomly chosen to take part in the P.A.C.E.
program from the total set of workers who expressed interest by enrolling in the treatment lottery.10
        Figure 1A presents a schematic diagram of the experimental design. 2703 workers signed up for
the treatment lottery, from which 1087 were chosen for treatment. Out of the 1616 untrained workers,
779 workers were in control lines, and the remainder, 837 workers, were in treatment lines. The former
group (untrained workers in control lines) serves as our primary control. The latter group (untrained
workers in treatment lines) is used to estimate treatment spillovers. Summary statistics and balance
checks are discussed in Section 3.4.11 Figure 1B presents the timeline of the experiment and data
collection.


3       Data
Figure 1C presents an overview of the different data sources used in the evaluation, the frequency of
data collection of each data type, and the availability of the data over time. Details of the variables of
interest are presented below.


3.1      Production Data

Productivity data were collected using tablet computers assigned to each production line on the sewing
floor. The employee in charge of collecting the data (the “production writer”), who was prior to our
    9
     Importantly, losers of the lottery were told that they would not necessarily receive the training in the next batch, nor
would they be able to earn the right to be trained in any way, but rather that subsequent training batches would also be
chosen at random via lottery.
  10
     The decision to allocate a fixed number of workers to treatment per treatment line was due primarily to production
constraints requiring a minimum manpower be present at all times during production hours.
  11
     For the sake of brevity, we present only balance checks for treatment versus control workers, but balance holds across
spillover versus control workers as well (results available upon request).


                                                             8
intervention charged with recording by hand on paper each machine operator’s completed operations
each hour for the line, was trained to input production data directly in the tablet computer instead.
These data then automatically wirelessly synced to the server. Importantly, from the perspective of the
garment workers, production data were being recorded identically before, during, and after the inter-
vention across treatment and control lines. Note that though productivity was being recorded prior
to the program implementation, the worker-hourly level data was not kept prior to the introduction
of the tablet computers for production writing but rather discarded after line-daily level aggregate
measures were input into the data server. Accordingly, line-daily level aggregate data was all that was
available at the time of treatment assignment, and as mentioned above, the first stage randomization
of lines to treatment was stratified by line-level baseline efficiency.


3.1.1     Productivity

The key measure of productivity we study is efficiency. Efficiency is calculated as pieces produced
divided by the target quantity of pieces per unit time. In order to calculate the worker-level daily
mean of production from these observations, we average the efficiency of each worker over the course
of the day (8 production hours).12
       At the worker-hour level, we define pieces produced as the number of garments that passed a
worker’s station by the end of that production hour. For example, if a worker was assigned to sew
plackets onto shirt fronts, the number of shirt fronts at that worker’s station that had completed
placket attachment by the end of a given production hour would be recorded as that worker’s “pieces
produced.” The target quantity for a given operation is calculated using a measure of garment and
operation complexity called the “standard allowable minute” (SAM). SAM is defined as the number of
minutes required for a single garment of a particular style to be produced. That is, a garment style with
a SAM of 30 is deemed to take half an hour to produce one complete garment. This measure at the line
level is then decomposed into worker or task specific increments. A line with 60 machine operators
then would have an average worker-hourly SAM of 0.5.13 As the name suggests, it is standardized
across the global garment industry and is drawn from an industrial engineering database.14 The target
quantity for a given unit of time for a worker completing a particular operation is then calculated as
the unit of time in minutes divided by the SAM. That is, the target quantity of pieces to be produced
by a worker in an hour for an operation with a SAM of 0.5 will be 60/.5 = 120.
       As mentioned in the previous section, hourly productivity data was available starting the month of
treatment announcement. During the month of treatment announcement (June 2013) the tablets were
introduced onto the production floors. Accordingly, June 2013 represents the pre-program baseline for
all productivity analysis below.
  12
      As noted above, pieces are recorded only if the garment is complete and passes minimum quality standards during in-
line and end-line quality checking. In averaging across hourly quantities within the day, we expect that mis-measurement
arising from re-worked defective pieces is minimized.
   13
      Mean SAM across worker hourly observations is 0.61 with a standard deviation of 0.20.
   14
      This measure may be amended to account for stylistic variations from the representative garment style in the database.
Any amendments are explored and suggested by the sampling department, in which master tailors make samples of each
specific style to be produced by lines on the sewing floor (for costing purposes).




                                                             9
3.2      Human Resources Data: Attendance and Salary

Data on demographic characteristics, attendance, tenure and salary of workers are kept in a firm-
managed database. The data linked to worker ID numbers were shared with us. The variables avail-
able in demographic data include age, date on which the worker joined the firm, gender, native lan-
guage, and education. We combined these with daily attendance data at the worker level indexed by
worker ID number and date, which records whether a worker attended work on a given date, whether
absence was authorized or not, and whether a worker was late to work on a given day (worker tardi-
ness). We also combined these with monthly salary data which also indicates current skill grade level.
The salary data are available until six months post-program completion, unlike the productivity and
attendance data, which are available for eight months after program completion.


3.3      Survey Data

In addition to measuring workplace outcomes, a survey of 1000 randomly chosen treated and control
workers was conducted in June 2014, the month of program completion. The survey covered, among
other things, questions related to financial decisions (including savings and debt) and awareness of and
participation in welfare programs (government or employer sponsored). It also measured personality
characteristics (conscientiousness, extraversion, locus of control, perseverance, and self-sufficiency),
mental health (hope/optimism, self-esteem, and the Kessler 10 module, which can be used to diag-
nose moderate to severe psychological distress (Kessler et al., 2003)), and risk and time preferences
elicited using lottery choices.15 Finally, the survey covered worker’s self-assessments relative to peers
by asking them to imagine a six-step ladder with the lowest productivity workers on the lowest steps,
and then asking them which step they would place themselves on; participation in skill development
programs; production awards; and incentive programs on the job.


3.4      Summary Statistics and Balance Checks

Table 1 presents summary statistics of the main variables of interest, as well as balance checks for
baseline values of attendance rate, high school completion, years of tenure with the firm, age, median
or above skill grade, and an indicator for speaking the local language (Kannada). Additionally, we
check balance for several workplace outcomes: salary in the month before treatment announcement
and productivity and task complexity in the announcement month (the first month of observation for
these outcomes).
       We fail to reject that the difference between treated and control workers for any of these outcome
means at baseline is statistically significantly different from zero. Average attendance rates are about
90%, and average tenure with the firm is about 1.4 years. The average worker is about 27-28 years old.
Over 60% of both samples are high school educated and speak Kannada.
       The summary statistics and differences presented in Table 1 apply to the direct treatment com-
parison. Analogous balance checks for spillover comparisons were performed as well. We find no
significant differences, and do not present them here for the sake of brevity.
  15
       Risk and time preference modules were adapted from the Indonesian Family Life Survey.


                                                            10
                                                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                  (1)                                              (2)                                 (3)
                                                                               Control                                           Treated                          Difference


P.A.C.E. Treatment                                           Control Workers in Control Lines                   Treated Workers in Treatment Lines
   Number of workers                                                      779                                                 1,087
                                                                Mean                SD                               Mean                SD          Mean Difference           p value


    Attendance Rate (Jan-May 2013)                                  0.898                     0.117                      0.903              0.103        -0.005                 0.380
    High School                                                     0.602                     0.489                      0.604              0.489        -0.003                 0.901
    Years of Tenure                                                 1.432                     2.709                      1.353              2.119        0.079                  0.500
    Age                                                            27.712                    14.087                     27.420             11.638        0.292                  0.637
    1(Speaks Kannada)                                               0.657                     1.560                      0.671              1.156        -0.014                 0.834
    High Skill Grade                                                0.616                     0.843                      0.642              0.688        -0.026                 0.473
    log(Salary) (May 2013)                                          8.746                     0.188                      8.737              0.156        0.009                  0.258
    Efficiency (Announcement Month)                                 0.586                     0.587                     0.556              0.426          0.030                 0.268
    SAM (Announcement Month)                                        0.618                     0.726                     0.615              0.535          0.003                 0.928


Spillover Treatment                                          Control Workers in Control Lines                   Control Workers in Treatment Lines
  Number of workers                                                       779                                                  837

Notes: Tests of differences calculated using errors clustered at the line level according to the experimental design.




4       Empirical Strategy
4.1       Overview

The empirical analysis proceeds in several steps, beginning with testing the impact of the program on
retention. This is important as a first step because impacts on retention would necessitate a weighting
procedure to account for the differential attrition across treatment and control groups. Following this,
we test for differences in workplace outcomes, then for differences in survey measures of self-reported
personal and professional outcomes, and finally estimate treatment spillovers.


4.2       Retention, Working, and Cumulative Person Days

We estimate the following regression specification to test whether P.A.C.E. treatment impacts retention:


             Rwdmy = α0 + ζ1 1[Tw ] ∗ 1[Treatment Announced]my + ζ2 1[Tw ] ∗ 1[During Treatment]my +
                                                                                                                                                                                         (1)
                           ζ3 1[Tw ] ∗ 1[After Treatment]my + ψuym + ηw + εwdmy

where the outcome is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if worker w was retained on day d in
month m and year y and 0 otherwise, 1[Tw ] is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the worker is a
trained worker on a treatment line and 0 if she is a control worker on a control line, and it is interacted
with dummies that take the value 1 for the month that the assignment to treatment was announced, the
months during the treatment and the months post-treatment, respectively, thus allowing comparison
relative to the pre-announcement period. Each regression includes unit x year x month fixed effects
ψuym (which absorb the main effects of the time dummies) and worker fixed effects ηw (which absorb
the main effect of the treatment indicator).


                                                                                                         11
      We estimate equation 1 separately for retention dummy variables constructed using both daily
attendance data and monthly payroll data. The difference between the two is that with the daily
data we can see whether the worker stopped coming to work within the month, even before they are
removed from the payroll. Standard errors are clustered at the production line level - while we did a
two level randomized treatment assignment with the lower level of treatment at the worker level, we
report line level clustering to be as conservative as possible. This is particularly important since we
designed the experiment to measure spillover effects, and in fact find some evidence to this effect.
      To estimate the impact of treatment on the additional number of days the firm receives from the
worker, we consider two outcomes: the first is a binary working variable that is 1 if the worker was
retained and is present in the the factory on a given day and 0 otherwise. It is thus a combination
of retention and attendance. The second is the number of cumulative person days as measured by
the cumulative running sum of the first variable. Both are defined at the daily level for each worker.
They are estimated as in Equation 1 using these variables instead of retention on the left-hand side.
These variables can once again be calculated from two sources of raw data: attendance and production
rosters.


4.3     Dealing with Potential Bias from Selective Attrition

When examining conditionally observed outcomes such as productivity (which are only observed if
the worker is still at the firm and working that day), there is a potential for selective attrition or obser-
vation based on treatment, which could generate bias in the impact estimates. To test and account for
this potential bias, we follow several approaches, outlined below.

   1. Testing directly for treatment-induced changes in the relative size of treatment v. control groups: We
        test directly for differential retention by estimating the regression specification in Equation 1
        shown above. We present the results in Section 5.1. The results indicate there was no differential
        retention at the end point of the program period (July 2014) as well as any point afterward.

   2. Balance tests by baseline characteristics at different points during and post-program completion: To test
        whether the retention across treatment and control is correlated with baseline characteristics, we
        present the results of balance tests by treatment and control one month after treatment (July 2014)
        as well as during the last month of data collection (February 2015). Results are presented in Table
        A9; the analysis shown here demonstrates that all baseline characteristics are balanced on means
        at both points in time. Tests conducted for other points in time are also balanced and omitted
        here for brevity. In addition, there is no heterogeneity in retention impacts across distributions
        of baseline characteristics at treatment announcement, program completion, and data collection
        endline, as shown in Figures A1-A6 (which provide a more stringent test than balance checks
        based on means).

   3. Dynamic weighting of conditionally observed outcomes: As mentioned above, we do not find any
        differential retention at the end point of the program period, nor do we find any evidence of
        heterogeneity in retention across treatment and control groups for any baseline characteristics.


                                                      12
       Despite this, in order to confidently recover population average treatment effects on condition-
       ally observed outcomes throughout the observation period, we weight treatment and control
       groups by the probability of being observed at any intermediate point in the data. For exam-
       ple, if there exists differential attrition across treatment and control at 6 months into program
       implementation, even if this difference later equalizes, to ensure that we recover the population
       average treatment effect on any conditionally observed outcome (e.g., productivity or salary) at
       all subsequent points of observation, we can weight all observations prior to that time by the
       probability of being able to measure the outcome at each point in time. Accordingly, we adapt
       the approach proposed in Wooldridge (2010) to accommodate any potential heterogeneous im-
       pacts of treatment by baseline characteristics of the workers and any differential dynamics in the
       onset or decay of treatment effects across time, in the following manner:

         (a) Estimate a probit specification for the probability of being observed, which is a dummy
              variable that takes the value 1 if the worker is in the sample on any given month and 0 oth-
              erwise (i.e., the retained dummy if studying impacts from the attendance or salary data and
              the working dummy if studying impacts from the production data), on the treatment indi-
              cator interacted with month by year fixed effects and baseline characteristics (attendance,
              education, tenure, age, skill grade, productivity and task complexity).16
         (b) We then estimate equation 1 using the conditionally observed outcome variables on the left-
              hand side and the inverse of the predicted probabilities from the first step as probability
              weights. Note that because in the intermediate data (after the announcement but before the
              endline) the control group is less likely to be working (as shown in the results), this amounts
              to overweighting a subset of control observations at most points along the timeline.

       In practice, once worker fixed effects are included in all regressions, the weighting procedure
       has negligible effect on the results. We explored robustness to different weights, as well as the
       absence of weights altogether, but do not present these results for the sake of brevity as they are
       generally quite similar.

 4. Production line-level estimates and impacts on retained workers only: Finally, we present results for
       productivity and task complexity at the line level that includes all workers on the production
       lines, rather than at the individual level. Line level results are presented in Table A4 and dis-
       cussed in detail in Section 6.5, and are quite consistent with individual-level results. (Note that
       we would expect smaller effects at the production line level, given that only a fraction of work-
       ers on each line were treated.) Additionally, estimates of productivity impacts for the subset of
       workers still retained by the end of the observation period are also reported in Table 3 and dis-
       cussed in section 5.2 below. The pattern of results is the same for this subset of retained workers
       confirming that treatment impacts on productivity cannot be driven by changes in composition
       of the sample over time.
16
     Since workers salaries are homogenous within skill grade level, grade proxies for skill level as well as salary.




                                                               13
4.4      Productivity and Task Complexity

We estimate treatment impacts on two outcomes from the productivity data: efficiency and SAM. As
discussed above, SAM measures task complexity, and efficiency is actual pieces produced divided by
target pieces (calculated from SAM). All of these variables are only measured if a worker is retained
by the factory, and present in the factory that day. Accordingly, these conditionally observed outcomes
are weighted in the analysis as discussed above. The weights are obtained as discussed in section 3
using the working status dummy as the outcome.
       In the SAM regressions, we follow the above specification exactly. However, in the efficiency re-
gression, we replace the worker fixed effects with worker by garment style fixed effects. These are to
account for any treatment impacts on the task complexity as identified in the SAM regression.
       We also include as additional controls days that the style has been running on the production
line and total order size to account for learning dynamics at the line level that might impact worker
productivity across the life of the order.


4.5      Salary, Career Advancement, and Career Expectations

To study the impact of the program on career advancement, we measure impacts on gross salary and
several work related survey outcomes. For salary, we first estimate the retention probability weights
as detailed in section 3, and then estimate equation 1 using those inverse probability weights, with the
log of gross salary as the outcome.17
       We use five variables from the cross-sectional survey data to cover self-reported performance, sub-
jective expectations of promotion, self-assessment, and initiative in requesting skill development. The
subjective expectations of promotion were measured by a binary variable for whether the worker
expects to be promoted in the next six months. The request for skill development was measured
by asking workers whether they have undergone technical skill development training in the last six
months. Self-reported performance was measured by asking whether workers have received produc-
tion awards or incentives in the last 6 months. Finally, we measured two kinds of self-assessment. Both
asked the worker to imagine a ladder with six steps representing the worst to best workers on their
production line (6 being the best). The first self-assessment asked workers where they would place
themselves relative to all the workers on their line, and the second where they would place themselves
relative to other workers of their technical skill grade. Since the variation in the survey variables is only
cross-sectional, we regress these outcomes on a binary variable for treatment or control, and include
factory fixed effects, as well as control for age, tenure with the firm, and education of the worker. In
survey outcome regressions, we employ weights obtained from the retention probit using attendance
data matched to the date of survey.


4.6      Attendance, Unauthorized Leave, and Tardiness

We also analyze attendance outcomes, once again weighting these data by the inverse retention prob-
abilities estimated from the probit specification discussed above. We focus the analysis on three out-
  17
       Note that the administrative salary data is at the monthly level for each worker rather than the daily-level.


                                                                14
come variables: whether the worker is present at work, whether the worker is absent without leave
(unauthorized) if absent, and whether the worker was tardy in coming to work.


4.7   Other Survey Outcomes

Finally, we consider the impact of the program on survey outcomes that might plausibly reflect the
skills taught by P.A.C.E. For instance, since the program targets the stock of non-cognitive skills such
as the ability to acquire and use information more effectively, we consider outcome variables regard-
ing whether workers avail themselves of government and firm welfare programs like pension schemes
and subsidized health-care. Similarly, since the program aims to make workers more forward-looking,
we test whether there is an increase in workers’ savings, especially for important future considerations
like education (their own or their children’s), and risk and time preferences. Furthermore, we test
whether the program impacted personality characteristics (conscientiousness, locus of control, perse-
verance, extraversion and self-sufficiency) and mental health (self-esteem, hope/optimism, and mental
distress.). As mentioned previously, the survey measures are cross-sectional. The regression specifi-
cation is thus the same as for the survey outcomes in the previous section: we regress the outcome
on the binary treatment variable and include factory unit fixed effects and retention weights from the
attendance data matched by survey date.


4.8   Figures

We create figures illustrating the month-by-month treatment impacts by re-estimating all the outcome
regressions with the treatment binary interacted with monthly dummies from June 2013 onwards
(rather than the announcement, during, and after dummies presented in equation 1 above). All re-
gression analogs are reported in tables in the Appendix, with figures presented and discussed in sec-
tion 5. Dummies for months prior to June 2013 are excluded to make treatment effects relative to the
pre-announcement period in all figures, except for those depicting monthly treatment impacts on pro-
ductivity outcomes for which the announcement month (June 2013) is the first month of observation
and the excluded base month.


4.9   Spillover Effects/Production Complementarity Effects

To estimate the effects on untrained workers who interact with trained workers, we re-run all of the
specifications mentioned above, replacing the binary treatment variable with the binary spillover treat-
ment variable. This variable compares untrained workers in treatment lines (workers who enrolled in
the lottery but did not receive the program and who work in production lines with workers who re-
ceived the training) with control workers in control lines (workers who enrolled in the lottery but did
not receive the program and who work in production lines without any trained workers). Thus, it
takes the value 1 if the individual is an untrained worker in a treated line, and 0 if the worker is a
control worker in a control line (and missing for treated workers).




                                                  15
5        Results
5.1        Retention and Daily Working Status


                               .1
                                                                           Figure 2: Monthly Retention
                     Impact on Retention
                       0       -.05 .05




                                           0                   3                   6         9         12          15   18
                                                                                    Months Since Treatment Start
                                           Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




                  Figure 2 depicts impacts of P.A.C.E treatment on retention. Figure 2 plots coefficients of monthly impacts
                  from the preferred regression specification. The corresponding full results are reported in Table A2 in the
                  Appendix. Figures using payroll roster data instead of attendance data look nearly identical. Accordingly,
                  these are not presented, but are also available upon request. Table 2, however, does present analogous
                  regression results from all of these alternative samples. Figure A7 in the Appendix depicts raw retention
                  data from the attendance roster across P.A.C.E treatment and control groups over the full observation
                  period.




         We begin by measuring the impacts of P.A.C.E. on retention and the probability that a worker is on
the job.18 Figure 2 plots regression coefficients of treatment effects estimated month by month using
attendance roster data. This figure shows that there is a statistically significant impact of treatment
on retention early in the program period, which dissipates by the end of the program (the program
training window is denoted by dashed vertical lines). Column 1 of Table 2 presents analogous regres-
sion coefficients pooling months after program assignment into three periods: announcement, during
training, and after training. The results indicate that on average the treatment impacts on retention
were small and insignificant throughout the entire observation period. Using the payroll data yields
nearly identical figures and so this additional figure is omitted for brevity. We do, however, report
estimates using this alternate data in column 2 of Table 2.
    18
    Since all the variables discussed in this section are not conditional on retention (i.e., not missing if the worker has left the
firm), no re-weighting is required.



                                                                                                     16
                                                                       Figure 3: Monthly Working




                           .1   .05
                  Impact on Working
                   0       -.05




                                      0                   3                   6         9         12          15   18
                                                                               Months Since Treatment Start
                                      Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




               Figure 3 depicts impacts of P.A.C.E treatment on working (retained and present) in the factory from
               the attendance roster data. Figure 3 plots coefficients of monthly impacts from the preferred regression
               specification. The corresponding full results are reported in Table A2 in the Appendix. Figure A8 depicts
               raw presence data from the attendance roster across P.A.C.E treatment and control groups over the full
               observation period.




       The second outcome of interest is the probability that a worker is retained and present at work
on a given day. This variable, which we refer to as “working” status, is therefore equal to 0 on a
given day if the worker has permanently left the factory, or she is still working for the firm but is not
present on a given day, and is 1 otherwise. Figure 3 plots regression coefficients of month-by-month
treatment effects for the attendance roster data. Figure 3 once again shows that treatment impacts are
statistically significant for some of the treatment period but not afterward (the program period is once
again denoted by dashed vertical lines).
       Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 present analogous regression coefficients for pooled post program as-
signment months. Treatment impacts are large and significant during and after the program when us-
ing production roster data, but attenuated and imprecise when using attendance data. This difference
is likely due to measurement error from two sources: 1) attendance data is more prone to measurement
error when biometric scanning equipment is malfunctioning or workers forget to scan in at the start of
the day;19 and 2) attendance data records partial-work days as absences where as production data will
count workers as present if they record production in that day.20 In the production data, a worker was
  19
    This is particularly salient for treatment workers during the program months as the training spans the usual time in the
morning when workers would scan in for the day.
 20
    The means of the control group across the two sources are different due to the fact that the production data is only



                                                                                                17
                     Table 2: Impacts of P.A.C.E. Treatment on Retention, Working, and Person Days
                                                               (1)                       (2)                      (3)                       (4)                      (5)                       (6)
                                                                        Retained                                           Working                                  Cumulative Person Days
                                                                                                            1(Worker Retained and Present in               Sum of Days Working for Each Worker
                                                       1(Worker Still on Attendance Roster)
                                                                                                                    Factory Today)                                      to Date

                                                     Attendance Roster           Payroll Roster         Attendance Roster          Production Data         Attendance Roster          Production Data


         After X P.A.C.E. Treatment                         0.00620                   0.00865                  0.00743                   0.0761**                   9.250                   16.20**
                                                            (0.0256)                  (0.0274)                 (0.0221)                  (0.0371)                  (8.683)                  (7.141)
        During X P.A.C.E. Treatment                          0.0264                    0.0256                   0.0285                  0.0870***                   5.360                   6.833***
                                                            (0.0215)                  (0.0220)                 (0.0193)                  (0.0318)                  (3.258)                   (2.601)
     Announced X P.A.C.E.. Treatment                        0.00416                   0.00476                   0.0136                                              0.501
                                                            (0.0136)                  (0.0153)                 (0.0138)                                            (1.271)


                  Fixed Effects                                                                               Unit X Month X Year, Worker
             Observations                                  1,433,981                   43,141                 1,270,871                  778,916                 1,270,871                  778,916
   Control Mean of Dependent Variable                         0.63                      0.66                     0.52                     0.37                    213.71                    103.22


 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the treatment line level. Retained dummy, Working dummy, and Cumulative Person Days are all
 defined for every worker date observation in the data and therfore the regressions do not require any weighting.




8.7 percentage points more likely to be working during the program (a 23.5% increase relative to the
control mean) and 7.6 percentage points more likely to be working after the program (a 20% increase
relative to the control mean).
      The final measure we study regarding retention and working status is the cumulative number of
working days that accrue to the firm. This is the running sum of the working status variable just
discussed. Figure 4 shows that the treatment impact on cumulative person days (calculated from
production data) is positive and statistically significant by about 3 months into the program period.
The impacts continue to grow quickly through month 8 of the training period, after which the growth
slows somewhat but remains positive through the remainder of the observation period. Columns 5
and 6 of Table 2 present the impacts on cumulative person days during and after the program, using
attendance and production data, respectively. The treatment increases the cumulative person days per
treated worker by 6.8 days during treatment and 16.2 days after treatment when the production data
is used, which is about 6.6% and 16% of the mean cumulative number of days of the control group
respectively.


5.2       Productivity and Task Complexity

If P.A.C.E. impacted the stock of soft skills (e.g., time management, communication, extraversion), then
it should follow that marginal productivity rises, both through direct channels, to the extent that soft
skills are used in production, and indirect channels, if workers were more likely to ask for and receive
additional training in hard skills. To test this hypothesis, we consider two outcomes: 1) productivity
as reflected in the industry standard measure of efficiency (pieces produced divided by target pieces);
available starting June 2013 (the month of treatment announcement), so has five months less of data relative to the attendance
roster.



                                                                                                    18
                                                                             Figure 4: Monthly Person Days




                               40
               Impact on CumulativePersonDays
                   10         20
                               0         30




                                                0                   3                   6         9         12          15   18
                                                                                         Months Since Treatment Start
                                                Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




            Figure 4 depicts impacts of P.A.C.E treatment on cumulative person days in the factory from the start
            of the production data (June 1, 2013) to each date. Figure 4 plots coefficients of monthly impacts from
            the preferred regression specification on the production data. The corresponding full results are reported
            in Table A2 in the Appendix. Figure A9 depicts raw person days data from the production data across
            P.A.C.E treatment and control groups over the full observation period.




and 2) the complexity of the task to which workers are assigned, as measured by SAM (number of
minutes in which a task is expected to be completed – a higher SAM thus denotes a more complex
task).
   Figures 5A and 5B plot regression coefficients of impacts of treatment on efficiency, estimated
month by month. Figure 5A presents this for all workers in the sample, and Figure 5B for only those
workers who were retained at the end of the data collection period (February 2015). The figures indi-
cate that treatment increases efficiency throughout the training and post-program period, with coeffi-
cients becoming significant towards the last third of the program period and after. Figures 6A and 6B
plot analogous regression coefficients of monthly treatment impacts on the complexity of the operation
the worker is performing as measured by SAM. These figures illustrate that both during and after the
program, there is evidence that treated workers are assigned to more complex tasks (tasks with higher
SAM).
   These patterns are confirmed in Table 3, which reports the results of analogous regressions in which
impacts are grouped into during and after P.A.C.E. program implementation. Treated workers are
more efficient after the program (relative to the month of treatment assignment announcement) by
nearly 11 percentage points, about 20% relative the control group mean. Consistent with the evidence
presented above, we see that the impacts on productivity are stronger after program completion. For

                                                                                                          19
           Figure 5A: Monthly Efficiency (All Workers)                                                             Figure 5B: Monthly Efficiency (Retained Only)
             .3




                                                                                                                              .3
                      .2




                                                                                                                                       .2
 Impact on Efficiency




                                                                                                                  Impact on Efficiency
         .1




                                                                                                                          .1
             0




                                                                                                                              0
             -.1




                                                                                                                              -.1
                           0                   3                   6         9         12          15   18                                  0                   3                   6         9         12          15   18
                                                                    Months Since Treatment Start                                                                                     Months Since Treatment Start
                           Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.                                                          Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




       Figures 5A and 5B depict impacts of P.A.C.E treatment on productivity in the factory. Figure 5A depicts coefficients of monthly
       impacts on efficiency (actual pieces produced / target pieces) from the preferred regression specification (including worker by item
       (style) fixed effects and controls for the number of days the worker has been producing that style on that line and the total order
       quantity) for the full sample of workers, with observations weighted to account for any differential composition across treatment and
       control due to attrition. Figure 5B presents the analogous figure for the subsample of workers who are still retained in the factory by
       the end of observation (February 2015). The corresponding full results are reported in Table A3 in the Appendix.




                           Figure 6A: Monthly SAM (All Workers)                                                                         Figure 6B: Monthly SAM (Retained Only)
                                                                                                                              .15
             .1




                                                                                                                              .1
              .05
  Impact on SAM




                                                                                                                  Impact on SAM
                                                                                                                    0       .05
 0




                                                                                                                              -.05
             -.05




                                                                                                                              -.1




                           0                   3                   6         9         12          15   18                                  0                   3                   6         9         12          15   18
                                                                    Months Since Treatment Start                                                                                     Months Since Treatment Start
                           Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.                                                          Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




                           Figures 6A and 6B depict impacts of P.A.C.E treatment on operation complexity (SAM, or standard allowable minute per
                           operation-piece). Figure 6A depicts coefficients of monthly impacts from the preferred regression specification for all workers.
                           Figure 6B depicts monthly impacts for the subsample of retained workers only. The corresponding full results are reported in
                           Table A3 in the Appendix. Figure A11 depicts raw SAM from the production data across P.A.C.E treatment and control groups
                           over the full observation period (June 1, 2013 onwards in the production data).




the sub-sample of workers who were retained until the end of the data collection period, the magni-



                                                                                                             20
                                                    Table 3: Impacts of P.A.C.E. Treatment on Productivity
                                                                         (1)                                         (2)                                         (3)                                         (4)
                                                                     Efficiency                     SAM (Operation Complexity)                               Efficiency                     SAM (Operation Complexity)
                                                                Produced/Target                      Standard Allowable Minute                          Produced/Target                      Standard Allowable Minute

                                                                                                                                                       Retained Workers Only (still in factory in Feb 2015)


         After X P.A.C.E. Treatment                                    0.108**                                    0.0384**                                     0.150**                                   0.0798***
                                                                      (0.0510)                                    (0.0180)                                    (0.0654)                                    (0.0255)
       During X P.A.C.E. Treatment                                     0.0300                                     0.0334**                                    0.0693*                                    0.0642***
                                                                      (0.0274)                                    (0.0147)                                    (0.0390)                                    (0.0208)


                                                        Days on Same Line-Garment,                                                              Days on Same Line-Garment,
             Additional Controls                                                                                    None                                                                                    None
                                                              Total Order Size                                                                        Total Order Size
                                                       Unit X Month X Year, Worker X                                                           Unit X Month X Year, Worker X
                  Fixed Effects                                                           Unit X Month X Year, Worker                                                                       Unit X Month X Year, Worker
                                                                  Garment                                                                                Garment
                                                           Inverse Predicted Probability from Probit of Working on
                     Weights                                                                                                                                                          None
                                                                Treatments X Mo-Yr X Baseline Characteristics
                  Observations                                        290,763                                     290,763                                     130,187                                     130,187
  Control Mean of Dependent Variable                                   0.542                                       0.565                                       0.527                                       0.588


Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the treatment line level. Observations in columns 1 and 2 are weighted in regressions by the inverse of the predicted
probability of working (i.e., not yet attrited and present in the factory with non-missing data) in the sample that day from a probit regression of the working dummy on month by year FE and their interaction with individual
and line treatment dummies and baseline variables reported in Table 1. Sample in columns 3 and 4 is restricted to only workers still retained in the factory by the end of observation. All samples are trimmed in these
regressions to omit days in which the worker is observed for only a half a production day or less or days in which the worker is observed for more than 2 overtime hours as these are anomalous observations with imprecise
production measures. These outliers make up only around 5% of the work-day observations.




tude of the treatment effect is similar, about 15 percentage points higher efficiency after the treatment.
Figure A10 presents these coefficients for the whole sample and the subsample of retained workers
only together as well as their confidence intervals to test for statistically differences in every month of
data collection. We cannot reject that the coefficients are the same in any month. The fact that these re-
sults are similar across panels further supports the notion that any changing composition of the sample
can be driving the productivity impacts.
      Additionally, we see fairly consistent impacts on task complexity (SAM) throughout the program,
and they are sustained and remain statistically significant after the program period. That is, treated
workers are assigned to more complex tasks both during and after treatment (tasks to which they are
assigned are expected to take about 2.3 seconds (0.038 minutes) more, roughly 7% of the control group
mean). Thus, not only are workers in the treatment group assigned to more complex tasks during and
after the program, they are more productive even at these harder tasks once treatment ends. The non-
cognitive skills that the program covers (like time management, goal setting, and team work) enhance
worker productivity and the ability to perform complex tasks.
      The time pattern of impacts on productivity – insignificant increases during much of the program
period followed by large, significant increases towards the end of training and afterward – is striking
and deserves additional consideration. The observed pattern could be rationalized in several ways.
First, the increase in task complexity discussed above (which happened early on in the program pe-
riod) may not captured fully by adjusting the target quantity. More complex tasks may take longer to
master, creating a drag on efficiency particularly just after task switching occurs. Second, the “incuba-
tion period” for productivity impacts in the context of this program, through both direct and indirect
channels mentioned above, is likely long. Learning soft skills to the point that they can be applied


                                                                                                                21
in the workplace may take time. Third, Sets of soft skills may be complementary, so that incremen-
tal learnings in a given module have a greater impact later in the program. This is consistent with
the structure of the program, which conducted review sessions before graduation to reiterate earlier
modules and discuss how to combine the new skills together and apply them in both professional and
personal situations. Finally, from anecdotal observation, women took several months to become true
participants in the group sessions; at the beginning of the program the level of participation, fitting
with the cultural context in which these women live, was quite low.


5.3     Career Advancement

In addition to worker presence and productivity, we study career advancement within the firm. To
estimate the impacts of treatment on career advancement, we consider both whether the worker was
given a raise using monthly payroll data as well as worker-reported measures of expectations of pro-
motion; whether they recently asked for (and received) skill development training; earned production
incentives; and finally, how they assess their own ability relative to all workers on their production
line, and relative to workers of the same technical skill grade as them. Except for the salary data which
is at the monthly level for each worker, the self-reported measures are from the worker-level survey
conducted in the month of program completion and vary only cross-sectionally.


                                                                                   Figure 7: Monthly Salary
                                .015
                  Impact on log(Gross Salary)
                       .005     0      .01




                                                0                     3                   6           9          12     15   18
                                                                                         Months Since Treatment Start
                                                Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




               Figure 7 depicts coefficients of monthly impacts of P.A.C.E treatment on log(gross salary) from the pre-
               ferred regression specification. The corresponding full results are reported in Table A3 in the Appendix.




      Figure 7 plots regression coefficients of monthly treatment impacts on log gross salary. We see in

                                                                                                          22
Figure 7 that PACE workers are paid negligibly more (roughly half a percent), with the gap showing
up towards the end of the program period and trending up modestly thereafter. Column 1 of Table
4 presents the results of the estimation comparing treatment workers to control workers during the
treatment assignment announcement month, and during and after the treatment (relative to before the
treatment assignment announcement month). Treatment workers receive on average less than half a
percent more wages in the period after the program completion, which translates to roughly 30 INR
or less than .5 USD a month. Thus, despite being assigned to more complex tasks and being more
productive, treated workers are not paid meaningfully higher wages.
      Columns 2-6 of Table 4 presents the results from analysis of related survey outcomes. Treatment
workers are about 8.7 percentage points more likely to report that they expect a promotion within the
next six months (roughly 15% of the control group mean), and are nearly 16 percentage points more
likely to request skill development training (63% of the control group mean). They are not significantly
more likely to report having received a production incentive or award, but rate themselves higher
relative to peer co-workers. Specifically, when asked to rank themselves relative to workers the same
technical skill grade, they are significantly more likely to rate themselves at a higher level (as shown
in column 5).


5.4     Attendance

Related outcomes of interest are attendance (a binary variable that is 1 if the worker is at work today
and 0 if not), unauthorized leave (a binary variable that is 1 if the worker is not at work today and did
not inform the employer and 0 if she is either at work or absent and took prior formal leave from the
employer), and tardiness (a binary variable that is 1 if the worker was late relative to the modal arrival
time of co-workers on the line that day and 0 if not). Table A5 presents the impacts of treatment on
these outcomes. There are no precisely measured impacts on any of the outcomes if the grouping is
done by these milestones rather than a month by month comparison. Table A6 presents the regression
results of the month by month estimation. The results indicate that treatment workers are more likely
to attend work in the first two months of the program, and absences are more likely to be authorized
during the same months. Worker tardiness does not appear to be impacted during or after treatment.


6     Mechanisms
Our interpretation of the productivity and task complexity results is that skills like time and stress man-
agement; communication; problem solving and decision-making; and effective teamwork are “soft”
inputs into production. Reinforcing these skills through the P.A.C.E. program should thus directly af-
fect workplace outcomes. Across the categories of results presented below, impacts are consistent with
a direct treatment effect on the stock of soft skills. In particular, the narrative that emerges is one that is
consistent with the P.A.C.E. program increasing the stock of soft skills. This is indicated in part by the
fact that treated women are more likely to proactively increase their stock of hard skills by requesting
technical training, are more extraverted, more likely to seek out and avail themselves of government
and employer benefits to which they are entitled, and more likely to exhibit forward looking behav-


                                                      23
          Table 4: Impacts of P.A.C.E. Treatment on Salary and Workplace Related Survey Outcomes


                                                           (1)                       (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)

                                                                                  Expect              Skill             Production                             Co‐Worker
                                                                                                                                          Skill Peer Self‐
                                                  Log(Gross Salary)             Promotion         Development            Award or                                 Self‐
                                                                                                                                           Assessment
                                                                                Next 6 Mos          Training             Incentive                             Assessment

                                                     Salary Data                                                       Survey Data


     After X P.A.C.E. Treatment                         0.00492*
                                                       (0.00270)
   During X P.A.C.E. Treatment                          0.00137
                                                       (0.000906)

Announced X P.A.C.E. Treatment
                                                        0.000221
                                                       (0.000647)
          P.A.C.E. Treatment                                                      0.0871**            0.158***             0.0293              0.122*              0.0645
                                                                                  (0.0414)            (0.0467)            (0.0185)            (0.0648)            (0.0667)


                                               Unit X Month X Year,
              Fixed Effects                                                                                 Unit, Education, Age, Tenure
                                                      Worker

                 Weights                              Inverse Predicted Probability from Probit of Retention on Treatments X Mo‐Yr X Baseline
                                                                                           Characteristics
              Observations                               28,692                      621                 621                 621                 621                 621
    Control Mean of Dependent
                                                          8.909                     0.563               0.249               0.032               5.337               5.298
             Variable

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the line level. Observations are weighted in regressions by the
inverse of the predicted probability of being retained (i.e., not yet attrited with non‐missing data) in the sample that day from a probit regression of the retained dummy on
month by year FE and their interaction with individual and line treatment dummies and baseline variables reported in Table 1. Controls in regressions for survey outcomes
include demographic baseline variables from Table 1 (i.e., dummies for education levels, dummies for deciles of the age distribution, and dummies for tenure in integer
years).




                                                                                      24
ior via savings and aspirations for their children’s future. Finally, these women share learnings with
their untrained co-workers, and these spillovers appear to contribute to the productivity of these co-
workers.
      Below, we support this interpretation using evidence from a survey of treatment and control work-
ers; from assessments of the treatment group’s knowledge before and after the completion of the pro-
gram’s core modules; and from the degree of treatment spillovers. We also present several alternative
interpretations and discuss the plausibility of each in turn.


6.1     Survey Results

The first piece of evidence supporting the interpretation that the stock of soft skills changed comes
from a survey we administered to treatment and control workers in the month after program comple-
tion. Table 5 evaluates the impact of P.A.C.E. treatment on financial behaviors and attitudes (Panel A);
availing of firm and government programs (Panel B); personality (Panel C); and mental wellbeing and
aspirations (Panel D).
      We discuss results within each category in turn to lay out our reasoning. The first category is
meant to evaluate whether P.A.C.E. treatment changes women’s financial behaviors and attitudes.
This change would be consistent with a shift in forward-looking behavior, an important dimension
of soft skills. The results from Panel A indicate that there is a positive impact on saving for own and
children’s education, and the impacts are quite large relative to the control group mean (about 30%
of the control group mean). Savings for other purposes show no significant impacts. We construct
survey-based measures of risk-aversion and patience with higher scores corresponding to higher lev-
els of risk aversion and patience. The estimates suggest that treatment increases risk aversion as well
as participation in insurance or informal risk-sharing mechanisms (about 10% from the control group
mean).
      The second category, availing oneself of government and employer-based entitlement programs,
is meant to evaluate changes in the effectiveness of information acquisition, another important soft
skill. The results in Panel B show that treated workers are substantially more likely to seek out welfare
programs. Impacts on binary indicators for enrollment in government pension and government sub-
sidized healthcare indicate that treated workers are more likely to avail themselves of these programs.
The magnitude of these impacts are quite large relative to control group means, which are around 0
for both outcomes. Impacts on other government subsidies and firm entitlements are negligible.
      The third category, personality, is meant to assess differences in key traits that are associated with
personality traits, namely conscientiousness, locus of control, perseverance, extraversion, and self-
sufficiency. In general, the impact estimates (shown in Panel C) are imprecisely estimated, but P.A.C.E.
treatment does have a large positive and statistically significant impact on extraversion. This result on
extraversion is consistent with the results above related to seeking out information and resources, as
well as results on self-reported comparisons to co-workers, which show that P.A.C.E. training increased
self-regard with respect to workplace performance relative to peers.
      The final category of the survey, mental health and aspirations, is meant to assess impacts on psy-
chological well-being and the extent to which future aspirations are affected by treatment. The results


                                                     25
                                    Table 5: Impacts of P.A.C.E. Treatment on Survey Outcomes
                                                                              (1)                         (2)                         (3)                         (4)                        (5)
                                                                                                                                                                                       Insurance or
                                                                                                 Saving for Other             Risk Preference            Time Preference
Panel A: Financial Behaviors and Attitudes                        Saving for Education                                                                                                Informal Risk-
                                                                                                     Reasons                       Index                     Index
                                                                                                                                                                                         Sharing


                     P.A.C.E. Treatment                                    0.0804**                     -0.0465                     0.166*                      -0.0984                   0.0637*
                                                                           (0.0313)                    (0.0334)                    (0.0876)                    (0.0935)                   (0.0351)

    Control Group Mean of Dependent Variable                                 0.265                       0.272                      -0.052                      0.019                       0.628


                                                                                                 Gov. Subsidized                                                                     Community Self
Panel B: Government and Firm Entitlements                               Gov. Pension                                       Other Gov. Subsidy           Firm Entitlements
                                                                                                   Healthcare                                                                         Help Group


                     P.A.C.E. Treatment                                    0.0248*                     0.0226**                     0.0119                      -0.0257                    -0.0270
                                                                           (0.0141)                   (0.00941)                    (0.0310)                    (0.0352)                   (0.0303)

    Control Group Mean of Dependent Variable                                 0.039                       0.006                      0.120                       0.142                       0.152


Panel C: Personality                                                Conscientiousness            Locus of Control              Perserverance               Extraversion              Self-Sufficiency


                     P.A.C.E. Treatment                                     0.0210                      0.0307                      -0.123                      0.164**                    0.0445
                                                                           (0.0732)                    (0.0770)                    (0.0774)                    (0.0702)                   (0.0877)

    Control Group Mean of Dependent Variable                                -0.047                      -0.040                      0.020                       -0.071                      -0.063


                                                                                                                                                         Child's Expected            Child Educated
Panel D: Mental Health and Aspirations                                  Self-Esteem              Hope/Optimism              Moderate Distress
                                                                                                                                                         Age at Marriage             Beyond College


                     P.A.C.E. Treatment                                      -0.172                     -0.0621                     -0.0422                    0.0456                     0.0885***
                                                                            (0.106)                    (0.0819)                    (0.0389)                    (0.165)                    (0.0280)

    Control Group Mean of Dependent Variable                                 0.048                       0.015                      0.094                      23.427                       0.117



                        Fixed Effects                                                                                Unit, Education, Age, Tenure
                          Weighted                                         Inverse Predicted Probability from Probit of Retention on Treatments X Baseline Characteristics
                        Observations                                         621                  621                    621                  621                  621


Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the treatment line level. Obersvations are weighted in regressions by the inverse of the
predicted probability of being retained (i.e., not yet attrited with non-missing data) in the sample that day from a probit regression in the attendance roster of the retained dummy on month by year FE and
their interaction with individual and line treatment dummies and baseline variables reported in Table 1. Controls include demograhpic baseline variables from Table 1 (i.e., dummies for education levels,
dummies for deciles of age distribution, and dummies for tenure in integer years).




                                                                                                    26
reported in Panel D show that, in general, outcomes associated with psychological well-being (self-
esteem, optimism, and mental distress) are unaffected by P.A.C.E. treatment, but aspirations for chil-
dren’s education rise dramatically in relation to the control group mean. This is consistent with the
result on saving for education presented in Panel A.


6.2                                  Pre- and Post-Module Assessments



                                                          Figure 8A: Avg Pre Score                                                                                                                                                       Figure 8B: Post - Pre % Change in Score
 Average Pre Score Per Module




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Percent Change in Test Score
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   120
                                42




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   110
                                40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                                38
                                36




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   90
                                34




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80
                                          Communication




                                                            Problem-Solving/Decision-Making




                                                                                              Time & Stress Management




                                                                                                                         Execution Excellence




                                                                                                                                                Health




                                                                                                                                                         Financial Literacy




                                                                                                                                                                              Legal Literacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Communication




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Problem-Solving/Decision-Making




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Time & Stress Management




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Execution Excellence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Health




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Financial Literacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Legal Literacy
                                     Figures 8A and 8B depict average pre-training test score (8A) and normalized (percent change, 8B) difference between post-
                                     and pre-training test scores administered for all core P.A.C.E. modules. Raw scores for each assessment are out of 100. These
                                     assessments were not given to control workers and accordingly cannot be analyzed in the preferred specification. Figure A12
                                     in the appendix shows average session attendance rates by training module.




                                The second source of evidence on the direct impacts of P.A.C.E. on the stock of soft skills is pre- and
post-module assessments built into the program. These assessments were designed to test the specific
value added from each core program module. They were only administered to program participants,
and thus we cannot compute a treatment vs. control difference, rather only a post vs. pre-module
difference for treated workers.
                                Figure 8A shows the pre-module assessments for each core P.A.C.E module. Figure 8B shows the
percent change between (identical) assessments taken pre- and post-module for each core P.A.C.E.
module. Taken together, the results from both analyses show that P.A.C.E. participants had low base-
line stocks of soft skills and improved their stocks of these skills dramatically through the training. The
changes shown in Figure 8B are all in the neighborhood of 85-110 percent, with the largest changes (in
percent terms) for Communication, Problem Solving/Decision-Making, Legal Literacy, and Execution
Excellence. The largest raw difference is in the Time and Stress Management module.
                                These results support the notion that workers absorbed the skills taught in each of the core mod-
ules, and that the stock of skills increased. We should note some caveats in interpreting these changes.
First, as described above, control workers were not given the assessments, so we are not able to es-


                                                                                                                                                                                               27
timate impacts by comparing across the treatment and control groups). Second, we are measuring
skill retention directly after module completion; this does not necessarily reflect long-term skill reten-
tion. Nevertheless, these results are consistent with our hypothesis that P.A.C.E. acted on workplace
outcomes by increasing the stock of soft skills.


6.3      Treatment Spillovers

Finally, we consider evidence on spillovers. Recall that the experiment was designed to capture
spillovers within production lines through a two-stage randomization procedure, in which lines were
first randomized to treatment or control, and then within treatment lines, workers who had enrolled in
the P.A.C.E. lottery were randomized to treatment or to the spillover group. In this section we evaluate
spillovers by comparing the outcomes of this latter group to control workers on control lines. The ex-
istence of spillovers would provide greater justification for employer investment in soft skills training.
We evaluate these hypotheses in Table 6, which presents the spillover results for workplace outcomes
of interest.21
       Panel A presents the results for person days as well as productivity. There is a weakly statisti-
cally significant impact on the binary for working during the treatment announcement period, and a
stronger result for cumulative person days during the treatment period - untrained workers who work
with treated workers work for about 8 more days during program months relative to control workers.
Productivity impacts are positive, about 70% as large as the direct treatment effects, but are not statis-
tically significant. Panel B presents the results for career advancement variables. Similar to the effect
on productivity, the spillover impacts on survey outcomes on requesting skill development training,
receiving a production incentive or self-assessment relative to co-workers are not precisely measured,
but again have coefficients of the same sign as the main treatment impacts. The worker self-assessment
relative to co-workers is positive and statistically significant at the 10% level.
       Table A8 presents the results for the non-workplace outcomes of interest for spillovers. On the
whole, estimates for non-workplace outcomes do not show a strong pattern of spillover impacts.
However, like directly trained workers, spillover workers are also more likely to be saving for their
childrens’ education and utilizing government subsidized healthcare.
       In sum, then, for workplace outcomes we see large spillover impacts on cumulative person days
accrued to the firm, and imprecisely estimated but positive effects on efficiency. We see some evidence
for spillovers on outcomes outside the workplace, but the results are imprecise in general. Overall,
the presence of spillovers suggests that knowledge transfer happened as a direct result of the program
– i.e., that program participants imbibed soft skills, which they then communicated to co-workers on
their production lines, and that transfer helped improve outcomes of non-participants, as well.


6.4      Alternative Mechanisms

Having presented evidence on the salience of direct skilling as a result of the P.A.C.E. program, we
now discuss several alternative interpretations of the results and any supporting evidence of each.
  21
     Note that probability weights, when necessary, are calculated exactly as they are in the treatment effect estimation, using
spillover treatment indicators in place of direct P.A.C.E. training.


                                                              28
                  Table 6: Spillovers on Co-Workers (Attendance, Productivity, and Career Advancement)
                                                                                 (1)                       (2)                       (3)                       (4)                                       (5)
                                                                                          Working                                  Cumulative Person Days
Panel A: Working and Production                                                                                                                                                                     Efficiency
                                                                            Attendance                Production               Attendance                Production


                        After X Spillover                                      -0.0155                   0.0363                    8.652                     8.092                                     0.0714
                                                                              (0.0206)                  (0.0438)                  (9.332)                   (7.884)                                   (0.0571)
                      During X Spillover                                       0.0252                    0.0628                   8.023**                    4.751                                    0.00591
                                                                              (0.0209)                  (0.0386)                  (3.841)                   (3.050)                                   (0.0319)
                   Announced X Spillover                                      0.0317*                                              2.151
                                                                              (0.0172)                                            (1.372)


                          Fixed Effects                                                                Unit X Month X Year, Worker                                              Unit X Month X Year, Worker X Garment

                                                                                                                                                                              Inverse Predicted Probability from Probit of
                             Weights                                                                                   None                                                   Working on Treatments X Mo-Yr X Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                                            Characteristics
                          Observations                                       1,102,880                  673,407                   562,478                   673,407                                   241,322
           Control Mean of Dependent Variable                                  0.519                     0.382                     0.390                    107.437                                    0.548


                                                                       Skill Development Production Award                    Skill Peer Self-         Co-Worker Self-
Panel B: Career Advancement
                                                                             Training       or Incentive                      Assessment               Assessment


                             Spillover                                         0.0254                    0.0204                    0.113                    0.140*
                                                                              (0.0608)                  (0.0243)                  (0.0687)                 (0.0769)


                          Fixed Effects                                                                                None

                                                                       Inverse Predicted Probability from Probit of Retention on Treatments X Mo-Yr
                             Weights
                                                                                                X Baseline Characteristics
                     Observations                                                527                       527                      527                       527
           Control Mean of Dependent Variable                                   0.244                     0.031                    5.287                     5.267

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Standard errors are clustered at the treatment line level. All regressions are for sewing department workers only as spillover sample is not defined for
non-sewing workers. Retained and working dummies and cumulative man days are defined for every worker date observation in the data and therfore regressions do not require any weighting. Observations in attendance and
advancement regressions are weighted in regressions by the inverse of the predicted probability of being retained (i.e., not yet attrited with non-missing data) in the sample that day from a probit regression of the retained
dummy on month by year FE and their interaction with individual and line treatment dummies and baseline variables reported in Table 1. Controls for survey outcome regressions in Panel B include demograhpic baseline
variables from Table 1 (i.e., dummies for education levels, dummies for deciles of age distribution, and dummies for tenure in integer years).




                                                                                                                  29
       First, we address the potential importance of reciprocity (an impulse to give back to the employer
as a result of access to the program). While it is plausible that some part of the impacts observed is
due to reciprocity, we deem it unlikely that the majority of impacts are due to this mechanism. This
is for two reasons. First, we find spillovers in treatment for the number of days worked by workers
who were signed up for the program and were on the same production line as treatment workers, but
did not receive the program. These would be difficult to explain if reciprocity were the main driving
force behind workplace impacts, since non-participants should not be driven by this motive. Second,
productivity impacts accumulate slowly during the program period and persist strongly for at least 8
months after program completion, with the largest productivity impacts occurring during this post-
training period. This does not fit well with a reciprocity motive as a primary mechanism, since we
would expect the reciprocity motive to be strongest while the program is offered and to dissipate over
time if pay does not rise commensurately with productivity as in this case. This indirect evidence is
in line with recent, more direct tests of the role of reciprocity in workplace settings (DellaVigna et al.,
2016).
       Second, we evaluate the possibility that the results for productivity and task complexity were due
to sheepskin effects, i.e., taking part in P.A.C.E. “certified” workers as high quality from the perspective
of management, and this led to the improvements in workplace outcomes we observe. We reason that
sheepskin effects are unlikely to explain the majority of the program’s impacts given the slow onset of
increased productivity over time, rather than an increase near the program’s end. Additionally, once
again spillover impacts are inconsistent with a sheepskin effect mechanism.
       Third, it is possible that workers found the classes enjoyable and they improved workers’ subjective
wellbeing, which in turn made workers more productive. The results reported in Panel D in Table 5
show that levels of psychological distress are unaffected by treatment, which contradict changes in
worker well-being and happiness being the mechanism for productivity impacts.22
       Finally, we evaluate the idea that increased social capital drives the results on workplace impacts.
The argument here is that it is possible that P.A.C.E. sessions improved the ability of workers to create
social ties, which could generate higher productivity on their production lines if it increased the extent
or intensity of social connectivity on the line. We argue that the context in which the study was run
likely precludes this from being a primary mechanism of impact. First, language-based and cultural
barriers are quite salient in the workplace in our context, likely limiting the extent of the importance
of social connectivity in productivity. Nearly half the workers in the factories under study are mi-
grants, many of whom do not speak Kannada, the indigenous language of Karnataka. Second, due
to throughput constraints which dictated the number of workers from the same production line who
could leave at the same time for a P.A.C.E. session, co-workers on the same line were placed in different
sessions conducted on different days of the week. Again, this likely limited the increase in within-line
social connectivity. These explanations do not preclude overall social ties from being impacted by the
program; they simply lower the likelihood that this channel contributed significantly to impacts on
workplace outcomes like productivity.
  22
       Results are unchanged if severe mental distress is used as an outcome instead of moderate mental distress.




                                                               30
6.5      Line-Level Productivity and Task Complexity Results

As a further test of robustness of our main results, we present regression results using daily produc-
tivity and task complexity at the production-line level instead of the individual-level.23 Results are
presented in Table A4. They are less precise since they include all workers on the line, not just treated
workers, but are very consistent with the individual-level results. The treatment effects for both ef-
ficiency and SAM are statistically significant at the 10% level after treatment. The magnitude of the
line-level treatment effect for efficiency is about 40% of the direct treatment effect, and for SAM is
about 70% the direct treatment effect. These results provide further evidence that the main results are
not driven by differential attrition rates by treatment. Furthermore, they indicate that the firm gains
not only higher individual-level productivity from training the treated workers, but that these workers
enable the entire production lines on which they produce to become more productive.


6.6      Return on investment calculations

                                                                               Figure 9: Total Program Costs Over Time
                                                         100
                        NPV of Program Cost (Thousands USD)
                        0     20     40      60    80




                                                               0                   3                   6         9         12          15      18
                                                                                                        Months Since Treatment Start

                                                                                        Trainer Salary Costs                   Lost Man Hours Costs
                                                                                        Total Costs
                                                               Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




       To quantify the total returns in terms of profit to the firm, we combine our treatment effect esti-
mates on retention (person-days) and productivity with costing data obtained from the program ad-
ministrators. We report in Table 7 calculations of the net present value of costs and benefits. Benefits
are calculated in terms of additional person days and incremental productivity from treated workers
using estimates from the randomized evaluation. Cost involve fixed and variable programmatic costs,
lost productivity due to training, and wage increases (we do not report wage as a separate category
of cost in Table 7 because these impacts were essentially negligible).24 We omit spillover impacts from
  23
       Note that these results include all workers on the production line, not just those that signed up for the program.
  24
       In addition, we implicitly assume in calculating lost productivity due to reduced person days that the rate of hiring or


                                                                                                                         31
the calculations that follow to produce conservative estimates, given that the effects on productivity
are not statistically significant.

                                                                     Figure 10: Cumulative Program Benefits Over Time


                      NPV of Program Benefits (Thousands USD)
                       0       100     200        300     400




                                                                0                   3                   6         9         12          15       18
                                                                                                         Months Since Treatment Start

                                                                                         Total Costs                              Additional Man Days
                                                                                         Additional Productivity                  Total Benefits
                                                                Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




    Table 7 first outlines costs of the program, both overhead costs and variable costs. The overhead
costs are given by the costs of hiring two full-time trainers per factory for the 12 months of the program,
additional support time from HR personnel, printed materials, food, and equipment (e.g., PA system).
The variable costs are from lost production hours, and the marginal increase in wages for treated
workers. For the 1087 treated workers, total program costs are approximately $95,000, about $57,000
of which are overhead costs, and the remainder variable costs. The time path of total costs in net
present value (NPV) is shown in Figure 9, with total costs rising linearly during the program period
and peaking at program completion.
    Details on profit margins on additional revenue both from an additional person day and additional
productivity, as well as additional revenue per garment were obtained from the firm. The benefits of
the program are generated by the higher number of cumulative person days accrued to the firm and
by higher worker productivity. At the end of the program period, the NPV of these benefits is just over
$164,000, about $52,000 of which is the result of additional person days gained during the program
and the rest due to productivity gains. At the end of our tracking period (8 months after program
completion), total benefits are substantially higher, more than $341,000. In the post-program period,
returns via productivity gains dominate, accounting for more than 70% of the total benefits. Figure 10
plots the time path of cumulative benefits to the firm. Note that these returns accrued net of attrition
worker replacement is common across treatment and control lines such that differential attrition produces truly lost person
days. This is largely true as hiring is centralized for each factory unit. Accordingly, firm management reported to us that it
is impossible for the rate of recruitment, hiring, and training to respond to differential turnover across lines within factory
unit.


                                                                                                                          32
                         Table 7: Return on Investment Calculations (Costs and Benefits to Firm)




Sewing Department Only (1087 Treated Workers)
   P.A.C.E. Training Overhead Cost (Trainers, HR Oversight, Materials, and Food for 12 Mos)                                                 ‐$57,091.68
   P.A.C.E. Training Variable Cost (Lost Garments from Lost Man Hours)                                                                      ‐$38,314.88
Total Cost (All numbers in present value)                                                                                                   ‐$95,406.56


1 Year After Program Announcement
       Additional Person Days                                                                                                               $51,804.37
       Additional Productivity                                                                                                             $112,785.00
   Net Present Value of Subtotal                                                                                                           $164,589.30
   Net Rate of Return                                                                                                                           73%



20 Mos After Program Announcement
   Additional Person Days (End of Observation)                                                                                              $68,389.79
   Additional Productivity (Garments per 8 hr day)                                                                                         $272,767.00
   Net Present Value of Subtotal                                                                                                           $341,156.80
   Net Rate of Return                                                                                                                          258%




Assumptions
   Additional Garments per Additional Man Day                                                                                                    8.2
   Additional Revenue per Garment                                                                                                              $7.00
   Labor Contribution to Cost (ʺCut to Makeʺ)                                                                                                   25%
   Profit Margin on Additional Revenue from Additional Productivity                                                                           18.75%
   Profit Margin on Additional Revenue from Additional Man Day                                                                                   5%
   Interest Rate                                                                                                                                10%
   INR per 1 USD                                                                                                                                 58

Notes: Trainer salaries were 17,000 INR per month for each trainer. There were 2 trainers for each of the 5 factories; 10 trainers in total. Additional HR personnel
time for program oversight amounted to 6,659 INR per month across all 5 factories. Materials and equipment costs amounted to 26689 INR per month across all 5
factories, and food costs amounted to 27,175 INR per month across all 5 factories. Additional garments per additional man day is calculated by dividing the
average worker level SAM (minutes to complete the operation on a single garment) by the line level SAM (minutes to complete a full garment for the line) and
multiplying by 480 minutes in a work day. All additional productivity and man days coefficients are taken from the montly impacts estimated in the main results
and appropriately scaled by the number original sample workers remaining in the factory in each month. Additional revenue per garment is taken from the
accounting department of the firm, as is the ʺCut to Makeʺ or labor percent contribution to total production cost. Profit margin on additional revenue generated
through improved efficiency is calculated as 75% of the ʺCut to Makeʺ cost as instructed by the accounting office of the firm and the profit margin on additional
revenue from an additional man day is equivalent to the average profit margin of the firm. The monthly interest rate is the average interest rate that prevailed
during the study time period. Similarly, the exchange rate is the average from the study period.




                                                                                  33
– that is, we only count person days gained and productivity increases accruing to workers who were
still present at each point in time.

                                                  Figure 11: Cumulative and Flow Return Over Time




                                                                                                                                        4
                                 250




                                                                                                                                        Monthly Flow Gain in Profits (%)
                   Return on Investment (%)




                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                      200




                                                                                                                                                      2
                   100      150




                                                                                                                                        0   1
                                 50




                                              0                 3                6         9        12        15             18
                                                                                 Months Since Treatment Start

                                                                Cumulative RoI (NPV)                         Monthly Flow Profit Gain
                                              Dashed vertical lines depict start and end of training.




    The net rate of return at the end of the program period is thus 73% (i.e., at program end, costs had
been entirely recouped by the firm, plus 73 percent additional returns). Twenty months after program
completion, flow benefits mostly from post-program productivity impacts help generate a net rate of
return of 258%. Figure 11 shows the time path of the cumulative and flow net rate of return.


7   Conclusion
In this paper we study the labor market impacts of soft skills. We combine randomized placement
into an on-the-job soft skills training program for female garment workers in India with detailed mea-
surement of productivity, retention, wages, and other workplace outcomes, to characterize the effects
ofthis training on workers as well as on the firm. We find that soft skills improvements generate large
and persistent productivity impacts, but have negligible effects on wages and turnover. These results
are consistent with theories of labor market imperfections, and suggest that the firm captures most of
the gains from the increased marginal productivity of labor.
    Growing interest in active labor market policies (Heckman et al., 1999) in low-income countries has
spurred study of the impacts of vocational training programs, which often include a soft skills training
component (Betcherman et al., 2004). In general, estimates of the labor market benefits of training
alone (as opposed to training plus asset or cash transfers) do not yield consistent evidence of impact
(McKenzie, 2017). Interventions focused on young women may be one area of exception – see, e.g.,
recent work by Buvinić and Furst-Nichols (2016) and Acevedo et al. (2017). This recent work, along


                                                                                                        34
with our findings, may pave the way for greater concentration on active labor market interventions
focused on women workers.
   Finally, our work is relevant to the literature on female labor force participation (LFP) and employ-
ment outcomes, particularly in low-income country contexts (Heath and Jayachandran, 2016). This
policy question of how to increase the LFP and career growth of women is especially salient in In-
dia, where the level of female LFP is not only unusually low considering India’s level of development
(India ranks 120th out of 131 countries in female LFP (Chatterjee et al., 2015)), but has substantially
decreased in rural areas between 1987 and 2009, despite a fertility transition and relatively robust eco-
nomic growth (Afridi et al., 2016). Studying improvements in career prospects for women, via man-
agerial training and promotion as Macchiavello et al. (2015) do, or via soft-skills training and resulting
productivity enhancements as we do, can contribute to our understanding of determinants of female
labor force participation that are amenable to policy intervention.




                                                   35
References
Acemoglu, D. (1997). Training and innovation in an imperfect labour market. The Review of Economic
  Studies, 64(3):445–464.

Acemoglu, D. and Pischke, J.-S. (1998). Why do firms train? theory and evidence. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 113(1):79–119.

Acemoglu, D. and Pischke, J.-S. (1999). Beyond becker: training in imperfect labour markets. The
  Economic Journal, 109(453):112–142.

Acevedo, P., Cruces, G., Gertler, P., and Martinez, S. (2017). Living up to expectations: How job training
  made women better off and men worse off. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Afridi, F., Dinkelman, T., and Mahajan, K. (2016). Why are fewer married women joining the work
  force in india? a decomposition analysis over two decades.

Aizer, A. and Cunha, F. (2012). The production of child human capital: Endowments, investments and
  fertility. Unpublished paper, Brown University.

Altonji, J. G. and Spletzer, J. R. (1991). Worker characteristics, job characteristics, and the receipt of
  on-the-job training. Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 45(1):58–79.

Anderson, M. L. (2008). Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early intervention: A
  reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training projects. Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, pages 1481–1495.

Ashraf, N., Low, C., and McGinn, K. (2017). Negotiating a better future: Communication skills and
  inter-generational investment in zambia. Technical report, mimeo.

Attanasio, O. P., Fernández, C., Fitzsimons, E. O., Grantham-McGregor, S. M., Meghir, C., and Rubio-
  Codina, M. (2014). Using the infrastructure of a conditional cash transfer program to deliver a
  scalable integrated early child development program in colombia: cluster randomized controlled
  trial. BMJ, 349:g5785.

Autor, D. H. (2001). Why do temporary help firms provide free general skills training? Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, pages 1409–1448.

Barrett, A. and O’Connell, P. J. (2001). Does training generally work? the returns to in-company
  training. Industrial & labor relations review, 54(3):647–662.

Barron, J. M., Berger, M. C., and Black, D. A. (1999). Do workers pay for on-the-job training? Journal of
  Human Resources, pages 235–252.

Bartel, A. P. and Sicherman, N. (1998). Technological change and the skill acquisition of young workers.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 16(4):718–55.



                                                     36
Bassanini, A., Booth, A., Brunello, G., De Paola, M., Leuven, E., et al. (2007). Workplace training in
  europe. Education and Training in Europe.

Bassi, V., Nansamba, A., and Liberia, B. (2017). Information frictions in the labor market: Evidence
  from a field experiment in uganda. Technical report, mimeo.

Becker, G. S. (1964). Human capital.

Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
  approach to multiple testing. Journal of the royal statistical society. Series B (Methodological), pages
  289–300.

Betcherman, G., Dar, A., and Olivas, K. (2004). Impacts of active labor market programs: New evidence
  from evaluations with particular attention to developing and transition countries. Social Protection, World
  Bank.

Blundell, R., Dearden, L., Meghir, C., and Sianesi, B. (1999). Human capital investment: the returns
  from education and training to the individual, the firm and the economy. Fiscal studies, 20(1):1–23.

Borghans, L., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., and Ter Weel, B. (2008). The economics and psychology
  of personality traits. Journal of human Resources, 43(4):972–1059.

Buvinić, M. and Furst-Nichols, R. (2016). Promoting women’s economic empowerment: what works?
  The World Bank Research Observer, 31(1):59–101.

Campos, F., Frese, M., Goldstein, M., Iacovone, L., Johnson, H. C., McKenzie, D., and Mensmann,
  M. (2017). Teaching personal initiative beats traditional training in boosting small business in west
  africa. Science, 357(6357):1287–1290.

Chang, C. and Wang, Y. (1996). Human capital investment under asymmetric information: The pigo-
  vian conjecture revisited. Journal of Labor Economics, pages 505–519.

Chatterjee, U., Murgai, R., and Rama, M. (2015). Job opportunities along the rural-urban gradation
  and female labor force participation in india. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (7412).

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., and Schennach, S. M. (2010). Estimating the technology of cognitive and
  noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica, 78(3):883–931.

Cunningham, W. V. and Villaseñor, P. (2016). Employer voices, employer demands, and implications
  for public skills development policy connecting the labor and education sectors. The World Bank
  Research Observer, 31(1):102–134.

Dearden, L., Reed, H., and Van Reenen, J. (2006). The impact of training on productivity and wages:
  Evidence from british panel data. Oxford bulletin of economics and statistics, 68(4):397–421.

DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., Malmendier, U., and Rao, G. (2016). Estimating social preferences and gift
  exchange at work. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                     37
Deming, D. J. (2015). The growing importance of social skills in the labor market. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gertler, P., Heckman, J., Pinto, R., Zanolini, A., Vermeersch, C., Walker, S., Chang, S. M., and Grantham-
  McGregor, S. (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation intervention in jamaica.
  Science, 344(6187):998–1001.

Goux, D. and Maurin, E. (2000). Returns to firm-provided training: evidence from french worker–firm
  matched data. Labour economics, 7(1):1–19.

Grantham-McGregor, S. M., Powell, C. A., Walker, S. P., and Himes, J. H. (1991). Nutritional sup-
  plementation, psychosocial stimulation, and mental development of stunted children: the jamaican
  study. The Lancet, 338(8758):1–5.

Groh, M., Krishnan, N., McKenzie, D. J., and Vishwanath, T. (2012). Soft skills or hard cash? the
  impact of training and wage subsidy programs on female youth employment in jordan. The Impact
  of Training and Wage Subsidy Programs on Female Youth Employment in Jordan (July 1, 2012). World Bank
  Policy Research Working Paper, (6141).

Groh, M., McKenzie, D., and Vishwanath, T. (2015). Reducing information asymmetries in the youth
  labor market of jordan with psychometrics and skill based tests. The World Bank Economic Review,
  29(suppl 1):S106–S117.

Guerra, N., Modecki, K., and Cunningham, W. (2014). Developing social-emotional skills for the labor
  market: The practice model. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (7123).

Heath, R. and Jayachandran, S. (2016). The causes and consequences of increased female education and
  labor force participation in developing countries. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Heckman, J. J. and Kautz, T. (2012). Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour economics, 19(4):451–464.

Heckman, J. J., LaLonde, R. J., and Smith, J. A. (1999). The economics and econometrics of active labor
  market programs. Handbook of labor economics, 3:1865–2097.

Heckman, J. J. and Mosso, S. (2014). The economics of human development and social mobility. Tech-
  nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Heckman, J. J., Stixrud, J., and Urzua, S. (2006). The effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on
  labor market outcomes and social behavior. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ibarrarán, P., Kluve, J., Ripani, L., and Rosas, D. (2015). Experimental evidence on the long-term
  impacts of a youth training program.

Katz, E. and Ziderman, A. (1990). Investment in general training: The role of information and labour
  mobility. The economic journal, 100(403):1147–1158.



                                                   38
Kessler, R. C., Barker, P. R., Colpe, L. J., Epstein, J. F., Gfroerer, J. C., Hiripi, E., Howes, M. J., Normand,
  S.-L. T., Manderscheid, R. W., Walters, E. E., et al. (2003). Screening for serious mental illness in the
  general population. Archives of general psychiatry, 60(2):184–189.

Konings, J. and Vanormelingen, S. (2015). The impact of training on productivity and wages: firm-level
  evidence. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2):485–497.

Leuven, E. and Oosterbeek, H. (2008). An alternative approach to estimate the wage returns to private-
  sector training. Journal of applied econometrics, 23(4):423–434.

Macchiavello, R., Menzel, A., Rabbani, A., Woodruff, C., et al. (2015). Challenges of change: An exper-
  iment training women to manage in the bangladeshi garment sector. Technical report, University of
  Warwick, Department of Economics.

McKenzie, D. (2017). How effective are active labor market policies in developing countries? a critical
  review of recent evidence. The World Bank Research Observer, 32(2):127–154.

Menzel, A. (2015). Organizational learning: Experimental evidence from bangladeshi garment facto-
  ries.

Mincer, J. (1962). On-the-job training: Costs, returns, and some implications. The Journal of Political
  Economy, pages 50–79.

Montalvao, J., Frese, M., Goldstein, M. P., and Kilic, T. (2017). Soft skills for hard constraints: evidence
  from high-achieving female farmers.

Myer, L., Stein, D. J., Grimsrud, A., Seedat, S., and Williams, D. R. (2008). Social determinants of
  psychological distress in a nationally-representative sample of south african adults. Social science &
  medicine, 66(8):1828–1840.

Ng, J. (2013). Elicited risk and time preferences: the role of demographics, cognition, and interviewers.
  University of Southern California Job Market Paper.

Schoar, A. (2014). The importance of being nice: Supervisory skill training in the cambodian garment
  industry. Technical report, working paper.

Staritz, C. (2010). Making the Cut?: Low-income Countries and the Global Clothing Value Chain in a Post-
  quota and Post-crisis World. World Bank Publications.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press.

World Bank, D. P. G. (2012). World Development Indicators 2012. World Bank Publications.




                                                      39
