                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                EVIDENCE OF DECREASING INTERNET ENTROPY:
THE LACK OF REDUNDANCY IN DNS RESOLUTION BY MAJOR WEBSITES AND SERVICES

                                           Samantha Bates
                                            John Bowers
                                          Shane Greenstein
                                          Jordi Weinstock
                                             Yunhan Xu
                                          Jonathan Zittrain

                                         Working Paper 24317
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24317


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                             February 2018, Revised March 2018




  The authors would like to thank Hans Christian Gregersen and Matt Phillips for their work in
  preparing early versions of our dataset. The authors would also like to thank David Dinin and
  Andy Ellis for lending us their expertise in DNS and other technical matters. The views expressed
  herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

  At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
  research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24317.ack

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2018 by Samantha Bates, John Bowers, Shane Greenstein, Jordi Weinstock, Yunhan Xu, and
  Jonathan Zittrain. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
  be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
  source.
Evidence of Decreasing Internet Entropy: The Lack of Redundancy in DNS Resolution by
Major Websites and Services
Samantha Bates, John Bowers, Shane Greenstein, Jordi Weinstock, Yunhan Xu, and Jonathan
Zittrain
NBER Working Paper No. 24317
February 2018, Revised March 2018
JEL No. L2,L22,L86

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the extent to which the Internet’s global domain name resolution (DNS)
system has preserved its distributed resilience given the rise of cloud-based hosting and
infrastructure. We explore trends in the concentration of the DNS space since at least 2011. In
addition, we examine changes in domains’ tendency to “diversify” their pool of nameservers –
how frequently domains employ DNS management services from multiple providers rather than
just one provider – a comparatively costless and therefore puzzlingly rare decision that could
supply redundancy and resilience in the event of an attack or service outage affecting one
provider.

Samantha Bates                                 Jordi Weinstock
Harvard Law School                             Harvard Law School
Cambridge MA 02138                             Cambridge MA 02138
sbates@law.harvard.edu                         jweinstock@law.harvard.edu

John Bowers                                    Yunhan Xu
Harvard Law School                             Harvard Law School
Cambridge MA 02138                             Cambridge MA 02138
johnbowers@college.harvard.edu                 yunhanx@gmail.com

Shane Greenstein                               Jonathan Zittrain
Technology Operation and Management            Berkman Klein Center for Internet
Morgan Hall 439                                and Society, and
Harvard Business School                        Harvard School of Engineering
Soldiers Field                                 and Applied Sciences Cambridge MA 02138
Boston, MA 02163                               a2jz@law.harvard.edu
and NBER
sgreenstein@hbs.edu
                                                                                                                         1




Evidence of Decreasing Internet Entropy: ​The Lack of Redundancy in DNS
Resolution by Major Websites and Services.

Samantha Bates, John Bowers, Shane Greenstein, Jordi Weinstock, Yunhan Xu, and
Jonathan Zittrain1

Abstract

This paper analyzes the extent to which the Internet’s global domain name resolution (DNS) system has
preserved its distributed resilience given the rise of cloud-based hosting and infrastructure. We explore trends
in the concentration of the DNS space since at least 2011. In addition, we examine changes in domains’
tendency to “diversify” their pool of nameservers -- how frequently domains employ DNS management
services from multiple providers rather than just one provider -- a comparatively costless and therefore
puzzlingly rare decision that could supply redundancy and resilience in the event of an attack or service
outage affecting one provider.


Introduction

On October 21, 2016, it appeared to many worldwide Internet users that the network had broken. For
example, many in North America or Europe that day trying to access major websites such as Netflix, CNBC,
and Twitter, received only blank screens or error messages. The cause was a distributed denial of service
(DDoS) attack on Dyn, a major domain name system service provider. Dyn reported that its servers were
overwhelmed by a flood of requests from a botnet of “Internet of Things” (IoT) devices infected by Mirai
malware.2

As a DNS provider that might be selected by a website, Dyn enables Internet traffic by translating the site’s
domain name (URL) into the IP address where the server behind that domain is to be found. During the
attack, Dyn servers were unable to process users’ translation requests (both legitimate and illegitimate), and as
a result, users lost access to web domains contracting with Dyn such as Netflix, CNBC, and Twitter.3 While it
is impossible to calculate the economic cost of such an attack, Dyn itself claims that “[t]he cost of a DDoS


1
  ​The authors would like to thank Hans Christian Gregersen and Matt Phillips for their work in preparing early versions of
our dataset. The authors would also like to thank David Dinin and Andy Ellis for lending us their expertise in DNS and
other technical matters.
2
  Scott Hilton, “Dyn Analysis Summary of Friday October 21 Attack” (October 26, 2016)
http://dyn.com/blog/dyn-analysis-summary-of-friday-october-21-attack/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/YW5C-MDEV
3
  Lily Hay Newman, “What We Know About Friday’s Massive East Coast Internet Outage,” ​Wired ​(October 21, 2016)
https://www.wired.com/2016/10/Internet-outage-ddos-dns-dyn/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/3BU2-6F4K
                                                                                                                               2



attack can quickly reach up to million dollars an hour in lost revenue and productivity for the average size
company.”4

The Dyn attack illustrates how fragile the Internet can be when malicious actors know how to exploit its
vulnerabilities. The “entropy” of the Internet – the fact that it comprises many servers, and they are
traditionally found in a variety of physical and logical locations – makes it more resilient to random errors, but
it remains vulnerable to targeted attacks against infrastructural components that have become centralized
either by design or by practice.5 The attack raises the questions of how necessary any existing centralization
may be; what the trade-offs are of seeking to decentralize it; and what baseline changes in entropy have
occurred over the years. This study hazards answers to each of these questions.

We find an increasing concentration of DNS services in a small number of dominant cloud services
companies. Coupled with domains’ apparent tendency not to employ DNS services from multiple DNS
providers, this concentration could pose a fundamental threat to the distributed resilience of the Internet.
Our results also suggest ways to mitigate these issues.




What is DNS?
DNS servers perform a variety of functions that make them an integral part of the Internet’s infrastructure.
This paper will focus primarily on DNS’s role as a “website directory” or authoritative resolver which
translates a website’s human-friendly domain name (ex. ​www.example.com​) into a machine-friendly IP
address (ex. 192.0.2.1) pointing to the location of the website’s host on the Internet. The information needed
to complete these translations is stored in definitive form by a domain’s “authoritative nameservers” in files
called “resource records” (RRs).6

DNS is structured as a hierarchically distributed database. At the very top of the hierarchy are 13 “root”
servers.7 Administered by a range of organizations including governments and branches of the US military,
these root servers are responsible for storing RRs corresponding to Top-Level Domain (TLD) nameservers.
A vast range of TLDs (including “.com,” “.net,” “.org,” and country-level identifiers such as “.uk” or “.fr”)
can be found at the rightmost end of the URL addresses we use every day. Each TLD nameserver – or
network thereof – is responsible for keeping RRs corresponding to the authoritative nameservers8 of domains


4
  ​https://dyn.com/ddos/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/94ED-SZ9D
5
   ​Réka Albert, Hawoong Jeong, and Albert-László Barabási, “Error and attack tolerance of complex networks” Nature 406,
378-382 (July 27, 2000) h  ​ ttp://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v406/n6794/full/406378a0.html​.
6
   There are many different types of resource records, but for the sake of simplicity we do not distinguish between them.
You can see the full list of RR types here: ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_DNS_record_types​ (Archived at
https://perma.cc/3AQL-NFZ2​).
7
   More accurately, 13 networks of root servers with internal redundancy.
8
   In practice, there can be additional non-authoritative nameservers between the TLD nameserver and the domain’s
authoritative nameserver. In such cases, the hierarchy is simply extended accordingly. For example, when requesting the IP
address of ​https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/​, the resolver may be directed to the nameservers for ‘uk’, ‘ac’ and ‘ox’ before it reaches
the domain’s authoritative nameserver.
                                                                                                               3



that fall within that TLD.9 For example, the “.com” nameservers keep RRs for the authoritative nameservers
for domain namespace encompassing domain names such as “​www.google.com​” and “​www.amazon.com​.”
Authoritative nameservers for a given domain namespace can be administered by that domain’s owners, or
management can be outsourced to one or more external providers such as Dyn, AWS, or Cloudflare. They
form the last stage in the DNS hierarchy, storing RRs that provide translations between domain names and IP
addresses.




                                                            Figure 1


Tracing a DNS Request
To understand how the DDoS attack on Dyn interfered with this process, let’s trace through the steps of a
DNS lookup. When an application (such as a web browser) wants to access a page or resource located at a
known domain name, it can leverage the DNS system to find a corresponding IP address. In principle, the
application submits a request to a DNS “resolver” asking for the IP address corresponding to a given domain
name, specified in URL format (ex. “​www.google.com​”). The resolver traces through this URL’s
period-separated components from right to left in order to zero in on the desired authoritative nameserver.

The resolver first queries a root nameserver, which replies with RRs corresponding to the TLD nameserver
specified by the domain name (ex. “.com”). The resolver then queries that specified TLD nameserver with
the second component of the domain name (ex. “google”). The TLD nameserver retrieves the RRs
corresponding to that domain’s authoritative nameservers (ex. “ns1.google.com”) and returns them to the
resolver. Finally, the resolver queries one of the authoritative nameservers and receives a usable IP address for


9
    These sets of RRs corresponding to a particular domain are often referred to as “NS records.”
                                                                                                                      4



the domain. The IP address is passed back to the original application, which can use it to connect to the
desired host. This entire process generally takes just milliseconds to finish.




                                                        Figure 2

If every DNS request passed through all of these intermediary stages, the DNS infrastructure would face a
constant and potentially overwhelming deluge of traffic. Luckily, RRs are cached at numerous points in the
lookup process. Applications and Internet-connected devices maintain small caches of RRs for recently
visited sites, as do Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and other intermediate nameservers. Of course, the
content of these records can become inaccurate over time as IPs change. As such, RRs eventually expire.
Most RRs must be replaced after twenty-four hours, though many larger sites implement much shorter
expiration periods.10 The duration for which nameservers are allowed to cache a RR without updating it is
that RR’s ‘time to live’ (TTL). An RR with a short TTL will have to be updated more often, but it is also
more likely to remain accurate.11

If the authoritative nameserver corresponding to a particular domain name goes down (as many of those
administered by Dyn did in the October DDoS attack), DNS resolvers become unable to update RRs that

10
   For example, the dig command, a tool for querying DNS servers (see ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dig_(command)
[Archived at ​https://perma.cc/JT2H-XE6M​]), reveals that the RRs for www.spotify.com had a TTL of 150 seconds as of
July 12th, 2017. View what a dig command looks like here: ​https://www.madboa.com/geek/dig/​ (Archived at
https://perma.cc/W56E-KGYT​)
11
   Liu and Albitz, ​DNS and BIND​, chapter 2, section 7, “Caching.” See also Liu and Albitz, ​DNS and BIND​, chapter 8,
section 4, “Changing TTLs.”
                                                                                                                      5



have expired or changed. In the event of a DNS failure IP addresses may still resolve to the correct host, but
it is very unlikely that any user will know the exact current IP addresses of the websites they want to access.
As such, a DNS malfunction effectively prevents users from accessing the content they have requested even
if that content is hosted on an otherwise healthy server.




                                                         Figure 3



DNS: Designed for Resilience?
As is evident from the hierarchical architecture outlined above, the global Domain Name System (DNS)
infrastructure is distributed by design.12 Rather than being handled by a single master server mapping domain
names to IP addresses, DNS lookups rely on interactions among millions of different servers worldwide. This
distributed model theoretically brings a degree of segmentation and redundancy to the DNS system,
minimizing “single points of failure” at which technical breakdowns result in access problems for significant
swaths of the Internet.13

However, the rise of cloud-based hosting and domain management services threatens to overturn this
distributed model of resilience. Companies such as Amazon Web Services14, Akamai15, and Dyn16 offer
scalable and often easily configurable external DNS hosting options alongside other cloud services, making it
easier than ever to offload DNS management. External DNS hosting can offer significant advantages in
terms of load balancing, reliability, and geographic reach. Dyn’s DNS service boasts points of presence on

12
    ​https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/classes/wi01/cse222/papers/mockapetris-dns-sigcomm88.pdf​ (Archived at
https://perma.cc/L46L-LG4W​)
13
     ​http://www.bau.edu.jo/UserPortal/UserProfile/PostsAttach/10617_1870_1.pdf
14
      ​https://aws.amazon.com/route53/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/K7YT-PVVM
15
       ​https://www.akamai.com/us/en/products/cloud-security/fast-dns.jsp​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/9YKJ-FQL8
16
   ​https://dyn.com/dns/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/94ED-SZ9D
                                                                                                                               6



five continents, a team of dedicated security experts, an enormous performance analytics engine, and a
multitude of load balancing and traffic steering features.17

Alongside these advantages, however, the consolidation of DNS services for a vast range of web domains
into the hands of a relatively small number of providers could potentially pose a threat to the stability of the
Internet. With consolidation comes single points of failure that create opportunities for simultaneous
downtime. As in the case of the Dyn attack, the reachability of many domains can easily hinge on the
resilience and stability of a single monolithic provider. Moreover, if the DNS market moves towards an
oligopolistic or monopolistic structure, the lack of competition among DNS providers may decrease the
diversity of providers available to consumers. Such a market shift could push consolidation even further while
stifling consumer-friendly business practices and making DNS servers even more attractive targets to
malicious actors.

The fact that externally hosted DNS providers offer high quality service while concentrating the DNS space
presents an important tradeoff between two different patterns of downtime. On one hand, having a relatively
small number of large externally hosted DNS providers with significant market share generates single points
of failure which expose large segments of the Internet to simultaneous downtime. On the other, externally
hosted DNS providers are – as mentioned above – generally very successful in maintaining almost perfect
uptime while provisioning a range of sophisticated additional services that can substantially improve DNS
performance. A tradeoff thus emerges between occasional periods of widespread downtime​ ​and potentially
more frequent but highly distributed patterns of DNS downtime for individual sites or smaller
externally-hosted DNS providers.

The Stakes of DNS Resilience
The Dyn attack provides a vivid illustration of how DNS infrastructure vulnerabilities – and DNS space
concentration – can wreak havoc on the stability of the Internet. Prompting a widespread Internet outage that
left many high-profile websites inaccessible for a period of hours,18 the attack’s devastating success highlights
many of the ways in which a concentrated DNS space with relatively little provider diversification on the part
of domain administrators can leave even large firms vulnerable to service disruptions.

Why, though, does DNS downtime matter? Is it really a big deal if a swath of the Internet becomes
inaccessible for a few hours every once in awhile? In short, yes. Even brief periods of downtime can have a
dramatic impact on the economic well-being of affected Internet companies. A 2014 survey19 of 270 North
American companies with a significant web presence found that about 50% of DDoS attacks cost their
targets more than $20,000 an hour, with 49% of attacks lasting between six and twenty-four hours. Some


17
   ​https://dyn.com/dns/managed-dns/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/BUU6-BSAK​. In addition to translating domain
names into IP addresses, DNS servers can also be used to direct and balance Internet traffic so that no individual server is
burdened by too many requests. These types of functions are called load balancing and traffic steering. For the purposes
of this paper we investigate the impact of concentration only on DNS’s role as a “website directory.” See Liu and Albitz,
DNS and BIND​, chapter 10, section 7, “Round-Robin Load Distribution.”
18
    https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/22/business/Internet-problems-attack.html
19
    ​https://lp.incapsula.com/rs/incapsulainc/images/eBook%20-%20DDoS%20Impact%20Survey.pdf​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/9RDY-FR8R
                                                                                                                         7



larger companies can suffer more than $100,000 an hour in IT, security, and sales related damages. About
87% of companies that had been targeted by a DDoS attack reported “at least one non-financial consequence
such as loss of customer trust, loss of intellectual property, and virus/malware infection.”20

DNS downtime has a range of other less explicitly economic impacts on a company’s web presence. Search
engines use web crawlers, automated scripts that can be used to copy visited websites or search for specific
information, to index pages and determine search result presentation precedence.21 If a site is unreachable
during a crawl due to DNS downtime, the crawler will mark it as having been “uncrawlable” at the time of
attempted access – a designation with potentially devastating consequences for a site’s visibility.22
Furthermore, since DNS is involved in handling services such as a domain’s email functionality, DNS
downtime can cripple communications within and between companies.

The DNS infrastructure will face more pressure from malicious actors in the coming years, not less. An
annual report23 published by the cybersecurity company Nexusguard found that in Q1 2017 the number of
DNS attacks they observed “registered a 380% year-on-year growth, suggesting that DDoS attacks occurred
more frequently than the same period a year ago.”24 The report partially attributes the proliferation of massive
DDoS-capable botnets to the rise of the so-called “Internet of Things,” which continues to bring an
enormous number of often poorly secured web-connected devices online. The “Mirai” botnet which brought
Dyn to its knees is only one example of such a weapon. As more and more devices are added to the global
network – with billions projected to be added each year25 – the number and power of botnets will almost
certainly increase. DNS resilience is not simply about protecting against today’s DDoS attacks – it is also
about anticipating and preparing for tomorrow’s.

Of course, it doesn’t always take hundreds of thousands of unsecured webcams and Internet-connected
toasters or other IoT devices to bring down a cloud services behemoth. In the course of routine maintenance
in early 2017, a tech at Amazon accidentally caused a number of Amazon web servers to go offline. The
server failure impacted services like Slack, Quora, and Medium that rely on Amazon cloud storage.26

20
   ​https://lp.incapsula.com/rs/incapsulainc/images/eBook%20-%20DDoS%20Impact%20Survey.pdf​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/9RDY-FR8R
21
    ​Web crawlers are automated scripts or programs that search the web for specific information (usually for indexing
purposes) in a systematic way. See ​https://www.sciencedaily.com/terms/web_crawler.htm​ (Archived at
https://perma.cc/UF2E-3W7B?type=image​) and ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_crawler​ (Archived at
https://perma.cc/B66K-2JDK​).
22
     ​ ttps://www.dosarrest.com/ddos-blog/how-ddos-attacks-can-impact-your-seo/​. Archived at
      h
https://perma.cc/E6G5-8KNQ
23
    ​https://www.nexusguard.com/hubfs/Nexusguard_DDoS_Threat_Report_Q1_2017_EN.pdf​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/2KW5-KU75
24
     ​https://www.nexusguard.com/hubfs/Nexusguard_DDoS_Threat_Report_Q1_2017_EN.pdf​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/2KW5-KU75
25
  http://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/telecom/Internet/popular-Internet-of-things-forecast-of-50-billion-devices-by-202
0-is-outdated​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/JA6K-XH72
26
   ​Jon Fingas, “Amazon outage breaks large parts of the Internet” ​Engadget​ (February 28, 2017)
https://www.engadget.com/2017/02/28/amazon-aws-outage/​ (Archived at ​https://perma.cc/BZ79-8689​) and
Timothy J. Seppala, “Amazon admits that a typo took the Internet down this week” Engadget (March 2, 2017)
https://www.engadget.com/2017/03/02/amazon-admits-that-a-typo-took-the-Internet-down-this-week/​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/K3SZ-B9JA​.
                                                                                                                  8



Amusingly, the AWS status page failed to properly reflect the outage due to hard dependencies on the service
that it was designed to monitor.27 With consolidation comes the risk that simple mistakes on the part of
engineers and administrators will cascade into widespread outages.



Methodology
To analyze trends in the concentration and diversification of the DNS space over time, we sampled the top
1000 U.S. domains in the “.com,” “.net,” or “.org” Top-Level Domains (TLDs) according to Alexa Top Sites
28
   listings on a monthly basis between November 2011 and May 2017. We recognize that our results could
change if we included domains from other regions, such as “.cn” and “.ru,” in our dataset. However, we
chose to focus on traditional domains, “.com,” “.net,” and “.org” because they are among the longest
standing top level domains and comparatively represent a broad spectrum of the Internet. Due to our
sampling method, the set of domains examined each month varied depending on the composition of the
Alexa rankings.29 This sampling methodology is also approximate because our dataset is missing about 3.5%
of rankings per month. The motivation for this approach is drawn from the use of market indexes in
economics – indexes such as the S&P50030 are composed to reflect the performance and behavior of a
broader market. It is important to note that DNS providers’ market share in this sample does not reflect that
of the broader Internet – our focus is on high-traffic domains which are far less likely to use low-end market
oriented providers such as GoDaddy DNS.31




27
   ​https://twitter.com/awscloud/status/836656664635846656?lang=en​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/5RD5-D97B
28
    ​http://www.alexa.com/topsites​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/644F-6NGN
29
     ​ lexa Top Sites data has some deficiencies, but was the best available dataset for our study. One drawback
      A
of the dataset is that Alexa’s ranking algorithm is not transparent. See
https://support.alexa.com/hc/en-us/articles/200449744-How-are-Alexa-s-traffic-rankings-determined​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/CF9U-Z9F8​. ​ However, it should be noted that other ranking companies also prefer to keep
their ranking algorithms secret and it is often not possible to obtain verified data from any of these
companies. Moreover, the top ranked sites identified by Alexa, Quantcast, Comscore, and other ranking
companies are comparable, confirming that our dataset of top ranked sites is accurate. While there may be
minor differences among rankings depending on the company, these differences tend to occur at the extreme
end of samples (ranks beyond 700 to 8,000). Finally, as these discrepancies are random, they are immaterial
from a statistical standpoint.
30
   ​http://www.indexologyblog.com/2013/07/09/inside-the-sp-500-selecting-stocks/​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/HS8A-W273
31
    ​https://www.datanyze.com/market-share/dns/
                                                                                                                 9




                         Figure 4: Original top 1000 domains in the top 1000 sites (ranked by Alexa) over time

It is also challenging to determine the importance and representativeness of a domain because it is not as easy
to quantitatively model as that of a publicly traded entity. While the contributions of members of a
conventional stock market index might be weighted using relatively straightforward and publicly available
metrics such as market capitalization, weighting domains is not nearly so simple. Even seemingly basic
metrics such as page views per month are very difficult to estimate accurately without insider analytics.32, 33
However, despite these challenges, we believe that our data are representative of most high-traffic Internet
sites within the TLDs examined. Given that “eyeball share” on the Internet is highly concentrated within a
relatively small set of sites, sampling 1000 of the most active sites on the Internet every month captures a
sample which represents a large proportion of all Internet behavior in the U.S..

We collected historical nameserver information for each of the domains identified in our dataset using an API
offered by CompleteDNS. These data record changes in each domain’s nameserver registration on a monthly
basis, allowing us to identify migrations to and away from external DNS providers or self-hosted DNS
solutions. We cross-checked our historical nameserver information against a number of comparable providers
and found no evident discrepancies or errors. We were not concerned with how much of a domain’s DNS
traffic was routed through a given nameserver. Rather, we looked at the number of distinct authoritative
nameservers registered by a domain and which providers managed those nameservers. By combining our
monthly sample of domains with these historical nameserver data, we were able to generate a
month-by-month timeline of nameserver configurations for our sample.


32
   ​https://moz.com/rand/traffic-prediction-accuracy-12-metrics-compete-alexa-similarweb/​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/32SC-MBEU​.
33
    ​https://www.screamingfrog.co.uk/how-accurate-are-website-traffic-estimators/​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/24VC-WU52​.
                                                                                                                           10




Concentration of the DNS Space
The extent to which a space of providers delivering vital services is concentrated has major implications for
that space’s vulnerability to catastrophic wide-ranging failure. If a large proportion of share in the space is
divided among a small number of providers, outages affecting any one of those providers may have dramatic
repercussions for the space as a whole. In other words, high-share providers have the potential to become
single points of failure for large segments of the Internet. In examining the concentration of the DNS space,
we aimed to shed light on the extent to which it falls prey to these vulnerabilities.

DNS as a Space
Our sampling methodology defines a set of high-traffic domains under the “.com,” “.net,” and “.org” TLDs.
Within this set we can observe, using the methodology outlined above, continuities and changes in the DNS
nameservers that domains identify, domains’ DNS usage, and how domains adjust their DNS architectures, as
well as the behaviors of new entrants into the sample. Each domain in our sample uses one or more DNS
providers. Some domains host and manage their own DNS nameservers, in which case they are their own
DNS provider. Others rely entirely on external providers such as Dyn, Amazon Web Services (AWS), and
Akamai. At any given time, a domain may have multiple nameservers (generally 2-8) managed by a
combination of providers or by a single provider.

We define the DNS space as the set of providers – including external DNS providers like Dyn, Akamai, and
AWS, and others, as well as “self-hosting” domains – handling DNS for our sample of domains. A provider’s
share of the space is defined as the number of domains in the sample for which that provider handles at least
one nameserver. The total size of the space is defined as the number of domains or “fractional domains”34
administered by each provider summed across all providers present in the sample.

Concentration of the DNS Space as a Whole
To quantitatively model the concentration of the DNS space over time we adopted a metric from the
antitrust economics literature: the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI). A standard measure of market
concentration used by the Department of Justice, Federal Trade Commission, and Census bureau, the HHI is
defined as the sum of squared market shares across all firms in a market.35 It ranges from 0 (for a perfectly
distributed market) to 10,000 (a perfectly concentrated market). More formally:
                                                                 N
                                                  H HI = ∑ si2
                                                                i=1
Where N is the number of firms (DNS providers in our case) and si is the share for the ​i​-th firm.



34
  In cases where a domain’s DNS services is diversified among multiple providers, share is divided evenly among all
providers used. For example, a domain managed by two providers would contribute 0.5 share to each. In economics,
share in these cases is generally divided according to proportions of sales – a comparable division metric unfortunately
does not exist in this case.
35
   ​http://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/fedred79&div=37&id=&page=​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/6G9J-5KKN​.
                                                                                                                                11



The HHI is generally used to measure market share in terms of revenues collected by suppliers; however, that
is not the case here. Because we are limited by the information that is publicly available (we do not have
access to the pricing of services or the revenues collected by the suppliers in this market), the HHI in this
paper measures market share based on supplier choice without accounting for revenue. Applying the HHI to
our dataset revealed a considerable degree of consolidation within the DNS space between November 2011
and May 2017.




                                         Figure 5: HHI of DNS providers in our dataset by year

As is apparent from figure 5 (pictured above), the HHI increased by a factor of about ​6.9 over the observed
timespan.36 This indicates that a number of DNS service providers managed to significantly increase their
proportional share of the DNS space in that timeframe, beginning to consolidate control of DNS services. The
linearity of the trend is striking – gains in concentration have been relatively consistent in the long run despite
yearly fluctuations.

To better understand the nature of this share capture, we looked at the percentage of share belonging to the top
provider, top 4 providers, and top 8 providers in the DNS space over time (note that top providers occasionally
changed on a month by month basis). As is reflected in figure 6 below, a small number of providers have come to
largely dominate the DNS space. The percentage of share held by the top 8 providers more than doubled between
November 2011 and May 2017, increasing from about ​24%​ to about ​59%.​ The percentage of share held by the top
4 providers grew by an even greater proportion, increasing from about ​17% ​to about ​49.8%. The top provider in
the sample controlled 4.9% of share in November 2011 and 17.3% of share in May 2017.



36
   ​In recognition of the fact that a disproportionate volume of internet activity is dominated by a few major websites
– Google, Facebook, Youtube, etc. – we recalculated the HHI using a weighting scheme so as to represent the outsized
influence of these top websites. All domains’ share in the sample were weighted by a factor of ​w(R) = e-2.6545
                                                                                                          ​     - ​ln(R)​
                                                                                                                          (where ​R
is the domain’s Alexa rank), a function derived from the regression of a domains’ share of global traffic on its Alexa rank
presented by Shiller et al. (DOI:10.3386/w23058). This weighting scheme had pronounced effects on the HHI: it grew
from 795 in November 2011 to 964 in May 2017, experiencing frequent fluctuations due to small changes in the
ordering of the top few sites. Dropping the top 5 domains from the dataset after weighting caused the HHI to grow
from 262 in November 2011 to 566 in May 2017, and dropping the top 25 domains caused the HHI to grow from 138
in November 2011 to 619 in May 2017, much more in line with the unweighted trend illustrated above.
                                                                                                           12




                           Figure 6: Percentage of the DNS market controlled by the top DNS providers

An analysis of share over time for several of these top providers offers further insight into changes in the
DNS space. The figure below shows change in market share over time for all providers that were in the top 3
(ranked by market share) at any point in the sample timeline. Note that a number of rapidly expanding
providers including Dyn, Akamai, AWS, and Cloudflare have captured a large proportion of the DNS space
while other players such as Neustar and DNSPod have retained significant share over time. The massive
expansion of AWS and Cloudflare (which collectively handle about a third of the entire space) is particularly
striking, signalling the increasing influence of multi-service cloud-based platforms in the DNS space.




                                        Figure 7: Market share of the top DNS providers

Breaking the space down into “original” domains (those that were present in the November 2011 sample) and
“entrant” domains (those that were not) reveals a marked difference in the DNS hosting preferences of long
                                                                                                          13



established domains and more recent ones. Entrant domains tended to use CloudFlare and AWS at much
higher rates than original domains and used Akamai, Dyn, and Neustar relatively less than original domains.
Cost may be one determinant of this divide – Akamai, for example, offers very expensive high performance
DNS and hosting services that newer domain owners might be unable to afford. It is also worth noting that
domains often use these providers for more than just DNS, as many also offer services including Content
Delivery Network (CDN) assistance and site hosting.




                               ​ igure 8: Original and entrant domain DNS provider preferences
                                F
The entrant domain space was also more concentrated than the original domain space, with a May 2017 HHI
value of over 1100 as opposed to about 600 for the original domain space. This signals that newer domains
which have broken into the high-traffic sphere may be relying more and more on a specific set of external
DNS hosts.




                                Figure 9: The HHI of original and entrant domains over time
                                                                                                                                14




Concentration of Self-Hosted vs. Externally Hosted DNS
While the HHI gives us a means of conceptualizing the DNS space in terms of existing market analysis
frameworks, DNS is distinct from most conventional markets in that many domains choose to host and
administer their own DNS nameservers rather than use external hosting providers such as Dyn or Cloudflare.
Companies that host their own DNS nameservers may maintain a server on their property or host their
nameservers with a service like Rackspace under their own names and remain responsible for managing it. By
differentiating external hosting providers from self-hosting providers – domains administering their own
DNS nameservers – we can both identify trends in the frequency of self-hosting and analyze the external
hosting market independently.

Our analysis of self-hosting and external hosting reveals that concentration of the DNS space is driven by
two primary forces – the concentration of the external hosting space into the hands of a small number of
providers and a widespread migration away from self-hosted DNS towards externally hosted DNS. The rise
of external hosting promotes concentration by enabling the consolidation of market share that would
otherwise be distributed among a large number of self-hosts into the hands of a single entity.




                Figure 10: The percentage of domains that host their own DNS and/or rely on external DNS providers over time.

As is evident from figure 10 (above), external DNS hosting rapidly overtook self-hosted DNS in the period
between November 2011 and May 2017.37 The percentage of domains managed entirely by external DNS
hosting providers grew from 32.9% to ​65.7% ​over that period. By looking at the concentration of the two
space segments independently, we can better pinpoint the sources of increased space-wide concentration. The
HHI of the external hosting space more than doubled between November 2011 and May 2017 as a small


37
  ​Rerunning this analysis under the weighting scheme described in footnote 35 gave significantly different results: after
weighting, the percentage of domains using externally hosted DNS services grew from 19.8% in November 2011 to
30.2% in May 2017. The lesser magnitude of this change is explained by leading – and heavily weighted – domains’
proclivity towards self-hosting: Google’s self-hosted domains account for about 25% of total weighted share in the
sample throughout the timeline, but less than 1% of the unweighted sample.
                                                                                                               15



number of providers took an increasing proportion of share. It also increased in the self-hosted DNS space.
The HHI increased for the self-hosted segment of the DNS space because a number of large multiple domain
self-hosting firms such as AOL and Alibaba, which have the ability to maintain their own DNS infrastructure,
retained share while smaller firms switched to external hosting, shrinking the overall size of the self-hosting
space. The external hosting space is massively more concentrated than the self-hosting space, with HHI
averaging about 1116 over the timespan as opposed to about 43 for the self-hosting space.




                                    Figure 11: The HHI of the external DNS hosting space.

T​he increased concentration of the DNS space can be said to be driven primarily by a combination of the
consolidation of share in the external hosting space and the migration of domains out of the self-hosting space
into the external hosting space. This shift is concurrent with a broader movement towards cloud-based site hosting
and management platforms.

The Dyn Attack: Dangers of DNS Concentration
On October 21, 2016, the massive “Mirai” botnet (largely comprised of poorly secured Internet-connected
devices) launched a sustained DDoS attack against systems critical to Dyn’s DNS management services.38 The
attack took most Dyn services offline for hours, leaving domains reliant on Dyn for DNS services
unreachable for many Internet users.

At the time of the attack, Dyn held about 10% share in the DNS space. Having expanded from holding 4.8%
share in November 2011, Dyn was (and still is) among the biggest DNS providers in the sample and it greatly
benefited from the increase in concentration of the market. Its clients included Twitter, Amazon, Zillow,
SoundCloud, and eBay among many others.




38
  ​https://dyn.com/blog/dyn-analysis-summary-of-friday-october-21-attack/​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/GE2P-CMKD​.
                                                                                                              16




                                          Figure 12: Dyn’s share of the DNS space over time

The dramatic consequences of the Dyn attack illustrate the extent to which DNS space consolidation has
exposed large swaths of the Internet to shared single points of failure. When Dyn’s systems were taken offline
by the DDoS attack, they brought a sizeable fraction of the Internet down with them. Had fewer domains
relied solely on Dyn’s DNS services, the DDoS attack would have been far less catastrophic. If large external
DNS hosting providers continue to absorb market share from smaller competitors and from the self-hosted
segment of the DNS space, this non-distributed exposure will only become more pronounced.


Diversification of the DNS Space
While the concentration of the DNS space as outlined above has the potential to expose dangerous single
points of failure in the DNS system, a powerful safeguard against such vulnerabilities is built into DNS itself.
By allowing domains to register multiple nameservers, DNS gives potentially vulnerable domains the
opportunity to diversify among multiple providers. For example, if you create a domain, www.example.com,
you can choose to register more than one authoritative nameserver for that domain and each nameserver you
register can be managed by a different provider. One of your nameservers could be managed by Dyn,
example.Dyn.1, and a second could be managed by Akamai, example.Akamai.1. In the event of another
DDoS attack on Dyn, users would still be able to access www.example.com as long as your DNS nameserver
managed by Akamai remained up and running.

The importance of DNS redundancy and diversification is not a new realization. RFC 2182, last updated in
1997, outlines best practices for “selection and operation of secondary DNS servers.” It explains that, “a
major reason for having multiple servers for each zone is to allow information from the zone to be available
widely and reliably to clients throughout the Internet, that is, throughout the world, even when one server is
unavailable or unreachable.”39 Similarly, our findings suggest that by registering DNS servers managed by
multiple DNS providers, a domain will remain accessible in the event that one provider fails due to an attack
or technical malfunction because it is unlikely that both providers will go down at the same time. By choosing


39
     ​https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2182​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/7RS9-A2YK​.
                                                                                                                     17



to work with multiple providers, any domain can therefore secure significant redundancy and robustness even
in an increasingly concentrated DNS space.

Diversification of the DNS Space as a Whole
Our analysis showed that the majority of domains are not taking advantage of this opportunity for resilience
through diversification. From November 2011 to October 2016, the proportion of domains in our sample
using nameservers from just one provider fluctuated in the range between 91% and 93%. At no point in our
timeframe did 1% or more of domains use 3 or more providers.




                     Figure 13: The percentage of domains that registered one, two, or three or more DNS providers

As the figure above illustrates, the Dyn attacks of October 2016 have seemingly spurred and sustained
interest in DNS diversification. From October 1st, 2016 to November 1st, 2016, the percentage of domains
using a single DNS provider fell from 92.2% to 89.4%. The percentage continued to decline between
November 2016 and May 2017, reaching 87.3% in May 2017.

Interestingly, diversification was more common amongst the top ranked 100 domains per month in the
sample. The percentage of domains using a single provider decreased from 95% in November of 2011 to
86% in October 2016. After the Dyn attack, it plummeted to a low of 78% in February 2017.
                                                                                                            18




                                  Figure 14: DNS diversification rates among original and entrant domains


This tendency to stick with one DNS provider was even more pronounced amongst entrant domains. As per
figure 14 (above), entrant domains in the sample tended to diversify at considerably lower rates than original
domains, with around 5% diversifying for most of the timescale prior to the Dyn attack. They also reacted
less intensely to the Dyn attacks than did the original domains: their diversification rate increased by about
half as much. This may signal that entrants are more wedded to single-provider cloud hosting. Such an
explanation is particularly likely in the case of firms that developed since the explosive growth of the cloud
began towards the beginning of our sample timescale. In contrast to the original domains that were created
before there were many cloud based DNS providers and had to build their own DNS infrastructure, entrant
domain owners have more external DNS providers to choose from. Moreover, external providers handle
more than just DNS management, so choosing to host everything with one provider may be the easiest
solution for entrants. For example, Cloudflare offers security features in addition to DNS management that
make it impossible for domains to register DNS nameservers managed by other providers. Finally, entrant
domain owners may be less risk averse because they have more to lose and less money at their disposal than
larger, established domain owners.

Given the advantages of diversification, why would so many domains (entrants and established domain
owners) elect not to use multiple DNS providers even in the aftermath of the revelatory Dyn attacks?
Configuring DNS across multiple DNS providers can be a non-trivial technical undertaking. When a DNS
server responds to a request by a DNS resolver, it authenticates its response with a set of “NS records,”
which must accurately reflect all of a domain’s nameservers (even across multiple providers).40 Using multiple
DNS providers therefore requires that the domain’s administrators be able to edit or otherwise synchronize
NS records among DNS servers that are managed by different providers.




40
     ​https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2182​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/7RS9-A2YK​.
                                                                                                                19



Many large external DNS companies provide support and documentation for implementing DNS
diversification, with some – such as Dyn – offering explicitly “secondary” DNS configurations as a service.41
However, configuring multiple DNS providers can still require significant development efforts and the
generation of (potentially insecure or buggy) bespoke code. ​The Guardian​ recently published a blog post
documenting its efforts to register an additional DNS nameserver managed by AWS. The post describes the
process of writing custom code to synchronize RRs between the primary and secondary DNS servers. For a
company that does not have the same knowledge or technical resources, diversifying DNS providers may
prove to be more trouble than it’s worth.42

Moreover, it should be noted that large externally managed DNS providers – including Dyn – generally have
near-perfect uptime records, with most attaining uptime of 99.9% or higher43, 44 on a monthly basis. For many
domains, particularly those with fewer network engineers at their disposal, externally managed DNS likely
produces better results than self-hosted DNS with less potential for catastrophically long periods of
downtime. The cost, difficulty, and potential technical issues associated with diversification among multiple
providers may simply not be worthwhile for a majority of firms. As the saying goes, “Nobody ever got fired
for buying IBM.”45 Additionally, as DNS providers continue to learn from experiences like the Dyn attack,
these larger external DNS companies may accumulate knowledge that will help them prevent future failures.
Some concentration of the market could in fact improve overall market practices, which would benefit all
domain owners.

However, as the number of insecure web-connected devices continues to grow at a breakneck pace, it is likely
that the scale and frequency of botnet-driven DDoS attacks capable of compromising even the largest
providers will continue to increase.46 If sophisticated externally managed DNS providers cannot scale their
countermeasures accordingly, uptime figures for even the largest services may begin to decline. Furthermore,
simultaneous downtime for large swaths of the web may be more destructive than more segmented periodical
failures.

Types of Diversification: External and Self-Hosted DNS
When domains diversify, they may do so in a number of ways. For instance, a domain may choose to delegate
DNS services between two or more externally hosted DNS providers. A firm working with Dyn might, for
example, choose to add additional nameservers from Akamai or AWS to diversify their DNS. Alternately, a
firm that manages its own DNS might choose to diversify with secondary services from a major externally
hosted DNS provider or vice versa.



41
    ​https://help.dyn.com/using-external-nameservers/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/M2LB-8E3V​.
42
     ​https://www.theguardian.com/info/developer-blog/2016/dec/23/multiple-dns-synchronising-dyn-to-aws-route-53​.
Archived at ​https://perma.cc/WDP4-MY93​.
43
     99.9% uptime – “three nines” – is a common responsiveness goal for web domains
44
      ​http://www.thewhir.com/web-hosting-news/many-dns-cdn-services-attain-near-perfect-uptime-cloudharmony-report
Archived at ​https://perma.cc/8KMZ-JECH​.
45
  https://www.forbes.com/sites/homaycotte/2014/12/09/your-startup-delimma-nobody-ever-got-fired-for-buying-ibm
/#3bdcb7fa16b6​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/PN7V-B5XF​.
46
   ​http://www.americansecurityproject.org/the-rise-of-iot-botnets/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/EMH7-CHL9​.
                                                                                                                                20




                Figure 15: The proportion of domains that chose to self-host or employed only external DNS services over time


As is evident from the figure 15 (above), employing a combination of externally hosted DNS services and
self-hosted DNS services was the most common form of diversification before the Dyn attack, after which
diversification among external providers more than tripled. As of May 2017, about 62.4% of diversified
domains opted to use multiple externally hosted DNS providers, while about 37.6% of diversified domains
chose to employ a self-hosted domain nameserver and an externally hosted one.

There is a very significant degree of variation in patterns of diversification and growth among external DNS
providers. As is evident from figure 16 (below) showing the 4 largest externally hosted DNS providers in the
sample as of May 2017, customers of some externally hosted DNS providers tended to diversify much more
than others. A fluctuating percentage of 81% and 89% of Akamai users remained undiversified throughout
the sampled timescale as Akamai’s DNS service has roughly doubled in size. Dyn’s customer base (in terms of
the number of domains supported), which almost tripled between November 2011 and early 2015,
subsequently shrank to just over twice its size by May 2017. There was a steady increase in diversification
rates among Dyn customers from November 2011 until the Dyn attack, at which point the percentage of
undiversified domains using Dyn’s services plummeted to 48%. The percentage of undiversified domains
using Dyn’s services decreased again to 36% in May 2017.
                                                                                                                                                    21




Figure 16: The number of undiversified and diversified domains using DNS services provided by one of the four largest external DNS providers: Akamai,
AWS, Cloudflare, and Dyn.

Cloudflare maintained consistently near-zero diversification rates for the entire timescale, over the course of
which it has exploded in size from having virtually no market share to becoming the second most dominant
provider in the sample. This near-complete lack of diversification is a product of Cloudflare’s security model,
which requires that DNS traffic is routed through the Cloudflare network to protect against DDoS attacks
and other network insecurities.47 This approach does not allow domains to register a secondary nameserver
managed by a different DNS provider. Until the Dyn attack (after which many domains added AWS as a
secondary DNS provider) AWS also registered an extremely low diversification rate – no more than 4% of
domains using AWS diversified at any point before the Dyn attack. Between the attack and May 2017, the
proportion of diversified domains using AWS increased to about 13%.




47
   https://support.cloudflare.com/hc/en-us/articles/205195708-Step-3-Change-your-domain-name-servers-to-Cloudflar
e​. Archived ​https://perma.cc/3FF7-P9BJ​.
                                                                                                                       22




                              Figure 17: The percent of diversified domains before and after the Dyn attack.


These discrepancies likely point to differences in user experiences between external DNS providers which
affect the ease with which domains can diversify among multiple DNS providers. It is worth noting that Dyn
– which had the most diversified client domains of any large external DNS host following the October 2016
attack – provides specific guidelines for making its DNS services work smoothly with those of other
providers.48 Neustar49 and DNS Made Easy,50 the runners up to Dyn in this regard, also provide such
instructions. AWS, which falls behind every other provider except for CloudFlare in terms of the
diversification of its clients, offers no such readily accessible support.

The Dyn Attack: Diversification as a Corrective to Concentration
The Dyn attack highlighted the value of diversification among multiple DNS providers. At the time of the
attack, 84 domains in our sample were using Dyn as their only DNS provider. Even more domains –
including Netflix – were using Dyn as the sole DNS for alternate domains delivering content to their sites.
The relationship between DNS vulnerability and CDNs should be explored further, but currently falls beyond
the scope of this paper.51




48
   ​https://help.dyn.com/using-external-nameservers/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/M2LB-8E3V​.
49
    ​https://www.neustar.biz/blog/secondary-dns-service-paper​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/Q7VN-ZY24​.
50
     ​https://www.dnsmadeeasy.com/services/secondarydns/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/QQD4-P2UT​.
51
      ​https://www.fastly.com/security-advisories/widespread-dyn-dns-outage-affecting-fastly-customers​. Archived at
https://perma.cc/P8B3-FD9N​.
                                                                                                                                                        23



Following the Dyn attack, a number of major blogs and commentators offered vocal support for
multi-provider DNS diversification.52, 53, 54 A significant number of domains did diversify, bringing the
percentage of domains in the sample using only one provider from 92.2% in October 2016 to 87.3% in May
2017. However, despite this coverage and evident shift in the DNS space, it seems that the lessons of the Dyn
attack were learned primarily by those who suffered from them directly. Of the 52 domains that remained in
the sample between October 2016 and May 2017 and diversified during that timeframe, the majority were
using Dyn alone prior to the attack.




Figure 18: The percent of previously undiversified domains that registered additional DNS providers after the Dyn attack (graph on the left). The graph on
the right shows the percent of Dyn users that employed additional DNS services from another externally hosted provider.


Of these Dyn users, more than two-thirds went to either AWS or NSOne, a relatively recent entrant into the
DNS space which expanded its share somewhat in the wake of the Dyn attack. In accordance with the
diversification patterns presented in figure 18, diversification through multiple externally hosted providers
proved much more common than diversification through a combination of externally hosted and self-hosted
DNS.




52
  https://www.internetsociety.org/blog/2016/10/how-to-survive-a-dns-ddos-attack-consider-using-multiple-dns-provid
ers/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/S3DM-TYXK​.
53
   ​https://blog.thousandeyes.com/dyn-dns-ddos-attack/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/P3UL-KH8F​.
54
    ​https://security.radware.com/ddos-threats-attacks/threat-advisories-attack-reports/dns-services-under-attack/​.
Archived at ​https://perma.cc/W8LU-64MT​.
                                                                                                                     24




                             Figure 19: NSOne’s market share of the DNS space before and after the Dyn attack


Conclusion
A stable DNS infrastructure is critical to the operation of the Internet. Growing cybersecurity challenges
from botnets, ransomware, and other service disruption systems will stress-test even the biggest providers,
and future downtime from such attacks is all but inevitable. With downtime comes SEO penalties and the
loss of revenue and user trust. In addition to this threat of bad actors, even the largest cloud services
providers have shown themselves to be vulnerable to large service outages.55

The concentration of the DNS space makes confronting these challenges all the more urgent. As a larger and
larger proportion of the Internet’s biggest sites fall under the management of a small number of externally
hosted DNS providers, single points of failure will continue to emerge and grow in magnitude. While every
company with an Internet presence will ultimately have to weigh its costs and benefits, diversification
promises a powerful means by which many of the dangers of this new DNS environment can be mitigated.
All would be prudent to consider altering their DNS architecture accordingly.

Ultimately, the biggest determinant of domain owners’ willingness to diversify may be the extent to which
providers choose to support and encourage such diversification. If single service lock-in is the model of cloud
DNS platforms, widespread diversification is unlikely. However, providers could encourage diversification of
DNS management services by requiring domain owners to select a secondary DNS provider or even specify
which secondary providers they should choose. If more domains adopt and support affordable and easily
configurable “Secondary DNS” models such as that offered by Dyn56, a diversified and resilient DNS space
could easily come into reach.




55
      ​http://www.americansecurityproject.org/the-rise-of-iot-botnets/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/ATD3-9SLV​.
56
     ​https://www.dyn.com/dns/secondary-dns/​. Archived at ​https://perma.cc/7EF2-UX2H​.
