NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDIBLE COMMITMENT AND
EXCHANGE RATE STABILITY:
CANADA'S INTERWAR EXPERIENCE

Michael D. Bordo
Angela Redish

Working Paper No. 2431

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1987

The authors are Visiting Professor, GSIA, Carnegie Mellon University, and Assistant
Professor, Department of Economics, University of British Columbia, respectively.
They wish to thank Shirley Haun for research assistance, the Bank of Nova Scotia
Archives for access to their material, and, especially, Ronald A. Shearer for
donating his data to us, and for his comments. Helpful comments on an earlier
draft were supplied by Barry Eichengreen, Peter Howitt, David Laidler, Anna Schwartz,
and Peter Temin. The usual disclaimer applies. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2431
November 1987

Credible Commitment and Exchange Rate Stability:
Canada's Interwar Experience

ABSTRACT

January 1929 the Canadian government suspended gold exports and
began a floating exchange rate regime that endured until the onset of World
In

War II.

In sharp contrast with the experience of other countries which left

the gold standard, deflation and declining economic activity continued in
Canada until 1933.

This paper examines the determinants of the Canadian exchange rate in
the 1930's and provides an answer to the question of why the Canadian dollar

did not depreciate in the early 1930's despite Canada's de facto departure
from the Gold Standard. We develop the answer in two stages. First, we

show that the government made a clear commitment to maintain a
contractionary monetary policy. It did so because it believed: that monetary
expansion would increase the value of external obligations without reducing
the value of domestic obligations; and that even if all contractual obligations
were met, Canada would lose her reputation as a responsible debtor. Second,

we argue that the government's commitment was viewed by the public as
credible. The credible commitment dominated market agent's expectations of
the evolution of the exchange rate.
Michael D. Bordo

Graduate School of
Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Angela Redish
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Y2

I. Introduction
It

has long been believed that many countries successfully extricated

themselves from the ravages of the Great Depression by cutting the fixed
exchange rate link of the gold standard, hence freeing themselves to pursue
expansionary monetary and fiscal policies and allowing their exchange rates to
depreciate.' In January 1929 the Canadian government suspended gold exports and

began a floating exchange rate regime that endured until the onset of World War

II. In sharp contrast with the experience of other countries which left the gold
standard, deflation and declining economic activity continued in Canada until 1933,

in concert with the experience of the United States (see Figures 1 and 2). The
Canadian dollar did not depreciate until late 1931 (see Figures 3 and 4) and, (as
Figure 5 shows) the nominal money stock declined.2

The behaviour of the exchange rate is shown in Figures 3 and 4 (Figure 4
shows the price of gold in each country). From January 1929 to September 1931

the Canadian dollar remained at or close to par with respect to both the U.S.
dollar and the British pound. Between October 1931 and March 1933 the Canadian

dollar depreciated (vis a vis the U.S. dollar) about half as much as the pound.
Finally, after approximately a year of transition, all three currencies reestablished
their traditional parities (albeit at a much higher gold price).
This paper examines the determinants of the Canadian exchange rate in the

1930s including the question of why the Canadian dollar did not depreciate in the
Irving Fisher (1935) first made the argument. For the case of Sweden, see
Jonung (1981), for Norway, Denmark and Finland, see Choudhri and Kochin (1980),
for Australia see Schedvin (1970) and Eichengreen (1985), for the United Kingdom

see Beenstock et al (1984). For the beneficial economic effects of devaluations in
the 1930s see Eichengreen and Sachs (1986).

2 In Canada the decline in Ml occurred through a decrease in the stock of high
powered money, rather than through a fall in the money multiplier as in the
United States.

2

early 1930s despite Canada's de facto departure from the gold standard. We
develop the answer in two stages: first, we show that the government made a
clear commitment to maintain a contractionary nionetary policy; and second, we

argue that the commitment was viewed by the public as credible. The credible

commitment dominated market agent's expectations of the evolution of the
exchange rate during the early 1930s.

In the next section we describe the institutional framework and in the third
we present the government's reasons for desiring exchange rate stability. We then

attempt to quantify the costs and benefits of depreciation, and conclude that

based on the assumptions and objectives of the government of the day,
depreciation and monetary expansion would have been irrational. Understanding of

this fact by the public made the government's commitment to sound monetary
policy credible. Consequently, in the final section we argue that before September

1931 the public's expectations were of exchange rate stability. Following Britain's

abandonment of the gold standard in October 1931, the public assigned a
non—zero probability X to maintaining the traditional parity with sterling, (that is,

a depreciation against the U.S. dollar) and a probability (1 — X) to maintaining

parity with the U.S. dollar. Econometric analysis shows that the data are
consistent with this hypothesis.
Il. The Institutional Framework.

We begin by describing the monetary institutions of the 1926—28 period
and then describe the operation of the monetary system after the suspension of
the gold standard.

Canada suspended the gold standard in 1914, in reaction to the onset of

World War I, and returned to convertibility twelve years later in July 1926. The

3

legal tender money stock then consisted of gold coin and government issued
Dominion Notes convertible into gold on demand at the rate $20.67 per ounce of

gold. The Department of Finance issued Dominion Notes, under two different

pieces of legislation.3 The Dominion Notes Act permitted a fiduciary issue of
$63.5 million with a 25% gold reserve, with any excess being 100% gold—backed.

Under the Finance Act, Dominion Notes could also be issued if a chartered bank

applied for a loan and supplied acceptable (broadly defined) collateral. These

notes were not included in the total subject to the Dominion Notes Act. The
banks applied for a line of credit each year from the Department of Finance and

could borrow reserves up to that limit at the current discount rate. This was the
discount window.
In

late 1928 the inconsistency between the Finance Act and the gold

standard became obvious. Call rates in New York rose to 8%, far higher than the

5% discount rate at the Department of Finance. The Canadian banks profited by
borrowing Dominion Notes from the Department and converting them into gold for

export and investment in New York. In the face of this drain on their reserves,
the Canadian government instructed the Canadian banks to halt the export of gold.

Thereafter, Dominion Notes were, in effect, inconvertible, and gold for export
could be obtained only by arrangement with the Department of Finance.4 As Knox

(1939; 20) reports, "the price of foreign exchange was free to vary according to

conditions in a free market". The unofficial embargo on exports continued until
October 19, 1931 when an Order—in—Council officially suspended gold exports.
Throughout the 1930s internal convertibility was maintained, that is, the Canadian

banks were required to maintain the convertibility of their notes and demand
Canada did not establish a central bank until 1935. For an analysis of the
factors leading to the establishment of the Bank of Canada, see Bordo and Redish
(1987).

This period is analyzed in detail in Shearer and Clark (1984).

4

deposits into Dominion Notes.

After the prohibition on gold exports, the stock of high powered money

was primarily determined by the government. Changes in the stock of high
powered money could occur through changes in the quantity of Dominion Notes in

circulation which in turn required either an amendment to the Dominion Notes Act

or an increase in the advances to the chartered banks under the Finance Act.

Since, in this paper, we focus on the behaviour of the government we briefly
address here the banks' ability to affect the stock of high powered money.

The commercial banking system was a small group (ten) of private
chartered banks, each with many branches. The system was highly concentrated

with the three largest banks (the Bank of Montreal, the Bank of Commerce and
the Royal Bank) holding 75% of the assets. The banks issued circulating notes,

demand deposits and time deposits. The banks were quite closely regulated.
Although there was no reserve requirement, 40% of reserves held were required to

be Dominion Notes. Interest rates of higher than 7% were prohibited, as was
lending secured by real estate.5 In 1890 the banks formed the Canadian Bankers'

Association which operated a clearing house in Montreal, and generally operated

as a lobby group/producer's association.

In

1901 the Bank Act amendment

recognized the Canadian Bankers' Association as "an agency for the supervision
and control of certain activities of the banks" (Watts, 1972; 18).

The banks could increase the stock of high powered money by increasing

their borrowing from the government. Since no bank came close to using up its

line of credit with the Department of Finance during this period, it is possible to
Neither of these seems to have been completely enforced; interest rates greater
than 7% were not illegal, but collection of rates greater than 7% could not be
enforced through the courts. Nixon (1937; 432) states that between 1900 and 1930
farmers in Eastern Canada paid on average 7—8% interest on loans, and in
Western Canada 6—10%.

5

argue that the base was demand determined, and that it was the banks' failure to

borrow the available reserves that explains the monetary contraction (Clark and
Shearer, 1976, 29).

The autonomy of the banks was, however, limited by the government's
control over the discount rate. This rate was rarely changed and was not used as

an instrument of short—run policy, but a letter sent by the Minister of Finance to

the President of the Canadian Bankers' Association in August 1929 enclosed a

copy of a memo (prepared by the Department for the House of Commons)
stating the Department's willingness to control the banks by changing the discount
rate:

If the Treasury should at any time feel convinced that Dominion Notes
issued to banks against securities are being used other than for the

purpose for which they are issued, the rate of interest charged the
banks for such issues will be raised to a rate which will prohibit such

misuse. (Archives of the Bank of Nova Scotia #69—52, Sec. 1, File 84
"Gold" Memorandum on Exchange and Gold Reserves and Operations of
the Finance Act, 1914.)

Both the government and the banks knew that the price of loans to the banks
was in the hands of the government which would feel free to vary the price to
achieve its policy goals. If the banks had attempted a monetary expansion, based

on borrowing reserves from the government at a fixed nominal interest rate, the
government would have increased the rate.6

6 The monopoly structure of the banking system suggests that they might have
an incentive to expand the money stock, and that the profit maximizing rate of
expansion might have been quite high. However, to the extent that the banks
believed the government's commitment (described below) to resume the gold
standard at the old parity, the potential benefits from monetary expansion were
very limited. If the banks undertook a monetary expansion yielding a potential
depreciation of bank notes against gold, agents would have an incentive to hoard
the notes pending resumption. The banks would then have to increase their
reserves prior to resumption absorbing much of the potential seignorage revenue.

6

Ill. The Government's Stated Policy.

Between January 1929 and September 1931 the Canadian government made

clear its commitment not to depreciate the exchange rate or increase the money
stock. The primary tools of monetary policy available to the government were the

interest rate on Finance Act advances, and amendments to the Dominion Notes
Act. The latter would have been the most straightforward, and either an increase

in the quantity of notes requiring only 25% gold backing or a lowering of the
25% ratio, would have increased the stock of high powered money.

An alternative expansionary policy would have been to lower the discount

rate on Finance Act advances. From late 1929 until late 1933 the advance rate
lay above the New York commercial paper rate. (There is no equivalent Canadian

commercial paper rate and we assume that short—term Canadian interest rates

were similar to those in the New York market). A decline in the advance rate

would have led to an increase in advances and a monetary expansion. For
example, in the early 20s the government lowered the advance rate below the

New York commercial paper rate, and the money stock expanded (Clark and
Shearer, 1976).

Though the government had the tools to conduct an expansionary policy it

did not do so. The government's position which it stated frequently and publicly,

and which we document below, was that it would not undertake any policy that
would lead to a depreciation of the Canadian dollar. This government policy was
endorsed by the major Opposition party.
Between July 1930 and 1935 the Conservative government of Prime Minister

R.B. Bennett was in power. During this period backbenchers frequently proposed

motions to increase the unbacked portion of the domestic money stock and the

7

government repeatedly voted against such motions. In September 1930, during a

special session of Parliament held to address the problem of unemployment, the

government was asked to undertake a public works program to be funded by
printing unbacked Dominion Notes. Prime Minister Bennett responded as follows:

Unless the paper money of this country has behind it an adequate

reserve of the only commodity that passes in the settlement of
international exchanges namely, gold, I would suggest that it is of very
little value; and to the extent to which the reserve may be depleted or

the ratio decreased by the issue of legal tender or of Dominion of
Canada bills, to that extent is there a possibility of the money of this
country becoming debased and not of par value in the countries of the
world, (Canada, House of Commons, [henceforth HC], 1st S, 17th P, p.78)

The response was similar eighteen months later when the Prime Minister
again argued that monetary expansion would not reduce unemployment but would
ruin Canada's reputation as a sound debtor:
If I thought for a single moment that to add, beyond $71 million of
the present outstanding unsecured paper money of this country, another
25 or 30 or 40 millions of dollars would cure unemployment, would lift
the Depression and would end all our troubles, I would have no more
hesitancy in asking the House for it than have in asking the House
Moreover if its
to pass any estimate that is submitted to it
I

credit abroad is to be considered, if our reputation for meeting our
obligations is to be considered, does anyone for a moment suggest
that we could substitute the notes of the Dominion of Canada to pay
bills in New York? (HC, 3rd S, 17th P, p. 650)

Since the House was not in Session in September 1931 there was little
debate about the ban placed on gold exports in October 1931, however, in the

Budget speech on April 6, 1932, the Minister of Finance argued: "It was
imperative that there be no flight from the Canadian dollar through fear of
inflation" Q-IC 3rd S, 17th P, p. 1749). Again an amendment to suspend the gold
backing of the Dominion Notes was defeated as Liberals and Tories voted against

it. The Prime Minister argued that depreciation "would be ruinous alike to the

credit and to the future development of this country" Q-IC, 3rd 5, 17th P, p.
2402).

8

Later, in October 1932, the Minister of Finance described the government's
monetary stance:

There has been no matter of greater concern to this administration than

the responsibility for the maintenance of the integrity of our financial
structure and the credit of the Dominion as a whole •.. [We have
undertaken) the most tireless efforts ... to see that that precious thing

called public credit, upon which the integrity of this country has
depended for half a century shall be maintained and that no cheap
nostrums in the form of quack remedies supplied by printing presses

should take the place of a proper discharge of our contractual
obligations. (HC, 4th S, 17th P, p. 53).

Six months later, in the budget speech he argued,

During the past year Canada was the only country that was able to
borrow in the public markets of the U.S. This enviable position has
been and can be held only by the maintenance of sound financial and
monetary policies •.. Let the sponsors of inflation never forget that
apart from the other difficulties and dangers involved in their program
one inevitable result would be a flight from our dollar, a withdrawal on
a large scale of the capital invested by foreigners in this country in
the form of securities and bank deposits. (HC, 4th S, 17th P, p. 3208)
The

assumption

underlying

this

statement

is,

of

course,

that

some

inflation/depreciation will lead speculators to expect more, and that capital flows
were highly sensitive to even the slightest anticipation of depreciation.

The Liberal party held very similar views on monetary policy to those of
their Conservative colleagues. The session of early 1930 had ended with a Liberal
member (Mercier) applauding his government, for maintaining the redeemability of

Canadian paper money "the strongest proof of Canada's exellent standing in the

eyes of its citizens and of the whole world" (I-IC, 4th S, 16th P, p. 2112).
In opposition the party continued to endorse 'hard money' policies with the

same rationale as

the

Conservatives: monetary expansion would cause

a

depreciation of the exchange rate and a loss of confidence in the Canadian

dollar, but would not increase employment. In 1931, during discussion of a
backbencher's motion to use monetary expansion to increase employment, the
Leader of the Liberal party (W. L. McKenzie King) argued:

9

Did I believe that this would make matters any better, I am not afraid
to say that I should be among those who would support it ... This is
a matter which is giving rise to a great deal of study on the part of

the most thoughtful economists and the most earnest of social
reformers and workers, and there is at the present time no general

consensus of view which one can say is accepted. (HC, 2nd S, 17th P,
p. 2669)

He had three other arguments against suspension of redeemability;
1.

the purchasers of the conversion loan would be treated unfairly, i.e. they had

a right to expect their bonds to be paid in notes redeemable in gold;7
2.

that it would "declare to the world that we have lost confidence in our
own financial and industrial position" (HC, 2nd S, 17th P, p. 2770);

3.

that since traded goods prices are exogenous Canada would not earn any
more foreign exchange by depreciating.

In summary, the government and the major opposition party opposed
depreciation on the grounds that it would not generate significant economic
benefits, and because of concern over maintaining Canada's reputation in world
capital markets.

The government's position was clearly stated and well known, but its
credibility in the eyes of the public depended on two additional factors: the
perceived rationality of the policy, and the consistency between the government's

monetary and fiscal policy. Table

I

shows that until 1930/31 the federal

government budget was in surplus and that subsequently the government ran a

deficit. However, the increases in government expenditure and decrease in tax

revenues were induced by the fall in economic activity and the government
responded by slashing discretionary expenditures and increasing tax rates, While

The conversion loan is described in detail below. It transformed a little over a
quarter of the outstanding government debt from gold denomination to Canadian
currency denomination.

The increase in Special Expenditures after 1930 is almost entirely accounted for
by increasing expenditures on Unemployment Relief. Ordinary Expenditures declined
after March 1931 due to a decline in expenditures in most Departments, especially

10

the calculations have not been done for Canada, it seems likely that, as in the
United States (Brown, 1956), on a full employment basis the Canadian government

was running a budget surplus, throughout the Depression years. Thus statements

that the money supply would not be increased were not rendered in—credible by

a fiscal policy that implied a need for money creation to finance a full
employment budget deficit.
IV. The Rationality of the Government's Policy.

We view the government as having conducted a cost—benefit analysis of
the decision to depreciate. The benefits of depreciation for real economic activity

and the government's real wealth were weighed against the costs to the
government of losing its reputation as a sound debtor.9 The government's decision

not to depreciate reflected, we argue, their conclusion that the potential benefits

were outweighed by the cost of a lost reputation. The public in turn perceived
the rationality of the government's decision, making its policy credible.
(i) Depreciation and Economic Performance

As Eichengreen and Sachs (1986) have pointed out, there is a clear ex post
correlation

between

exchange

rate

depreciation

and

improved

economic

performance. Their reduced form analysis can be used to suggest a possible

measure of the output costs of a refusal by the government of Canada to
depreciate. They measure the effect of depreciation by comparing the extent of
depreciation with the decline in industrial production in ten European countries and

find that on average if a nation had, by 1935, depreciated its exchange rate to
8(cont'd) Public Works (whose spending fell from $25 million to $13 million
between March 1931 and March 1933), the Department of the Interior (from $8
million to $3 million) and Subsidies to Provinces (from $17 million to $13
million).

These effects are quite similar to those analyzed by Barro and Gordon (1983)
in their study of the importance of reputation in monetary policy.

11

60% of its 1929 value, industrial production (in 1935) would have risen to 12%
above its 1929 value. If the exchange rate had not depreciated over the period,

industrial production in 1935 would be 16% lower than its 1929 value. These
results suggest that Canada's failure to depreciate may explain the dramatic
decline in her industrial production: an index of industrial production (1929=100)
was 67.2 in 1932 and 86.7 in 1935.'°

The ex post evidence is of little use, however, in understanding the
government's decision and its credibility. As the discussions in Section Ill show,
the government, and indeed the opposition, thought that depreciation would have

little or no impact on unemployment and only radical Western members of
parliament argued that a depreciation/monetary expansion would reduce domestic
unemployment levels.

(ii) Depreciation and the Government's Real Wealth

An alternative source of benefits to the government is the improvement in

the government's balance sheet. Three types of benefits will be discussed: an
increase in tax revenues, a reduction in the real value of outstanding debt, and a

reduction in the real cost of servicing the debt. Examination of the government's
0 This method cannot, however, give precise estimates of the output costs of
exchange rate stability. The United States is omitted from the sample on the
grounds that the Depression started there and that this, and the severity of the
downturn, make her experience atypical. Canada's proximity to the United States
may have made her experience more similar to that of the United States than to
that of Europe. Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, the simple regressions of
industrial production on depreciation are biased by the omission of the date of
depreciation. Thus, for example, a depreciation by Belgium in 1935 is given the
same weight as that of England in 1931. By 1935 Canada had depreciated her
exchange rate by approximately 60%, but this occurred in at least three steps (a
15% depreciation in late 1931, a further 15% depreciation in early 1933 and a
gradual 10% depreciation from then to 1935). It seems likely that different paths
of depreciation between 1929 and 1935 would have led to different levels of
industrial production in 1935. What can be learnt from the results of Eichengreen
and Sachs is that in Europe there was a statistically significant and economically
relevant negative correlation between the extent of depreciation and the level of
industrial production.

12

revenue and expenditure accounts — summarized in Table 1 — sheds light on the

significance of these factors. In the year ending March 1929, interest on the
public debt was 35% of government expenditures — a huge proportion." In the
same year import taxes accounted for 40% of government revenue, while income
and sales taxes accounted for 30%.

The importance of import taxes for government revenue suggests that the
government might be concerned that depreciation would reduce imports and thus

import tax revenue. The government did not openly discuss this drawback to

depreciation, however, they introduced extensive increases in tariff rates as

imports fell reflecting a concern both with tariff revenue and employment in
protected industries. Income tax rates were also raised to offset some of the
early decline in tariff revenues.

The discussion of Section Ill shows that the size of the public debt was a
key factor in the government's decision making with respect to the exchange rate,

and the data in Table 1 provide some explanation for the concern. We assume
that the government's policy decision is whether or not to engineer a depreciation
through a monetary expansion. We use a simple accounting framework to look at

the effect of such a policy on the government's debt load from two
perspectives: firstly, we examine the effect of a monetary expansion/depreciation

on the real value of outstanding debt; and secondly, we examine the more short

run effects on the government's cash flow position, that is, the change in the
value of interest payments and maturing debt in a particular year.'2

11 For example, it is twice the level of 1947 (17.5%) when World War II debt had
been incurred, and twice the level of 1983 (18%) when considerable concern was
raised about the size of the government debt.
2 This appears to have been the calculation of immediate interest to the
government. The Department of Finance, after September 1931, routinely prepared
statements listing the principal and interest payments abroad that would come due

in the following twelve months. See, for example, NAC M 1014 .B. Bennett
Papers) p. 196679 — memo dated September 25, 1931.

13

The

potential

benefit

of

a

monetary expansion/depreciation to

the

government is the decrease in the real value of the stock of government debt. In

order to measure the annual benefit of deciding to expand/depreciate in

a

particular year this stock benefit must be converted to a flow benefit, by
multiplying by the interest rate. The real value of the government's funded debt
(D/P) is:

D/P= (Bd + e.Bf) / P

(1)

where Bd represents bonds denominated in Canadian currency; Bf represents bonds

denominated in foreign currency; e is the price of foreign currency; and P is the
domestic price level. The government also issues fiat money (H), so the benefit
(R) to the government of an unanticipated monetary expansion is the reduction in
the real value of its funded debt plus the real seignorage revenue:
R= dH/P — d(D/P)

(2)

Now, assume that the government expands the monetary base by dH. In keeping

with the historical context we examine a one—time monetary expansion, and
initially assume that expectations of depreciation and inflation are not afffected
by this policy. Denote the percentage change in the high—powered money stock

dH/H = ir, and let this be accompanied by an increase in prices dP/P = air and
depreciation of the exchange rate de/e = 3ir. By parameterizing the effect of the

monetary expansion on the price level and the exchange rate, the case of a
neutral change in the money stock (a=3=1) can be examined as a special case
of the more general specification. Note that, if we let a=13=1, and assume dBd

= dBf = 0, then by totally differentiating (1) and appropriate substitution, we
find

R= (Bd/P) . ir + dH/P

(3)

Thus the government benefits from a monetary expansion and the benefit rises
(continuously) with the amount of expansion.

14

The government's concern about the increase in the service cost of foreign

currency denominated debt, reflects the fact that in the general case, where the
assumption that a.=13=1 is removed, the benefits of monetary expansion could be
positive or negative:

R =air (Bd/P) + (a—13) ir (e.Bf) / P + IT (HIP)

(4)

If, as an extreme example, a = 0, 13 = 1, then,

R =ir [H — e.Bf] I P

(5)

which is negative if H<eBf. While this example may be extreme, it is frequently
assumed that a < 13, that is, that prices adjust less rapidly than exchange rates
(Dornbusch, 1976).

To capture the potential costs and benefits of monetary expansion to the
Canadian government in the 1930s we relax some of the simplifying assumptions.

The domestic bond issues of the government (Bd) are separated into gold bonds

(Bdg) and Canadian currency bonds (Bdc). In theory, gold bonds should be

combined with foreign currency denominated bonds. In practice, however, the
government refused to pay gold to holders of such bonds if they were domiciled

in Canada, so that only the gold bond holdings of foreign residents should be
added to the foreign currency denominated bonds.'3

13 See the correspondence of R.B. Viets, Solicitor to the Department of Finance.
His standard response to requests for redemption in gold of bonds with a gold
clause was

You say that you have a Dominion of Canada bond matured November
1 1934, which you desire to have paid in gold coin that is legal tender
in Canada. Gold coin in Canada is worth only its face value in
currency. The reason this is so is that gold coin cannot legally be
melted down nor can it be exported. (National Archives of Canada
[henceforth NAC], RG19, Vol. 3529, letter from Viets to Alphonse Jarry,
22 Nov. 1934.)
To help maintain the validity of this position the government attempted to
prevent anyone from trading coins at a premium. Thus a Toronto firm advertising
to buy gold coins at a 30% premium was sent an admonishing letter: "The result

[of laws forbidding the export or melting down of gold coin] is that gold coin
has no higher value than that of legal tender currency, and it must follow that to
acquire the premium value of gold bullion the coin has to be melted down or
exported". The firm was asked to "refrain in future" (NAC, RG19, Vol. 3529 #10,
letter from Viets to Arthur Brownstone, 14 February 1934). Elsewhere, W.C. Clark

15

This framework can be used to

quantify

the

effect of monetary

expansion/depreciation on Canadian government wealth at a specific point in time

— we choose two, September 1930 and April 1932. The first date corresponds to
the government's refusal to expand the currency as requested by several members

of the House of Commons during the special session of the House to discuss
unemployment. The second date was chosen because in April 1932 the Inspector
General of Banks forwarded to the Prime Minister a memo recommending that the
government depreciate the exchange rate to parity with sterling (Bryce, 1986; 129).

The author of the memo, Graham Towers, admitted that this could cause
expectations of further inflation, but argued that "joining the sterling bloc would
be regarded as an acceptable clearly defined goal".'4

Table 2 presents a breakdown of the monetary issues and funded liabilities
of the Canadian government on September 30, 1930 and March 30, 1932. On both

dates nearly 80% of the debt is denominated in Canadian dollars, although in 1930

it is mostly gold bonds which by 1932 had been converted into Canadian
currency debt.'5

'3(cont'd) (the Deputy Minister of Finance) advised Prime Minister Bennett that

"There is of course the odd case where a person might buy gold coins on the
speculative anticipation that when Canada revalues her gold such gold coins will
be worth more than their present face value" but, he continued, such a market "is
so small and of such a nature that it would not be recognized by a court" (NAC,
RG19, Vol. 3979 G—1—10—3, letter dated 1 Mar. 1934). The government's position

on payments outside Canada was clarified in a letter from Viets to the Canadian
High Commissioner in London,
Contracts payable in gold in Canada are sufficiently discharged by

payments in legal tender currency, or at all events, damages for not
paying in gold would be negligible. Of course a contract to pay gold
in a country other than Canada would be governed by the laws of such
country. (NAC, RG19, Vol. 3529 #187, letter dated 23 July 1934.)
' Bryce (1986; 130), in his history of the Department of Finance, argues that the
government's decision not to follow this recommendation reflected a 'debtor
mentality', that is, concern about the country's credit rating.
' The conversion loan that effected this transformation (see below) occurred in
late 1930, prior to the depreciation of the Canadian dollar and consequent rise in
the Canadian price of gold in late 1931.

16

Since so many desirable data are unavailable we can only find orders of
magnitude of potential benefits and we do this by looking at three scenarios. In
the first, we assume that prices and the exchange rate adjust proportionately with

the monetary expansion (aI3=1) and that all domestic gold bonds are to be
honoured in gold. The second case differs only in that half the domestically
issued gold bonds are expected to be honoured in Dominion notes and not gold.
The 50% is a very rough guess as to the share of non—Canadian holdings of gold

bonds, which the government continued to redeem in gold. Clearly if gold bonds

were worth more in the United States than in Canada, there would be an
incentive to export such bonds.16 We therefore believe the first scenario to be

more relevant. (The second alternative is included to capture the possibility of

incomplete markets.) Finally we drop the assumption that a==1, and assume
that domestic prices do not increase while the exchange rate depreciates (a=0,
13=1), reverting to the assumption that the gold clause in all bonds is honoured,
and assuming that the price of gold rises with the price of foreign exchange.
For each case we examine the impact of a hypothetical once—and—for—all

15% increase in the stock of high powered money on the two dates. In March
1930, 15% was chosen because it is of the same order of magnitude as the

depreciation by Canada's major trade competitors, Australia and Argentina. In
October 1931, a further 15% depreciation would have meant that Canada had

depreciated against the U.S. dollar and gold to roughly the same extent as
sterling did.

16 There is evidence that 'gold' coupons were sent by Canadians to the United
States for redemption: The Attorney General of Ontario wrote to R.B. Bennett
(who was Minister of Finance as well as Prime Minister) asking "Would there be
any way that you could exert influence on the banks to stop this practice
[Canadian individuals and institutions sending coupons to branches of Canadian
banks in the United States where they must be redeemed in gold? It is a very
unpatriotic and unnecessary thing to do to—day" (NAC, M1013, p. 196817 — letter
dated 14 Dec. 1931).

17

The results are given in Table 3. The stock benefit measures the permanent

increase in the government's real wealth, however, this must be converted into a

flow benefit because the decision not to depreciate in September 1930, can be

thought of as a decision to postpone depreciating for one year. Table 3 line lb,
shows that monetary expansion/depreciation, under favourable assumptions, would

have yielded less than $9 million revenue in September 1930 — a relatively small
contribution to the government's tax revenue of $296 million.'7 In March 1932, the

potential benefits are higher (and the possible loss is also lower) although it is

still inconsiderable. The increase in the benefit is due to the conversion loan
which redeemed a large portion of gold bonds and replaced them with non—gold
bonds. If the gold clause in these bonds would not have been honoured, the 1930
potential benefits have been underestimated. The Monetary Times (10 January 1931)

states that the new issue was mostly taken by Canadian residents.

We turn now to an analysis of the effect of monetary expansion and
depreciation on - the government's cash flow situation. The government was

particularly concerned about the increase in the Canadian dollar value of its
immediate commitments in sterling and the U.S. dollar. Table 4 indicates the

extent of such obligations in the year following each of the two calls for
expansionary policy: October 1930 — September 1931, and March 1932 — February
1933.

The conversion loan of May 1931 makes this counterfactual analysis rather

difficult. This loan redeemed $638 million of gold debt (originally issued to
finance World War I) with lower interest non—gold bonds. However, only $52.9
million of that debt was to mature during the period October 1930 — September
' The flow benefit is calculated using an interest rate of 4,5%. Average yields
on Dominion of Canada short term bonds in 1930—32 ranged from 4.43% to 5.08%
(Nixon, 1937; 427).

18

1931. In our analysis we have assumed that if the government had depreciated in
September 1930, it would not have undertaken the conversion loan. Several points

must be made here. In a world of sophisticated (rational?) agents, bond holders

would have realized that such a conversion might influence the probability of
depreciation, which would affect the price at which agents would have traded the
gold bonds for non—gold bonds. The available historical evidence suggests, but in

no way proves, that (a) after the reduction in its gold bond liabilities the
government still saw depreciation as a costly strategy, and (b) the government

would not have paid gold — or its market value in legal tender — to Canadian
residents holding bonds.'3

Line lila in Table 4 shows that paying gold for bonds issued in London
and New York after a depreciation would not have resulted in significant cost
increases for the government, although if gold were paid to all Canadian gold
bond holders the numbers are significantly larger. These costs would be offset by
the seignorage revenue accruing from the monetary expansion ($25 million in 1930

or $23.6 million in 1932). Thus if the government paid only 50% of its gold debts
in gold (Table IV, line 1Mb) it would make a net financial gain from the monetary

expansion, It seems probable that as long as the government continued to pay
gold on bonds issued externally, it would be able to borrow on the world capital
market.

' See fn. 13 above for evidence that the gold clause in bonds that were not

converted was not honoured. This perhaps explains the lack of discussion, at the

time of the conversion loan, of the omission of the gold clause in the new
bonds, The records of the management committee set up to co-ordinate the
conversion loan contain only one reference to the gold clause: the Comptroller of
Loans was requested by W. Sellar (the Deputy Minister of Finance) to list the
loans giving in each case the exact wording of the clause, if any, appearing in
the text of the bond in regard to the question of payment in gold" (NAC, RG19,
Vol. 593, File 155—31, dated 20 Apr. 1931). There seems to have been no follow
up to this memo.

19

(iii) Depreciation and the Benefits of a Sound Reputation

The evidence of Section III suggests that the government's actions were
constrained by the effects they would have on Canada's reputation for a 'sound'

currency. The exact consequences and costs of a lost reputation were never
described, although it seems clear that the government and opposition viewed the

problem in black (no reputation) and white (good reputation) terms. As Barro and
Gordon have pointed out, rational agents would include the expected costs due to

a loss of reputation in determining the net benefits of a monetary policy. Such
agents would then expect a policy change if it yielded net benefits.
The statement that Canada had a reputation for sound monetary policy, is
implicitly a statement that holders of Canadian dollar denominated assets expected

a zero rate of inflation, and loss of such a reputation is implicitly a statement

that expected rates of inflation (and possibly their variance) would rise. This

would impose the following costs on the government: (a) an increase in the
interest rate that must be paid to Canadian holders of Canadian government
bonds denominated in Canadian funds, to compensate for the higher expected

inflation rate, and risk premium; (b) a similar premium would be needed for
foreign holders of such bonds denominated in Canadian funds to compensate them

for the exchange risk and expected depreciation; (c) since the fiat currency does

not pay interest, the increase in expected inflation will reduce the desired
holdings of real balances and therefore the flow of seignorage revenue.

The amount of the increased costs would depend on the shape of the

demand curve for each liability.'9 A plausible assumption is that issues of
Canadian debt to foreigners faced an infinitely elastic demand curve; issues to
' Calomaris (1985; 15—16) raises this issue in the context of the Greenback
period in the United States.

20

Canadians faced a slightly downward sloping curve, and issues of high—powered

money faced a more inelastic demand curve. Such a view would be consistent

with the government's greater concern about losing its reputation

in

the

international market (where all bond holders were paid in gold or the equivalent)
than in the domestic market (where holders of high powered money were denied
redemption in gold).

It might be argued that exchange risk would not have prevented Canadians

from raising funds internationally, if they had borrowed in the lender's currency.

This would transfer the exchange risk to the borrower, however, it might be

assumed by a lender that a country willing to default by depreciating its
currency, would be willing to default on principal if the former option were not
open. Finally, we note that the government's statements could be interpreted as a

fear that international credit would be unavailable at any price; that is, that
markets were not of the perfect Sort assumed in the last two paragraphs.2°

The analysis of the impact of depreciation on the government's balance

sheet could be repeated for the nation as a whole. Canada was a net debtor

nation and the effect of depreciation on aggregate real wealth would come
through the channels discussed above. Data are not available to undertake the

kind of quantitative analysis that we have used to examine the effect on
government wealth, however, the direction of effect would be the same.2'
Thus, the government's failure to undertake an expansionary monetary policy

resulted from two beliefs: that monetary expansion would increase the value of
20 For a discussion of credit rationing in markets with incomplete information see
Stiglitz and Weiss (1981).
21 Data on stocks of bonds outstanding are unavailable, although there are data
on the amount of interest paid outside Canada. In addition there are no data on
whether the foreign held bonds were denominated in Canadian dollars, gold or
foreign currency, or on net foreign holdings.

21

external obligations without reducing the value of domestic obligations; and that,
even if all contractual obligations were met, Canada would lose her reputation as
a responsible debtor.
V. Expectations and the Exchange Rate: an Empirical Test

After early 1929 Canadian currency was de facto inconvertible, and the
money stock was a policy variable under the control of the government. While in
the long run the exchange rate, representing the relative purchasing power of one

country's currrency in terms of another, is determined by the behaviour of the
supply of money relative to the demand for money in the two countries, in the

short run the exchange rate, like other asset prices is strongly influenced by
expectations. Thus expectations of future monetary policy would be important in
determining to—day's exchange rate.

We have argued extensively above that the government made a clear

commitment to maintain the gold basis of the Canadian dollar, which would
prevent them from pursuing policies leading to inflation and depreciation. Since
this appeared to be a rational policy the Canadian public viewed it as a credible
corn mit m ent.

While the government's policy was unwavering, international factors also

influenced the public's expectations about the level of the exchange rate.
Specifically, the British abandonment of gold in September 1931 and the American

suspension of gold convertibility in March 1933 both reduced the probability
agents attached to Canadian maintenance of the gold basis. We assume that

expectations went through three phases which were determined by these
exogenous external events. Between January 1929 and September 1931, Canadians

expected resumption at the traditional parity at any time. This view was

22

encouraged by the government's insistence that the country was on a gold basis.
While both politicians and economists ridiculed this assertion, there was continual

discussion of the possibility and methods of returning to a de facto gold basis.22

The second phase began with the suspension of the gold standard in
England. This clearly surprised the banking community.23 The President of the
Canadian Bankers' Association wrote privately to a colleague on September 22,
1931 :24

We have had two hectic days in Toronto. It was only Friday last that
one of the big five banks [in England] assured its friends in Montreal

that England had no idea of abandoning the gold standard. This
information appeared in the press on Saturday, therefore the

announcement which reached Toronto on Sunday evening came not only
as a great surprise but also as a great shock.

It was now impossible to resume at the traditional parity with both sterling and

the U.S. dollar (either C$1 = US$1 or C$4.86 = £1, but since £1 = US$3.45 it
was impossible for US$4.86 = C$4.86 = £1) and we argue that the uncertainty
left Canadians in the position of having to hedge their bets.
Finally, after the middle of 1933, when the traditional relationship between

the U.S dollar and sterling was reestablished, we assume that

Canadians

anticipated a similar return to parity. That is, a return to an exchange rate of
C$4.86 = US$4.86 = £1, with all currencies depreciated by the same extent as
measured in gold. The Bank of Commerce, in its Monthly Commercial Letter (June

1934; 5) reported that the return to normality was tantamount to the return to
the gold standard. In December 1933 the President of the Bank of Toronto stated

22 See for example, Monetary Times, 3 May 1929, 17 Jan. 1930, 14 Feb. 1930. The

Australian bankers had a similar reaction to the initial suspension of the gold
standard there in early 1930: "Never for a moment did the banks consider the
departure from parity to be anything more than a temporary expedient." (Schedvin,
1970; 156)

23 See the article by Curtis in Monetary Times, 16 Oct. 1931.
24 From the Archives of the Bank of Nova Scotia; File A #70—10 BNS Docs
Section #8.

23

that

All present signs seem to point towards an ultimate international
agreement upon a new gold standard for all countries, probably 40 to
50% below that now prevailing. The initiative will probably come from

Washington or London or both acting jointly, and this country's
problems in the Gold and currency field may find a solution at the
same time.

These assumptions can be used to build a simple model of the Canadian

exchange rate. Consider the case where each agent assigns a probability X to
resumption at some future date t1 at the traditional parity

and a probability (1

— X) to resumption at the rate e*, e' > . If agents hold rational expectations
then,

Xi +
where

(6)

(1—X)e*

is the expectation formed at t0 for the exchange rate at t1. If no

new information becomes available in the period (t0,t1) then equation (6)

holds

for t0 < t < t1. If agents are risk neutral, then

e=

t0 < t < t1

(7)

At t1 when the actual parity at resumption is revealed there will be an
instantaneous jump in the exchange rate, however, the ex ante forecasting error is
zero.

Combining equations (6) and (7), the model predicts that,

e= Xi +

(1—X) e

(8)

If et is the Canadian dollar — U.S. dollar exchange rate (the price of a U.S. dollar
in Canadian dollars) then our analysis of expectations implies that

= 1, so that

if (X), the probability of resumption at the old parity of U.S. $1 = C$1, is unity

then e = i. Similarly e is equal to the inverse of the ratio of the current U.S.

dollar price of sterling to 4.866. This implies that if X=0, then the price of
sterling will be C$4.866.

24

The hypothesis that

the

level

of the Canadian exchange rate was

determined in the manner described in equation (16) can be indirectly tested by

estimating the coefficients of the equation and testing whether or not they sum
to unity.25 Using seasonally adjusted monthly data for the period October 1931 to

December 1938 (using unadjusted data did not alter any of the results), and
correcting for the observed first order autocorrelation, we estimated the equation.

Interactive dummy variables were included to test for possible changes in the
coefficients in March 1933 (when the U.S. restricted dealings in foreign exchange
and gold) and February 1934 (after the U.S. Treasury purchase price for gold was
fixed at $35.00/ounce).

The estimating equation was

e = a0 + a1Dl + a2D2 + a3e' + a4(e' . Dl) + a5(e' . D2)

(9)

where e and e' are defined as above, and
Dl = 1 between March 1933 and January 1934 inclusive

= 0 otherwise
D2 = 1 between February 1934 and December 1938 inclusive

= 0 otherwise

The null hypothesis states that the following restrictions will hold:

(I) a0 + a3 = 1.0

(ii) a1 + a4 = 0.0
(iii) a2 + a5 = 0.0
Estimation yields the following results:

25 This test determines whether or not the depreciation of the Canadian dollar
against gold was a weighted average of the depreciation of the U.S. dollar and
the pound sterling. Evidence that it is a weighted average of the two is
consistent with our hypothesis of the determination of the Canadian exchange rate
over the period. It is, of course, potentially consistent with alternative hypotheses,
so it is worth emphasizing that the test would reject the hypothesis for most
exchange rates — for example, the Australian dollar — over the period.

25

= 0.49 + 0.1OD1 + 0.36D2 + 0.53e* — 0.15(e*
(6.92) (1.38)

= .97

(2.45)

(5.50)

Dl) — 0.38(e

(1.47)

D2)

(10)

(2.40)

n = 87

p = 0.71

and the absolute values of the t—statistics are given in parentheses.

H0: a0 + a3 = 1.0

t= 0.72

df = 81; accepted

H0: a1 + a4 = 0.0

t=—1.60

df = 81; accepted

H0: a2 + a5 = 0.0

t=—0.84

df

81; accepted

The null hypothesis was accepted in each case, and the estimation suggests that

there was a significant change in the coefficients in February 1934 but not in
March 1933. The probability assigned to resumption at the par of U.S.$1 = C$1 is

0.49 before February 1934 and 0.85 after that date. Return to a parity of C$4.866

= £1 was assigned a probability of about 0.53 before February 1934, and 0.15
after that date.

If the restrictions in fact held exactly, and there was no change in the
coefficients in March 1933, better estimates of the coefficients could be obtained
by imposing such restrictions, which yields the following results:
= 0.55 + 0.22D2 + O.44e*t — 0.22(e*
(23.2) (1.90)
(18.59)
(1.90

D2)

(11)

The probability estimates change only slightly (X=0.55 before February 1934

and 0.77 after February 1934) suggesting that the results are quite robust.
Interestingly there was considerable discussion in late 1933 of the possibility that

the Canadian dollar would become more closely linked to sterling in an Empire
currency block, (see discussions in the Wall Street Journal July and August 1933),

but apparently these were outweighed by the stability suggested by the effect on

expectations (of resumption at U.S.$1 = C$1) of the U.S. fixing of the price of
gold.

26

Contemporary reports provide some support for our hypothesis that
speculation played an important role in determining the exchange rate. The Wa/I
Street Journal (22 July 1930) reported that when the Canadian dollar had been at

a slight discount in early 1930, some funds held by U.S. subsidiaries had not
been repatriated as firms had anticipated the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.

In a discussion in the Monetary Times (16 Oct. 1931) of the impact of the British
depreciation in September 1931 on the value of the Canadian dollar, Curtis argues

that the Canadian dollar depreciated because of the withdrawal of U.S. funds: "It

may be costly, because of a possible depreciation in the Canadian dollar, to
leave funds in Canada. And just because there was doubt in the minds of many
as to Canada's monetary standard, there was a strong movement to transfer funds
out of Canada".

There was little contemporary comment on the prognosis for the Canadian

dollar, although there was frequent discussion in the Wall Street Journal and the

Monetary Times of day—to—day fluctuations in the rate. For example, the Wa/I

Street Journal (20 Jan. 1932) stated that, although

in

late

1931

"general

nervousness had caused the rate to decline far below a level which foreign
exchange authorities considered to be justified,

.

a recovery to anything like

par is not looked for in best informed circles".2'

The customary explanation of the level of the exchange rate in the early
years following suspension is that the balance of payments happened to be in
equilibrium at the traditional parity. First proposed by Knox in his 1939 study of

monetary policy for the Rowell Sirois Royal Commision, this point of view was
stated succinctly by Mclvor (1963):

That the Canadian dollar did not depreciate significantly in the early
26 No data on the future exchange rate are extant, although the Wall Street
Journal occasionally refers to 15— and 30—day futures.

27

years of the depression was due to a net inflow of capital which

reflected in part the confidence of foreign investors in the Canadian
economy, in part Canadian government borrowing in New York and in
part Canadian tariff policy which by curtailing imports lessened the
demand for foreign exchange. There is no evidence, however, that these
government measures which supported the dollar were adopted with that

object in view. This result was rather of an incidental nature, but
entirely in accord with the government's desire to maintain "sound"
money. [emphasis added]

It seems rather unlikely (to us) that the Canadian balance of payments
incidentally equilibrated at the traditional parity for nearly three years before
October 1931 and for several years after 1934. Under a floating exchange rate the

behaviour of the supply of money relative to the demand for money is central
to the determination of the level of the exchange rate.

The explanation offered by Shearer and Clark (1984) is more intuitively
attractive. They argue that during the first phase of the prohibition on exports of
gold, the government needed, and obtained, the co—operation of the banks. They

suggest that, particularly after mid—1931, the banks did not export gold on their
own account, or for U.S. banks that were their customers, although it would have

been profitable for them to do so. This, however, does not explain why the
banks would co—operate with the government, nor does it explain the level of the
exchange rate observed after October 1931, when the Canadian dollar depreciated

about half as much as the pound, against the U.S. dollar.
VI. Conclusion.

Canada, in the period 1929—35 was an exception to the rule on the
consequences of leaving the gold standard. Unlike many other countries, Canada

did not experience reflation, and depreciation of her currency after she left the

gold standard de facto in early 1929. The explanation we offer for Canada's
atypical experience is that the principal authority responsible for determining the

nation's money supply in the absence of a central bank — the Government of

28

Canada — had strong reasons not to expand the money supply and hence
depreciate the Canadian dollar.

The government opposed depreciation because it believed the costs of

servicing its externally held debt (in terms of gold) outweighed the benefits of
depreciating its domestically held debt and because it feared that departure from

the rules of the gold standard would encourage a flight of capital. The public, on

its part, treated the government's commitment to exchange rate stability as
credible. Strong expectations of a return to the gold standard at the old parity
dominated exchange rate expectations until Great Britain left gold in September
1931. Thereafter, until the U.S. re—established a new gold parity in March 1934,

exchange rate expectations were determined by the probabilities the public
attached to Canada following the policies of each of its major trading partners.

29

REFERENCES

Beenstock, M., F. Capie, B. Griffiths (1984) "Economic Recovery in the United
Kingdom in the 1930's", Bank of England Panel of Academic Consultants.
Pan& Paper #23, April.

Bordo, M. and A. Redish (1987) "Why did the Bank of Canada emerge in 1935?"
Journal of Economic History, XLVII,

405—18.

Brown, E. Cary (1956) "Fiscal Policy in the 'Thirties: A Reappraisal" American
Economic Review 46, 857—879.

Bryce, Robert B. (1986) Maturing in Hard Times (MOntreal: McGill—Queen's
University Press).

Calomaris, Charles W. (1985) "Understanding Greenback Inflation and Deflation: An
Asset—Pricing Approach" unpublished ms. Northwestern University.

Choudhri, E. and L. Kochin (1980) "The Exchange Rate and the International
Transmission of Business Disturbances: Some Evidence from the Great
Depression" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, XII, 565—74.

Clark, Carolyn and Ronald A. Shearer (1976) "New Evidence on Monetary Policy
under the Finance Act, 1920 — 1934". Unpublished manuscript, University of
British Columbia.

Dornbusch, R. (1976) "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics", Journal of
Political Economy, 84, 1161—76,

Eichengreen, B. (1985) "The Australian Recovery of the 1930's in International
Comparative Perspective" Harvard University Discussion Paper, No. 1184.
October.

Eichengreen, B. and J. Sachs (1986) "Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in
the 1930's" Journal of Economic History, XLV, 925—46.

Fisher, I. (1935) "Are Booms and Depressions Transmitted Internationally through
Monetary Standards?" Bulletin of the International Statistical Institute, 28 (No.
1): 1—29.

Jonung, L. (1981) 'The Depression in Sweden and the United States: A Comparison

of Causes and Policies' in K. Brunner, ed,, The Great Depression Revisited
(Boston: Martinus Nijhoff)

Knox, FA. (1939) Dominion Monetary Policy, 1929-34 (Ottawa)
McI vor, R .C. (1961) Canadian Monetary, Banking, and Fiscal Development (Toronto:
Macmillan)

Nixon, S.E. (1937) "Interest Rates in Canada: the Course of Interest Rates,
1929—1937", Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 3, 421—434.

Rich, Georg (1987) "The Cross of Gold: Money and the Canadian Business Cycle
1867—1913" (unpublished manuscript).

30

Schedvin, C.B. (1970) Australia and the Great Depression (Sydney: Sydney University
Press).

Shearer, Ronald A. and Carolyn Clark (1984) 'Canada and the Interwar Cold
Standard, 1920—35: Monetary Policy without a Central Bank' in Michael D.
Bordo and Anna J. Schwartz, eds., A Retrospective on the Classical Gold
Standard (Chicago: University of Chicago Press)

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss (1981) "Credit Rationing in Markets with
Imperfect Information" American Economic Review 71.

Watts, G.S. (1972) 'The Origins and Background of Central Banking in Canada', Bank
of Canada Review 14—27.

31

TABLE

1

GOVERNMENT REVENUE AND EXPENDITURES

1928/29

1929/30

1930/31

1931/32

1932/33

Interest
Ordinary
Special

124.989
225.963
5.998

121.566
236.213
13.570

121.289
268.269

121.151

254252

17.831

55.959

134.999
223.529
96.892

Total

356.950

371.349

407.389

431.362

455.420

Import duties
Excise duties
Sales Tax
Income Tax
Other ordinary
Other special

187206

179.429
65.035
63.409
69.020
64.518

131.208
57.746
34.734
71.048
54.851

104.132
48.654
59.606

56.063

70.072
37.833
82.191
62.066
54.474

4.540

6.622

7.028

4.492

Total

460.940

445.952

356210

336.737

311.129

Balance

103.990

74.601

(51.179)

(94.625)

(144.291)

Expenditures

Revenues
63.684
83.007
59.422
62.144
5.476

Source: Canada, Public Accounts, various years.

61254

32

TABLE 2

FUNDED DEBT AND MONETARY ISSUES OF THE DOMINION GOVERNMENTS

Outstanding

In sterling
In U.S. funds

Outstanding

September 30, 1930

March 30, 1932

(C$m)

(C$m)

f

311.68
165.90

311.68
240.97

1,444.12
362,00

790.31
1,221.31

2,283.75

2,564.28

169.57

157.34

In Canadian funds

gold bonds (Bdg)
other (Bdc)

Dominion notes outstanding (H)

5Data on funded debt includes only direct liabilities and not indirect liabilities,
that is, guaranteed debt issued by railroads. Debt includes matured but
outstanding amounts and is gross of deductions for sinking funds. (Sinking funds
were only held against foreign currency denominated debt.)

Source: Canada, Public Accounts, 1930/1 and 1931/2.
Moody's Manual of Investments, Government Securities, 1930 and 1932

33

TABLE 3
POTENTIAL BENEFITS FROM MONETARY EXPANSION

(1)

(2)

(3)

Assumptions

a=13 =1

a= =1

a=0, 6 =1

Gold or Foreign Exchange

Bf+Bdg

Bf+(.5)Bdg

Bf+Bg

Q1+Bdc)ir

(H+Bdc-+(.5)Bdg)ir

[H—e(Bf+Bdg)}ir

is paid to

Benefits: Nominal

I

Seit. 1930: ir=dH/H=15%

a) Stock benefit
b) Flow benefit

$79.74m
$3.59m

$188O4m
$8.46m

—$262.82m

$206.80m
$9.31m

$266.07m
$1 197m

—$177.84m

-$11.83m

II March 1932: ir=dH/H=15%
a) Stock benefit
b) Flow benefit

1930
1931

GNP

Tax Revenue

$5,728m
$4,699m

$296m
$275m

—$8.OOm

34

TABLE 4
INTEREST AND MATURING DEBT OBLIGATIONS

September 1930 —
September 1931

March 1932 —
March 1933

(C$m)

(C$m)

Interest obligations

I

(a) London
(b) New York
(c) Canada — gold

11.14
10.09
79.90

(d) Canada — non—gold

16.71

(e) Canadian gold/New York
(f) Miscellaneous

II

11.14
11.96
36.67
61.49
6.15

1.67

1.67

117.85

129.09

Maturing debt

(a) Canada — gold

(b) New York

Sum I and II

52.93'

34.45

25.00
195.78

163.54

Ill Change in Canadian $ costs: 15% depreciation

(a) No payment of gold on

6.93

3.46

(b) Payment of gold on 50% of

16.90

9.26

(c) Payment of gold on all

26.80

15.05

(d) Payment of gold for all debt

29.40

24.50

Canadian gold debt2

Canadian gold debt
Canadian gold debt

1. See text.

2. The debt payable in New York or Canada in line 1(d) is counted as Canadian
gold.

FIgure 1

WHOLESALE PRICE INDEX, CANADA AND USA, 1928=100
MONThLY, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

21.6-

1.2
0.8-

-. - CANADA
USA

0

I

1928

1930

I

I

1932

1934

1936

19'O

1938

Figtre 2

INDUSTRIAL PRODUC11ON, CANADA AND USA, 1928=100
MONThLY, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

2

0

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

1938

1940

Figure 3

EXCHANGE RATES, CAN/USA, CAN/UK, 1928=100
MONThLY, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

21.6-

1.2-

0.80.4-

01928

CANADA-USA
CANADA-UK

1--

1930

1932

1934

1936

1938

1940

1938

1940

FIgure 4

PRICE OF GOLD, 1928=100
MONThLY

2
1.6

1.2

0

1928

1930

1932

1934

1936

FIgure 5

Ml, CANADA AND USA, 192&=lOO
MONTHLY, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

2-

0.4—

CANADA
USA

01928

1930

1932

I

I

1934

1936

1938

1940

