                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     POLITICAL ALIGNMENT, ATTITUDES TOWARD
                          GOVERNMENT AND TAX EVASION

                                       Julie Berry Cullen
                                        Nicholas Turner
                                     Ebonya L. Washington

                                      Working Paper 24323
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24323


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 2018, Revised July 2019




We thank Daniel Brownstead, Stephanie Hao, Claudio Labanca and Meredith Levine for
excellent research assistance, and Jeffrey Clemens, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Danny Yagan and
participants in several conferences and seminars for helpful comments. All errors are our own.
The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The individual-level data for this project were accessed when Turner was an
employee of the U.S. Treasury.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Julie Berry Cullen, Nicholas Turner, and Ebonya L. Washington. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Political Alignment, Attitudes Toward Government and Tax Evasion
Julie Berry Cullen, Nicholas Turner, and Ebonya L. Washington
NBER Working Paper No. 24323
February 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. D72,H24,H26,H3

                                         ABSTRACT

We ask whether attitudes toward government play a causal role in the evasion of U.S. personal
income taxes. We use individual-level survey data to demonstrate a link between sharing the
party of the president and trust in the administration generally and opinions on taxation and
spending policy, more specifically. Next, we move to the county level, and measure tax behavior
as turnover elections push voters in partisan counties into and out of alignment with the party of
the president. We provide three types of evidence that alignment reduces evasion. As a county
moves into alignment we find 1) taxpayers report more easily-evaded forms of income; 2) suspect
EITC claims decrease; and 3) audits triggered and audits found to owe additional tax decrease.
Our results provide real-world evidence that a positive outlook on government lowers tax
evasion.

Julie Berry Cullen                              Ebonya L. Washington
Department of Economics - 0508                  Yale University
University of California, San Diego             Box 8264
9500 Gilman Drive                               37 Hillhouse, Room 36
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                         New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                        and NBER
jbcullen@ucsd.edu                               ebonya.washington@yale.edu

Nicholas Turner
Federal Reserve Board
Nick.Turner@frb.gov




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24323
If a thousand men were not to pay their tax bills this year, that would not be as violent and
bloody measure, as it would be to pay them, and enable the State to commit violence and shed
innocent blood.
                                     -Henry David Thoreau, Resistance to Civil Government

           As long as there has been taxation, there has been tax resistance—the refusal to pay based

on disapproval of how the funds would be spent. There are numerous examples of tax resistance

in U.S history. In 1846, Henry David Thoreau famously refused to pay taxes because of his

opposition to both the Mexican-American war and to slavery, as reflected in the quote above. In

the 1960s, antiwar protestors advocated nonpayment of federal taxes to defund the Vietnam War.

What is the extent of tax resistance today? We address this question in this paper, viewing tax

evasion as a modern version of tax resistance.

           Tax evasion lowered federal tax revenue in the United States by $419 billion on average

across tax years 2008-2010.1 The vast majority of losses (roughly 70 percent or $290 billion)

come from evasion of the personal income tax. This reflects both the heavy reliance on this form

of taxation (which accounts for roughly half of federal receipts) as well as the greater scope for

evasion of personal income taxes as compared to other forms of taxation, such as corporate and

payroll taxes. Speaking to that second point, the IRS estimates that individuals fail to report only

one percent of the most visible income—income that is both withheld and third-party reported.

However, taxpayers fail to report some 63% or $136 billion of the least visible income—income

subject to no withholding and little to no third-party reporting—such as proprietor income.

           Failure to pay taxes impacts the efficiency, equity and incidence of the tax system and

alters the distribution of resources to and across economic activities. Given the widespread

consequences of evasion, economists have a long history of studying the behavior. The classic

model (e.g., Allingham and Sandmo, 1972) characterizes tax evasion as a financial gamble that


1
    See Figures 1 and 2 for more details and sources for the facts in this paragraph.


                                                             1
the agent undertakes if the benefits exceed expected costs. In this framework, the impact of the

marginal tax rate on evasion is ambiguous,2 but the model clearly predicts, and the empirical

evidence generally supports the idea that evasion is decreasing in the cost (i.e., audit and penalty

rates).3

           We build on the literature that argues that the benefits of tax compliance are broader than

simply avoiding a penalty in expectation. Among the factors that might affect willingness to pay

is the perceived value of government spending. Falkinger (1988) extends the basic model to

allow the agent to value the share of public goods received. More generally, Congdon, Kling and

Mullainathan (2009) propose that tax behavior may be affected not only by public goods

received but also by one’s attitudes toward government and its policies. The U.S. federal

government also asserts that sentiments could have real consequences on tax collections; the

Internal Revenue Service (IRS) mentions “socio-political” factors as one of the primary

influences on voluntary tax compliance (IRS 2007). Economists have attempted to manipulate

tax morale in the lab and in the field, as we detail in our literature review. Our innovation is to

study a real world setting where there is plausibly exogenous variation in attitudes, allowing us

to gauge how changes in approval of government impact tax evasion at the county level.

           Our approach is designed to overcome two key data challenges. The first is the well-

known difficulty of quantifying an illegal activity. We address this challenge in three ways. First,

we follow a tax gap approach that relates reported income to generated income, presuming that


2
  If the penalty depends on the amount of tax evaded, the marginal rate plays no role, but there are competing
income and substitution effects if the penalty depends on the amount of under-reporting. The empirical relationship
between the marginal tax rate and evasion is similarly non-robust, with, for example, Clotfelter (1983) and Kleven et
al. (2011) finding a positive relationship, and Feinstein (1991) finding a negative one.
3
  See Barbuta-Misu (2011) for a review of this literature. Given that enforcement is low, some authors posit that
there is a puzzle as to why compliance on less visible sources of income is so high. Alm, McClelland and Schulze
(1992) calibrate the Allingham and Sandmo model for the United States. They find that even a coefficient of relative
risk aversion of 3, which is on the high end of estimates (Gandelman and Hernández-Murillo, 2014) only predicts a
14% compliance rate, far lower than even the 37% compliance rate for the least visible income.


                                                         2
the difference reflects evasion. We bolster this interpretation by comparing the reporting

sensitivity of income sources with differing degrees of third-party reporting and, hence, scope for

evasion. Second, we identify suspect claims of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). Prior

research (Chetty et al., 2012) suggests that when self-employed taxpayers report the least amount

of income that qualifies for the maximum EITC, a pattern Chetty, Friedman and Saez (2013)

term “sharp bunching,” this is likely to reflect evasion. Most personal income tax audits are

initiated by computer when reported amounts are discrepant with norms for similar returns in

ways that correlate with prior detected evasion.4 Therefore our third grouping of evasion proxies

are audit rates and the rate of audits that yield additional tax liabilities.

         The second data challenge we face is measuring government approval. The proxy for

approval we choose is political alignment—a match between own party and presidential party.

To support the validity of this proxy, we use nationally representative data from the General

Social Survey (GSS) to confirm that an individual who is in political alignment with the

president has more positive views of government and taxes and spending relative to an individual

who is not aligned. We then construct an analogous county-level measure of political alignment

from voting records, equal to the share of the two-party vote cast for the party of the current

president.5 In light of evidence that voters’ preferences are sensitive to current economic

conditions (e.g., Brunner, Ross and Washington, 2011), rather than using the vote share from the

most recent election, we use the average over several elections.

         Our empirical analyses then track changes in evasion for partisan counties—those that

vote consistently for one party—that are either shifted into or out of alignment by turnover


4
  Historical information on how returns are selected for examination was accessed at
https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/the-examination-audit-process on February 6, 2018.
5
  It is important to note that we are unable to link individual-level IRS data to other sources that might capture
person-specific attitudes, so instead we use residential location to form groups of potentially like-minded taxpayers.


                                                          3
elections. Given the time frame covered by our tax data, we focus on the years just before and

after the 2000 and 2008 presidential elections, when the party of the president changed. These

natural experiments allow us to observe the same counties under different regimes, with both

Democratic and Republican counties observed moving into and out of alignment.6

         Overall, our results provide novel evidence for an attitudinal component to tax

compliance.7 Combining evidence from our survey (GSS) and administrative (IRS) data, we

demonstrate that when a higher fraction of county residents holds a positive view of government,

a lower fraction of individual income tax is evaded. As a county moves out of alignment,

conditional on economic activity, we find no change in the reporting of visible third-party

reported income but that reporting of less visible income decreases by about 2.6 percent.8 We

also show that sharp bunching around the EITC threshold and the rate of audits that result in

additional tax liabilities increase, which we interpret as further evidence of tax evasion.

         In addition to conducting extensive robustness tests to ensure we have adequately

controlled for underlying economic conditions, we perform a limited set of heterogeneity

analyses. First, we consider how results vary by election, finding that the 2000 election drives

impacts on our EITC proxies while the 2008 election drives impacts on the tax gap and audit

proxies. Second, we consider differences across states according to their tax systems and politics.

We find that the evasion response is muted in states where the cost of evasion is higher since the

federal tax return is a direct input into the state return. The response is magnified in counties

where the benefit is increased because of a lack of alignment with both the governor and the


6
  As part of our data agreement with the IRS, we do not attempt to estimate differential impacts by party affiliation.
7
  Ours is among the first studies to consider the role of political alignment in tax evasion. Previous work has looked
at the relationship between a CEO’s political affiliation and corporate tax avoidance, with conflicting results.
Christensen et al. (2015) find that firms led by CEOs who donate more to the Republican party are less likely to
avoid taxes, while Francis et al. (2016) find these are exactly the firms that are more likely to avoid taxation.
8
  In our specifications, we estimate the differential effect of moving into, relative to moving out of, alignment.
Throughout the text when we refer to movements into alignment we mean relative to moving out of alignment.


                                                          4
president.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1 we review the recent

literature on tax morale and provide evidence that political alignment is a meaningful proxy for

the component of tax morale that operates through government approval. The data and methods

are presented in Section 2, and the results in Section 3. Finally, in Section 4 we offer a brief

discussion and conclusion.

1. Tax morale and the role of political alignment

1.1 Literature on tax morale

       There is a growing literature exploring mechanisms underlying differences in the

willingness to pay taxes, or “tax morale.” In their review, Luttmer and Singhal (2014) provide a

typology for classifying these mechanisms. In addition to other categories, such as intrinsic

motivations (e.g., guilt) and peer influences (e.g., social image and norms), they define

“reciprocity” to refer to those mechanisms that depend on the individual’s relationship to the

state. Attitudes towards government and alignment with the president’s party fall under the

reciprocity category. Being aligned with the president’s party might increase trust in the

administration in general, as well as approval of the government’s tax and spending activities.

       There is both survey and experimental evidence in support of the idea that taxes paid are

a positive function of the payee’s trust in and approval of government. Webley et al. (1991)

demonstrate a correlation between negative attitudes toward government and evasion in the lab,

while Scholz and Lubell (1998) and Torgler (2003) show that trust in government is correlated

with reported compliance in surveys. Reported compliance is also increasing in an individual’s

level of patriotism (Konrad and Qari, 2012) and exposure to war threats against the state

(Feldman and Slemrod, 2009).




                                                  5
         Further, experimental economists have found in the lab that individuals are more likely to

be tax compliant the more they value the public good (Alm, Jackson and McKee, 1992) and

when those individuals have selected that public good (Alm, McClelland and Schulze, 1992).

Torgler (2005) and Hanousek and Palda (2004) find complementary evidence that tax morale is

higher when individuals have direct democratic rights and view the quality of government

services to be high, respectively. Researchers have also repeatedly found that perceptions that the

tax system is fair increase reported compliance (e.g., Cummings et al., 2009; Fortin, Lacroix and

Villeval, 2007; Steenbergen, McGraw and Scholz, 1992).

         Outside of the lab, experimental economists have tried to manipulate tax morale through

mailings or other interventions that prime reciprocal motives by highlighting the public goods

that tax dollars provide. The impacts of these relatively weak interventions – that do not change

the allocation of revenues or political circumstances – on tax compliance have been mixed.

While De Neve et al. (2019) find that messages of reciprocity were effective in increasing

Belgium income taxpayers’ knowledge and appreciation of public goods, respondents were not

more likely to say that taxes should be reported honestly and these messages failed to increase

compliance.9 Among firm owners subject to the VAT in Uruguay (Bergólo et al., 2019) and

individuals subject to the property tax in Argentina (Castro and Scartascini, 2015), the income

tax in Minnesota (Blumenthal et al., 2001) and the church tax in Germany (Dwenger et al.,

2016), varying teams of researchers similarly find no impact on tax collections of randomized

mailings emphasizing the beneficial use of revenues. In contrast, such mailings are found to raise

taxes collected on foreign income in Norway (Bott et al., 2017) and from overdue personal



9
  Unlike the Belgian null results for reported tax morale, Dorrenger and Peichl (2017) find that injecting reminders
that taxes support public education coupled with information about evasion levels reduces the likelihood that
respondents report that it is justifiable to evade taxes in a German survey experiment.


                                                          6
income taxes in the UK (Hallsworth et al., 2017). Notably, however, in the former setting the

reciprocity message was coupled with moral suasion, and in the latter the behavior is a form of

tax compliance that is exclusive of evasion.

         Our study moves beyond the attempts to experimentally manipulate morale to quantify

the impact of naturally occurring quasi-experimental variation in attitudes toward government on

evasion, as measured by IRS administrative data. From this perspective, the most closely related

predecessor is Cebula (2013), showing that the IRS time series on aggregate evasion is predicted

by the public’s dissatisfaction with government. Using more plausibly exogenous variation in

attitudes, we confirm a causal link.10

1.2 Linking political alignment to tax morale

         Our proxy for tax morale under the federal personal income tax is sharing the same party

as the president. It is the president who is the head of the executive branch, which houses the

IRS. Further, political scientists have long documented that voters assign credit or blame for the

macroeconomy to the president (Key, 1966). Gomez and Wilson (2001) provide evidence that

only sophisticated voters understand that there are multiple players, including Congress, in

macroeconomic conditions, and thus vote accordingly.11 It seems likely that taxpayers similarly

focus heavily on the president when forming attitudes related to tax morale.

         In order to provide empirical evidence in support of this contention, we use GSS12 data to



10
   The only other study we are aware of that exploits a natural experiment to provide a shock to tax morale is Besley,
Jensen and Persson (2019). These authors show that the adoption of an unpopular poll tax to fund local government
in the UK had an immediate negative impact on tax payments that persists long after the tax was repealed due to
changes to social norms.
11
   Other evidence of the greater attribution assigned to the president include the fact that presidential approval
predicts the outcomes of congressional midterm elections (Kernell, 1977) and that voters assign greater
responsibility for subnational economic conditions to the president than to state elected officials (Stein, 1990).
12
   Smith, Tom W; Marsden, Peter V; Michael Hout. General Social Surveys, 1972-2014. [machine-readable data
file]. Principal Investigator, Tom W. Smith; Co-Principal Investigators, Peter V. Marsden and Michael Hout, NORC
ed. Chicago: National Opinion Research Center, 2015.


                                                          7
show that sharing the same party as the president predicts government approval, and like other

measures of approval used in the literature, predicts self-reported tax morale. Our key findings

are summarized in Figure 3, with details provided in Appendix A. Conditional on observable

characteristics, respondents whose party identification matches that of the president are

significantly more likely to have confidence in the executive branch and significantly less likely

to state that their income taxes are too high, that the government spends too much, and that the

government should do less. We do not find that alignment with the executive branch predicts

agreement with the idea that the government spends too little or should do more. In other words,

there is an elasticity of disapproval for taxation and spending with respect to alignment, but not

an elasticity of approval. Though not shown in the figure, party alignment with congress does not

predict tax morale, which supports our focus on the president. In the main analysis, we ask

whether less negative attitudes toward taxation and spending induced by party alignment with

the president translate into a higher willingness to comply with taxation.

2. Methodology and data

2.1 Measuring evasion

       Our goal is to estimate the impact of political alignment on evasion, a behavior that is

difficult to measure due to its illegality. A variety of methods have been used to measure evasion

in the literature. In rare instances, data from random (e.g., Kleven et al., 2011) or near complete

(e.g., Dwenger et al.. 2016) audits are available. More typically, evasion is inferred from

discrepancies between what is observed and what is expected. For example, Feldman and

Slemrod (2007) compare the estimated elasticity of charitable giving across different sources of

taxable income. Absent evasion, their presumption is that the propensity to donate would be

constant across more and less visible income sources.




                                                 8
        In this paper, we use several approaches to infer evasion at the county by year level. The

first is known as the tax gap approach. We use reported taxable income measures as our

dependent variables, presuming reductions in reported amounts conditional on observed

economic activity reflect evasion.13 The categories of income differ in the extent to which they

are third-party verified, so are differentially susceptible to evasion and would be expected to be

differentially responsive to shifts in attitudes for this reason. The components we consider, from

least to most easy to evade, are: i) information reported and withheld income (wages and

salaries), ii) income that is subject to substantial information reporting (financial and retirement

income), and iii) income that is subject to little information reporting (Schedule C proprietor

income and Schedule E pass-through and rental income). Figure 2 shows that this categorization

aligns well with evasion rates found in IRS audit studies.

        Our second approach to identifying evasion is to identify suspect claims of the EITC. In

part due to its complexity, the EITC is subject to high rates of over-claiming. Based on audit

studies, the IRS estimates about one-third of credit payments reflect overpayments (IRS 2014),

with most of the discrepancy due to claiming an ineligible child, filing as a single or head of

household when legally married and over- or under-reporting income or business expenses. Saez

(2010) demonstrates that those who report self-employment income have a propensity to report

the least amount of income that qualifies for the maximum EITC and Chetty et al. (2012) provide

evidence from audits that this “sharp bunching” is driven by noncompliance. Guyton et al.

(2018) provide additional evidence that many returns filed by the self-employed claiming the




13
   We create our own aggregations from the population returns, collapsed to the county year level. We access the
underlying individual income tax data from the Compliance Data Warehouse (CDW). These data are available
beginning in 1996 and include information on nearly every line of the 1040 and most supporting schedules filed, as
well as records of audits. See Appendix B for more details on IRS variable creation.



                                                         9
EITC are suspect. Exploiting the random assignment of audits, they show that among EITC

taxpayers with self-employment income, those that are randomly audited are roughly 40 percent

less likely to claim the EITC in the year following the audit, compared to returns with similar

audit risk scores that were not audited. Thus, we consider both the rates at which the self-

employed claim the EITC at all, as well as the propensity to bunch near the minimum earnings

level that qualifies for the maximum credit as markers of evasion. Following Chetty, Friedman

and Saez (2013), we identify these “sharp bunchers” as returns with dependents and non-zero

Schedule C income that report net earnings within $500 of the minimum income required for the

maximum credit.

        Finally, we infer evasion using the audit rate. Audits are triggered under the personal

income tax primarily by automated computer algorithms that are periodically updated based on

stratified random audits. If the statistical analysis of a return suggests a high probability of

inaccurate information or omitted income, the return is flagged for audit. In addition to the audit

rate, we look at the fraction of returns adjudicated via audit to owe additional tax.

        For all tax outcome variables, we are concerned about selection. Namely, there is the

possibility that changes in reported income that we attribute to evasion actually result from

differential impacts of tax policies, such as expansions to existing tax credits or the introduction

of temporary tax credits that induce filing among those not otherwise required to file. To guard

against this possibility, we rely on the subset of returns filed by “policy constant” tax filers. The

subset of policy constant filers is determined by applying the 1996 tax law (adjusted for

inflation) to later years.14 This strategy effectively screens out those (typically elderly)

individuals with low income and earnings induced to file in 2007 and 2008 in order to claim


14
  See Appendix B for more details and Appendix E (Table E3) for results that use the full, unrestricted sample and
yield qualitatively similar results.


                                                        10
refundable credits as part of the stimulus program. Not surprisingly, since so little of aggregate

reported income is screened out, results are robust to expanding the sample to include all returns

and not simply the policy-constant filers.

2.2 Methodology

         With these proxies for evasion in hand, we exploit presidential turnover elections to

provide the quasi-experimental variation. Our focus is on partisan counties, those counties that

vote consistently for one party over the other in presidential elections. By tracking the behavior

of residents of partisan counties under different regimes, we attempt to hold all else constant and

isolate the alignment-induced shift in tax morale.

         We characterize counties based their two-party vote shares across the 1996 to 2008

elections. We define partisan Democratic counties as those for which the Democratic share of the

two-party vote is always above 50 percent, while we label as Republican counties those for

which this share is always below 50 percent. Alignment is then defined as the average share of

the two-party vote cast for the party of the president.15 Therefore, alignment only changes when

the party of the president changes. For example, if 80 percent of the two-party vote typically

goes to the Democratic candidate, then the county’s alignment measure will be 80 percent when

the president is a Democrat, and 20 percent when the president is a Republican. We focus on

partisan counties as they see the largest swings in the share aligned following a turnover

election.16 These counties, which always fall on one side of the 50 percent threshold, are also

least likely to have their latent partisanship misclassified by average vote share across

presidential elections.


15
   We demonstrate robustness to varying the definition of alignment, including basing it on a longer-run average of
the two-party vote share in Table 3.
16
   Given nonpartisan counties’ small swings in the share party-aligned, it is not surprising that including these
counties in the analysis leaves the results largely unchanged as we demonstrate in Appendix Tables E5-E8.


                                                         11
        Our data span two turnover elections: 2000 and 2008. In 2000, George Bush

(Republican) took over from Bill Clinton (Democrat). In 2008, Barack Obama (Democrat) was

elected, changing the party in the White House once again. For our primary regression analyses,

we employ a window sample bracketing these two elections. Specially, we include the years

1999 and 2001 for the 2000 election and the years 2007 and 2009 for the 2008 election.17 We

omit the election year because of the difficulty in defining alignment for that tax year. For

election years, income is earned under one president and reported (by the following April) under

another. Alignment is not well-defined for these transition years as evasive behavior may occur

not only at the time of, but also well in advance of, tax filing. For example, a contractor may ask

for cash payments in order to be able to evade taxes on income.

        Our window analysis balances the number of years each county is in versus out of

alignment and accounts for the constraint that the IRS information returns data we use to capture

the level of economic activity are first available in 1999. Most importantly, this strategy isolates

the variation in political sentiment that our alignment measure is designed to capture. As we

demonstrate in the top of Figure 4, both Democratic and Republican approval for the president

(measured at the national level) vary considerably even within an administration. Remarkably,

Democrats (Republicans) swing more than 50 (nearly 30) points in their approval of George

Bush across his eight years in office. In contrast to the approval measures which capture

changing national sentiment over time, our alignment measure has the virtue of isolating the

large shift in public opinion at the county level following turnover elections. However, it fails to

capture within term variations in approval, a point we return to Section 3.4.



17
  If we restrict our GSS analysis to similar window years (1998, 2002, 2006 and 2010, due to the biennial design),
we find qualitatively similar evidence for the relationship between presidential alignment and approval of
government, taxes and spending.


                                                        12
         Restricting the sample to partisan counties and the four window years around the two

turnover elections, we run the following ordinary least squares specification relating one of our

proxies for evasion for county c in state s in year t to the county’s political alignment in that

year:

(1) Proxycst = b ´ alignment cst + Xcst W + a c + d st + e cst ,

where a is a vector of county fixed effects and d is a vector of state-by-year fixed effects, so that

relative changes in alignment within a county over time provide the identifying variation. To

account for correlation over time, reported standard errors are clustered at the county level. Our

identifying assumption is that residents of economically similar counties facing common state

and federal tax systems would behave similarly in the absence of differential changes in

alignment.

         The key threat to interpreting b as the causal effect of alignment on evasion is omitted

time varying factors correlated with alignment and evasion, the most obvious being varying

economic conditions. One channel for such a link is studied in Gerber and Huber (2009). The

authors use the same definition of alignment as we do, showing that it predicts optimism about

the future of the economy in survey data. They then demonstrate increased sales tax collections

from the quarter before to the quarter after the election when a county moves into alignment,

consistent with increased consumption (though also perhaps with reduced evasion).18 A second

channel that has been documented is federal spending targeted to counties on the basis of

political alignment.19


18
   In contrast, Mian, Sufi and Khoshkhou (2015) find no evidence of an effect on consumer spending, also using a
quite similar strategy to us but studying each election in turn. Interestingly, to support their strategy, they document
that alignment is not correlated with systematic changes in either IRS adjusted gross income or wage aggregates. We
too find no detectable effect on AGI or wages.
19
   Dynes and Huber (2015) show an explicit link between voter alignment with the president and federal government
transfers in the United States. Prior work has demonstrated a link that is moderated by congressional representation.


                                                          13
         Figure 4 demonstrates this key challenge for our sample period where swings in

alignment for Democratic and Republican counties (shown at the top of the figure) occur under

contrasting economic environments (as demonstrated by the unemployment series in the bottom

of the figure). The first of our turnovers coincides with an economic recovery, while the second

coincides with the onset of the Great Recession. To control for varying economic environments,

the vector X includes time-varying factors drawn from IRS third-party information reports that

control for the amounts and types of income generated in a county. Specifically, we include log

per capita information return amounts (wages from W2 forms and financial, retirement and

unemployment income from 1099 forms) and the shares of wages paid by different types of

businesses (S-corporations, C-corporations and partnerships).20 These shares control for the

composition of business activity, and possible shifting between personal and corporate tax bases.

Finally, to allow for the differential economic cyclicality of less visible income sources, we

interact per capita unemployment compensation with the pre-period share of self-employed in

the county as recorded in the 1990 Census. It is important to allow for this flexibility since

Republican counties tend to have higher shares self-employed. We provide evidence that this

share succinctly captures the key economic differences between otherwise similar Republic and

Democratic counties by demonstrating robustness of our findings to additionally interacting our




For example, Albouy (2013) finds that representation by a member of the majority party predicts greater transfers,
and Berry, Burden and Howell (2010) find the same for House representation by the party of the president. In the
Portuguese context, Migueis (2013) demonstrates an impact of municipal government alignment with the federal
government on federal transfers to the municipality. Brollo and Nanncini (2012) and Bracco et al. (2015) find that
pre-election transfers increase to aligned municipalities in Brazil and Italy, respectively. Dell (2015) demonstrates
that violence increases in Mexican municipalities following a close mayoral election in which the PAN party is
victorious, attributing this to increased transfers from the PAN federal government allowing mayors to crack down
on the drug trade.
20
   We create the wage share variables by linking the W2 forms to various business tax returns by employer
identification number. Appendix B provides more details on the IRS variable construction. Unfortunately, data from
the 1099-MISC, which would additionally capture some visible forms of self-employment income, are not available
in window year 1999.


                                                         14
unemployment intensity measure with a county’s propensity to vote Democratic (as predicted by

economic variables drawn from a variety of government sources excluding the IRS) and with a

county’s average Democratic vote share. To address the concern that unemployment may not

fully characterize the economic cyclicality of counties, particularly during the Great Recession,

we demonstrate the robustness of our results to the addition of housing market controls and

analogous interactions with these variables.

       Our variety of dependent variables also addresses concerns that results may be driven by

economic activity. The tax gap approach, that defines evasion as reductions in reported amounts

conditional on generated amounts, has the most stringent requirements for controlling adequately

for a county’s economy. Within the tap gap approach, however, we are able to compare the

sensitivity of reporting across more and less visible income sources that are differentially

susceptible to evasion, all using the same control set. Further, the complementary EITC and audit

specifications are less dependent on accurately measuring true taxable income generated.

       A second limitation of our approach stems from our use of aggregate data to make

inferences about individual behavior. Particularly given the low levels of turnout in the United

States, we can never prove that the county residents’ whose alignment changes are the same

individuals who subsequently change their taxpaying behavior. This problem is known as the

ecological fallacy. Because attitudes of networks are shocked at the same time as own attitudes,

we are also unable to discern whether our impacts are due to changes to own tax morale or due to

changes in the attitudes of peers that would operate through social multipliers. Therefore, in the

conclusion we discuss implications for policies that would be targeted to populations, not to

individuals.

       A final concern is that taxpayers may perceive the probability or cost of audits as varying




                                                 15
inversely with alignment. The three cross-sectional surveys that we were able to locate that ask

both about party identification and audit perception, suggest that this is not a concern. We find

that Republican and Democratic respondents do not have significantly different expectations of

audits at any of our three survey time points, two during a Republican administration and one

during a Democratic presidency (see Appendix C for details). Further, to the extent that there are

differential audit probabilities that we were not able to detect, they would serve to drive our

results toward zero as the increase in evasion from being out of alignment would be tempered by

a decrease in evasion due to its perceived costs.

2.3 Sample and summary statistics

         As explained above, we characterize a county’s partisanship status by the average two-

party vote shares across the 1996 to 2008 presidential elections.21 Fifteen percent are always

majority Democratic, 48 percent are always majority Republican, and the remainder we classify

as nonpartisan counties.22 Figure 5 shows the geographic distribution of counties by partisan

status. Our analysis focuses on the 1,907 partisan counties for which we have needed data.23

While many states have large majorities of supporters of one party, most states still have

heterogeneity across counties in party leaning.

         Tables 1a and 1b report means and standard deviations for the dependent and control

variables, respectively, by the partisan status of the county. Note that all financial variables have


21
   County vote returns were purchased from http://uselectionatlas.org/. See Appendix D for details on the
distribution of vote shares by year and persistence over time within counties, as well as partisan and nonpartisan
county shares by state.
22
   Democratic counties tend to be more urban and populous, so that the population-weighted shares are 43 percent
Democratic and 29 percent Republican. Regression results are robust to weighting by log population.
23
   Starting from an unbalanced panel of the 3,149 counties that ever existed 1989 to 2012, we drop counties that are:
i) not represented in the voting data (34 counties, including all 33 Alaska counties), ii) deleted over the period (3
counties), iii) not the primary county for any zip codes (4 counties), iv) missing whole zip codes of returns deleted
from the CDW in 1999 (53 counties), v) combined with other areas for reporting by the BEA (50 counties). The
remaining sample is a balanced panel of 3,005 (partisan and nonpartisan) counties, representing more than 95
percent of ever existing counties and 93 percent of the population in a typical year.


                                                         16
been converted to real per capita 2010 dollars. The reported income statistics show that the most

visible form of income is also the most common, with wage and salary income making up three-

quarters of gross income. The least visible forms make up less than 10 percent. Republican

counties tend to have higher shares self-employed and relatively more income from less visible

sources. Larger shares of residents of Democratic counties claim the EITC. However, sharp

bunching is a rare event in both types of counties.

3. Results

3.1 Baseline window analysis

       The first row of Table 2 presents our baseline estimates of the relationship between

alignment with the president and evasion. Each cell of the table contains the coefficient and

standard error on alignment from a different specification of equation 1. In order to isolate

exogenous variation in alignment our estimation samples include the two years that surround

each of the turnover elections (i.e., 1999, 2001, 2007 and 2009), with each partisan county

spending two of these years in and two of these years out of political alignment. The dependent

variable, which varies across columns, is defined based on the subset of tax returns filed by

policy constant filers, who would have been expected to file under time-invariant tax provisions.

As described above, in addition to county and state-by-year fixed effects, we control for income

generated based on variables constructed from the information returns as well as the interaction

between unemployment benefits received and self-employment intensity. The subsequent rows

present results for more and less restrictive versions of the control set, which are discussed in the

next subsection.

       Our first evidence of a causal link between alignment and evasion comes from the tax

gap approach in the first three columns of Table 2. The small and insignificant point estimate in




                                                 17
the first cell of the table indicates that the amount of wage and salary income reported,

conditional on our controls for income generated, does not vary as a county moves into

alignment. Since our presumption is that reductions in reported amounts conditional on observed

economic activity reflect evasion, this null finding is reassuring since there is little scope for

evasion on this type of income.24 Similarly, in the second cell, we find no responsiveness of

financial and retirement income, which is also largely visible to the government. However,

moving to the third cell, we find that as alignment increases (decreases) by one, reporting of the

less visible Schedule C&E25 increases (decreases) by a significant 0.086 log points. An increase

of one in alignment would occur for a county that voted unanimously for the Democratic

presidential candidate from 1996 to 2008, at the time when a Democratic president succeeds a

Republican. In our data, the average Democratic (Republican) county gives 62 percent (34

percent) of its vote to the Democrat; therefore, the average change in alignment is about 30

percentage points. Normalized by this average change in alignment, we find that moving into

alignment increases the amount of Schedule C&E income reported in the average partisan county

by 2.6 percent, or about $50 per person per county moving into alignment.26 By comparison,

DeBacker et al. (2015) track individual taxpayers and find that reported Schedule C income

increases by roughly 15 percent in the first year after an audit. Notably, underreporting of

business income accounts for nearly a third of the IRS estimation of the tax gap (IRS, 2016).

         Our second type of evidence for a causal link between alignment and evasion is suspect


24
   We also find no impact of alignment on the more aggregate reported income measure of gross income less capital
gains, which we omit for brevity.
25
   When we examine the impact of alignment on Schedule C&E income separately, results are economically and
statistically significant for each. Coefficients (standard errors) are 0.075 (0.024) for Schedule C and
0.083 (0.035) for Schedule E income.
26
   Throughout the discussion of our results, we refer to effects in percent changes adjusted for the average change in
county alignment rather than log points for the zero to one change expressed in the table. This involves first scaling
the effects by the average difference in vote shares of roughly 30 percentage points and then uses the simplification
that log(1+x) is roughly equal to x when x is small.


                                                         18
EITC claims. Claiming the EITC unambiguously decreases tax liability. Depending on family

structure, the maximum credit is potentially large.27 Further, there is the potential for the credit to

be claimed erroneously because it is not possible to perfectly observe eligibility. For example,

self-employment income, both gains and losses, count towards earnings for the EITC and are not

third-party verified. The sharp bunchers among Schedule C filers that others have associated

with evasion are a subset of Schedule C and EITC filers. In the next three columns of Table 2,

we explore the broader sets of filers, as well as the rare sharp bunchers (where rates in our

sample are about 1 per 1,000 residents).28 Alignment decreases the rate of EITC claims by about

0.9% in the average partisan county as shown in the first row of column 4. Even more suggestive

of decreased evasion, moving into alignment decreases the rates of filing both Schedule C and

the EITC by a significant 1.2%. Finally, despite both the rarity of the event and the reduction in

our sample size,29 we find further evidence that moving into alignment decreases evasion when

analyzing sharp bunching. As the average county moves into alignment, there is a 2.3%

reduction in this behavior.

        Our final two dependent variables are related to audits. We see in the first cell of column

7 that residents of the average county that moves into alignment are nearly 4% less likely to

submit returns that are audited. And, those that are audited are less likely to be found to have

underreported income (column 8).



27
   The value of the EITC depends on the number of qualifying children. In 2019, values range from $529 for returns
with no children to over $6,557 for returns with three or more children. (Accessed at https://www.irs.gov/credits-
deductions/individuals/earned-income-tax-credit/eitc-income-limits-maximum-credit-amounts-next-year on May, 9
2019).
28
   This rate is lower than the 2.1% rate reported in Chetty, Friedman and Saez (2013) because of how the
denominator is constructed. Our rate is relative to the county year population as opposed to the number of EITC
returns with children that have income in the EITC-eligible range.
29
   For both the sharp bunching and audit outcomes, the sample is restricted to partisan counties with populations
over 10,000 to avoid missing data due to masking for nondisclosure. We demonstrate the robustness of our other
outcomes to limiting the sample to larger counties in Appendix Table E4.


                                                       19
3.2 Robustness to varying economic controls

        In summary, the first row of Table 2 presents results from three types of tests (tax gap,

sharp bunching and audits) that consistently point to an economically and statistically significant

causal impact of alignment on evasion. The greatest threat to this interpretation is unobserved

economic activity that is correlated with alignment. The remainder of Table 2 addresses this

concern.

        Our control set includes measures of amounts and types of income earned by county

residents drawn from IRS information returns and the interaction of the best proxy for cyclicality

from these (unemployment benefits received) with self-employment intensity (the 1990 share of

residents self-employed). We argue that the interaction is necessary to allow for differential

cyclicality of less visible economic activity for Democratic and Republican counties. That is,

while controls such as wages and unemployment benefit amounts capture conditions for

households with wage earners well, they may fail to capture the dynamics of earnings for small

business owners. The interaction allows small business activity to evolve with the local business

cycle according to its importance as a sector. In row 2 of Table 2 we omit this interaction. This

serves to decrease some of our estimates in magnitude, leaving both the sharp bunching and the

found underreporting results insignificant.

        In the next two rows of the table, we explore whether the interaction we have included is

not only necessary but also sufficient, by instead expanding the control set to allow for additional

differential cyclicality. We use non-IRS baseline economic variables to predict the propensity for

a county to be partisan Democratic as opposed to Republican.30 We then add an additional


30
   Predictors include non-farm private employment, government employment, unemployment, and number of
establishments, as well as number of housing starts and the share of establishments by industry (as detailed in
Appendix Table E1). All are from 1990 and all but housing starts (which has high rates of zeroes) are expressed in
log per capita form. The prediction equation is run for the sample of medium-run partisan counties.


                                                        20
interaction between this propensity and our measure of the local business cycle. Results, shown

in row 3, are largely unchanged from the baseline. To push even further we then also add an

analogous interaction using the county average vote share, which is the variable that is used to

construct alignment each year. While some coefficients increase and others decrease in

magnitude, as demonstrated in row 4, all three tests still yield significant evidence of a causal

link between political alignment and evasion.

       Our macroeconomic proxy, the unemployment rate, may not fully capture income

dynamics, particularly during the Great Recession when housing price dynamics were key. Thus,

in the remainder of Table 2, we explore the sensitivity of our results to augmenting the

specification to include measures of economic cyclicality drawn from the housing market,

namely the number of mortgage-months serviced per capita and the median home value. In row

4, we demonstrate the robustness of our baseline specification to adding these two controls. In

the final rows of the table, we then interact these new macroeconomic proxies with first the

predicted propensity to be Democratic (row 5) and then additionally with the average

Democratic vote share (row 6). For both of these augmented interaction models, we find

significant evidence of evasion across all three tests of the illegal behavior. We choose the more

parsimonious specification in row 1 as our baseline specification to avoid over-controlling for

differences across partisan counties that are not economic.

       We further explore robustness of our results to additional economic controls in Appendix

Table E3. We demonstrate that we still find tax gap, bunching and audit evidence of the impact

of moving out of alignment on evasion when in comparison to our baseline specification we: 1)

allow for greater flexibility of information return controls by interacting them with indicators for

the second election; 2) include directly as controls time-varying versions of the non-IRS




                                                 21
economics variables used as predictors for county partisan status; and 3) compare a county’s

post-election tax behavior to only its pre-election tax behavior from the same election by

including county-by-election fixed effects. And, although we find that when a county moves into

alignment it is more likely to receive federal grants and procurement, controlling for these has

little effect.

         We additionally address concerns about economic differences among counties through

propensity score trimming and eliminating counties hit hard by the housing crisis, as shown in

Appendix Table E4. In other specifications in the table, we exclude counties that are likely to

have greater divergence between measured economic activity and resident incomes including

those that are the location of capital cities and those with large commuting flows.31 Finally, we

demonstrate robustness to including all counties, whether classified as partisan in or not, by

repeating all analyses to this point with this expanded sample in Appendix Tables E5-E8.

3.3 Robustness to varying measures of alignment

         In our baseline model, we define alignment as the average presidential vote share across

the 1996 to 2008 elections. In Table 3 we investigate how dependent our results are on this

baseline definition. In the first row of the table we repeat our baseline specification from the first

row of Table 2 for reference.

         In the second row, we calculate alignment from the average vote share across more


31
   In results not shown, we test sensitivity to varying the treatment of our standard errors. First, we cluster at the
state rather than the county level. Though standard errors tend to be somewhat larger, statistical significance is rarely
affected. For example, in the baseline specification in the first row of Table 2, all estimated coefficients retain the
same level of statistical significance other than that for audits found to owe, which falls from the 1% to the 5% level.
Second, we implement the Conley (1999) adjustment for spatial correlation using Stata code provided by Hsiang
(2010). We model the adjustment assuming a 100-year serial correlation (which well approximates the baseline that
allows for clustering at the county level) and a Bartlett spatial weighting kernel that we allow to decay over 150
miles, which is over 4 times the average distance between county centroids. (The average county land area is 2,584
square kilometers which, assuming a circle, translates to a diameter of 35 miles.) With this admittedly arbitrary
adjustment, audits owed again falls to the 5% level, sharp bunching falls from the 1 to 10% level and Schedule C &
EITC lose significance. The other three measures of evasion retain the same significance levels.


                                                          22
elections. This gives us a better measure of a county’s long run partisanship status but leaves

fewer counties by which to estimate the impact of alignment, as some counties that were

formerly classified as partisan no longer have consistent partisanship and so are classified as

nonpartisan. The pattern of results is robust to this change.

        In the next two rows we move away from exploiting the intensity of alignment and rely

solely on the aligned/unaligned margin for identification. We model alignment as a binary

variable that takes the value 1 for a county that has voted for the current president’s party over

the focal time period, either 1996 to 2008 (row 3) or 1988 to 2008 (row 4).32 The tax gap, EITC

and audit results are robust to this change in terms of both significance levels and effect sizes in

the average county. Recall that the average change in alignment in a turnover election is 0.3 (1)

for the continuous (binary) measure.

        Up to this point, we have ignored turnout, effectively assuming that voters and nonvoters

are affected by the treatment similarly. However, there are at least two problems with this

assumption. First, we do not know that the views about government of nonvoters correspond

with those of voters. Second, even if voters and nonvoters hold similar views of the candidates

ex-ante, the literature on cognitive dissonance and voting suggests they would have differing

views ex-post, as those who are able to exercise the vote have stickier views (Beasley and Joslyn,

2001; Mullainathan and Washington, 2009). Therefore, in the next two rows of Table 3, we

interact our continuous alignment measure with average turnout over the same period for which

alignment is calculated. This interaction scales the magnitude of the changes into and out of

alignment by the share of county eligible voters that exercise their franchise. Average turnout is

0.52, so therefore the swing in alignment in the average county shrinks from 0.3 to 0.16. The


32
   As indicated in Appendix D, 12 (15) states have partisan counties from only one side of the aisle over the medium
(long) term, so that these states do not contribute to identification when using this binary measure.


                                                        23
magnitude of coefficients generally increases commensurately leaving the impact of alignment

on the average county little different from the baseline specification.

       The last two rows of Table 3 address another possible source of slippage in our alignment

measure due to timing. Our window approach effectively compares taxpayer behavior in the

third year of the old president’s term to the first year of the new president’s term. As presidential

approval often dips throughout a president’s tenure (see, for example, Figure 4), vote share could

be a less accurate measure of presidential approval in the third year than in the first. In the final

rows of the table we use as our key independent variable Gallup’s measure of national

presidential approval averaged across the tax year, stratified by party. We assign the Democratic

(Republican) approval measure to the Democratic (Republican) counties. As does the binary

alignment measure, approval abstracts from variation within counties of the same party. Swings

from unaligned to aligned are double in size for approval (approximately 0.6) as compared to

continuous alignment (0.3). Once again, the magnitude of coefficients adjusts commensurately.

Thus, Table 3 demonstrates that results are robust across alignment measures.

3.4 Heterogeneity

3.4.1 By year

       Given that our approach zeroes in on the year before and the year after a turnover

election, it is natural to ask what happens if we widen our lens to include more years on either

side of elections. As we demonstrate in Figure 4, even within an administration, there is great

variation in presidential approval that may well impact tax morale. However, our alignment

measure, while having the virtue of reflecting variation in sentiment across counties, is unable to

capture variation in sentiment across time within an administration. Thus, our identification

strategy fails to distinguish between year-to-year shifts in tax evasion that are due to changing




                                                  24
attitudes towards a particular president and secular trends. Given these limitations, we relegate

event study style results to Appendix F.

         Here, we present results from our window strategy broken down by election. For

completeness, we include the 2004 non-turnover election, when George W. Bush won a second

term. We do not view this election as a falsification test, as relative presidential approval by

party changed by some 20 percentage points from 2003 to 2005. To present results by election,

we amend the basic specification by interacting our alignment measure with election indicators,

including in our analysis set the window years around the three elections and treating Republican

counties as moving into alignment in 2004.33 We present results in Table 4 for our baseline

specification (in the top panel) and two of the alternative specifications (in the bottom two

panels) that add additional controls for differential cyclicality according to initial economic

characteristics.

         Focusing first on our two turnover elections, the results of Table 4 indicate that the link

between alignment and evasion that we see in Table 3 is not strictly driven by either election.

However, we do see different types of evasion responses in each of our two elections. In 2000,

our EITC findings are consistent with alignment reducing evasion while our tax gap and audit

evidence are not. In 2008 we find the reverse, robust evidence of alignment curbing evasion

when looking at audits and the tax gap approach, while the EITC evidence is more mixed, less

stable and in the case of sharp bunching, significantly wrong-signed in two of three

specifications.34 The differences across the elections may suggest that there is differential ease or



33
   We include county-by-2004 election fixed effects to control for the fact that average county alignment differs
from average alignment across the other two elections (which are equated by design).
34
   The year-to-year patterns shown in Appendix F reveal pre-trends local to the 2008 election that are not adequately
addressed by our baseline controls when this election is viewed in isolation, as evidenced by the sensitivity to the
control set across panels.


                                                         25
knowledge of different forms of evasion across time and space. Secondly, Table 4 results are

consistent with the change in (and perhaps greater salience of) presidential approval from before

to after the 2004 election resulting in significant changes in evasion as measured by both the tax

gap and EITC outcomes.35

3.4.2 By state characteristics

        In the vast majority of states, residents must pay state income taxes as well as federal

income taxes. In this final section of results, we ask how the impact of alignment varies with

state income tax codes and alignment with state executives.

        In the “State income tax piggybacking” section of Table 5, we incorporate variation

across states in the degree to which alignment with the president would be expected to matter for

evasion under the federal personal income tax. Some states closely tie their own income tax

calculations to amounts reported on the federal return. In these cases, taxpayers may be less

sensitive to approval of the federal government when deciding how much to report, since it is

necessary to evade at the federal level to evade at the state level, and vice versa. To test this, we

substitute the medium-run binary alignment measure for our medium-run continuous measure

and add an interaction between that binary measure and an indicator for states that piggyback on

the federal income tax. (Estimates from the specification that includes just the binary alignment

main effects are shown in the first row for comparison.) The interaction term is of the opposite

sign from the main effect across the three EITC claimant and two audit columns. In three cases

the interaction coefficients are significant at the one percent level and in a fourth at the 10

percent level. These results are consistent with these ties increasing the costs of evasion and



35
   Given the smaller change in approval in 2004, we might expect that the magnitudes of the coefficients in the 2004
row should be smaller than those of the other two rows. And in many cases they are smaller. However, given the
differing context expected relative magnitudes are unclear.


                                                        26
therefore moderating the responsiveness to alignment. However, the same pattern is not seen for

the tax gap approach.

        In the “Dual alignment with president and governor” section, we show that the impact of

alignment, again captured by a binary variable, is larger in magnitude when a county is doubly-

aligned, aligned both with the president and with the governor. This pattern holds across the tax-

gap and audit approaches and for two of three of the EITC outcomes. Being doubly unaligned

increases the benefit of evasion as it allows one to express displeasure with, or at least withhold

funds from, two administrations.36

4. Discussion and conclusion

        We find real-world evidence consistent with taxpayers’ approval of government affecting

evasion. We first provide evidence from national survey data that people’s attitudes towards

government are correlated with their partisan alignment. When individuals are of the same

political party as the incumbent president, they express less negative views on government tax

and spending policies.

        We then use tax and voting outcomes at the county-level and an identification strategy

based on partisan counties moving into and out of alignment by turnover elections, to provide

three types of evidence all supporting a causal impact of alignment on tax evasion. First, using

the tax gap approach that relates reported income to income generated, we find no elasticity of

third-party reported income. However, we find that the non-third-party reported Schedule C&E

income increases by about 2.5 percent as the average county is moved into alignment.

        Second, we find evidence of sharp bunching of income around the EITC phase-in level.


36
   Another type of heterogeneity that would be interesting to explore is by county party. However, we remind
readers that our data use agreement precludes examining differential impacts by party. We did explore whether
sensitivity to alignment varies by the 1997 level of county social capital (Rupasingha, Goetz and Freshwater, 2006),
but did not uncover any heterogeneity by this dimension.


                                                        27
As the average county moves out of alignment its population is 2.4 percent more likely to file

returns that note dependents, non-zero Schedule C income and net earnings within $500 of the

level associated with the end of the EITC credit phase-in range applicable to the tax unit.

       Thirdly, we demonstrate that audits significantly decrease when a county moves into

alignment. As audits are predominantly instigated by algorithms designed to detect likely

evasion, it is not surprising that we find that the fraction of returns adjudicated in audit to owe

additional taxes decreases as well.

       Finally, we provide evidence that all three responses are muted when the cost of evasion

increases because federal income tax reports are direct inputs to state tax returns. Responses are

magnified when the benefits of evasion increase because county residents are doubly unaligned,

with the president and governor.

       Overall, our pattern of results suggests that individuals who disapprove of government

tax and spending policies evade more, relative to comparable individuals who have a more

positive outlook about the government. This fact is cause for concern given the inefficiencies of

evasion. Yet it also suggests that there may be scope for remedying evasion through simple

interventions, such as information campaigns. Americans are unclear about how the government

spends their money and who bears the burden of taxes. Ballard and Gupta (2018) find that in a

random sample of Michigan residents, roughly 85 percent overstate their average federal tax rate,

and that respondents who believe that tax dollars were spent ineffectively overstate their average

tax rate by a greater extent compared to those who believe their tax dollars were spent

effectively. Confusion also persists in how the federal government spends tax dollars. A Pew

survey (Pew Research Center, 2013) showed that 33 percent of respondents believe the national

government spends more on foreign aid than on interest on the debt, Social Security or




                                                  28
transportation. In reality, the government typically spends about 17 times what it spends on

foreign aid on just Social Security (Ingraham, 2014). Further, information affects perceptions of

government programs. When Kaiser told poll respondents that the U.S. spent less than 1 percent

on foreign aid, the fraction of respondents saying that too much was spent on aid fell in half,

from 56 percent to 28 percent (Rutsch, 2015). As noted in our literature review, single mailings

on these topics produced mixed impacts on tax compliance. However, we speculate that the

government’s clearly and repeatedly conveying information about how tax dollars are actually

spent may change individuals’ perceptions about their tax burdens and alter their inclination to

evade taxes.



References

Albouy, D. 2013. Partisan representation in Congress and the geographic distribution of federal

   funds. The Review of Economics and Statistics 95(1): 127-41.

Allingham, M.G. and A. Sandmo. 1972. Income tax evasion: a theoretical analysis. Journal of

   Public Economics 1(3-4): 323-338.

Alm, J., B.R. Jackson and M. McKee. 1992. Estimating the determinants of taxpayer compliance

   with experimental data. National Tax Journal 45(1): 107-114.

Alm, J., G.H. McClelland and W.D. Schulze. 1992. Why do people pay taxes? Journal of Public

   Economics 48(1): 21-38.

Ballard, C. and S. Gupta. 2018. Perceptions and realities of average tax rates in the federal

   income tax: evidence from Michigan. National Tax Journal 71(2): 263-94.

Barbuta-Misu, N. 2011. A review of factors for tax compliance. Economics and Applied

   Informatics 1: 69-76.




                                                29
Beasley, R.K. and M.R. Joslyn. 2001. Cognitive dissonance and post-decision attitude change in

   six presidential elections. Political Psychology 22(3): 521-40.

Bergólo, M., R. Ceni, G. Cruces, M. Biaccobasso and R. Perez-Truglia. 2019. Tax audits as

   scarecrows: evidence from a large-scale field experiment. National Bureau of Economic

   Research Working Paper 23631.

Berry, C.R., B.C. Burden and W.G. Howell. 2010. The president and the distribution of federal

   spending. American Political Science Review 104(4): 783-99.

Besley, T., A. Jensen and T. Persson. 2019. Norms, enforcement, and tax evasion. National

   Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25575.

Blumethal, M., C. Christian and J. Slemrod. 2001. Do normative appeals affect tax compliance?

   Evidence from a controlled experiment in Minnesota. National Tax Journal 54(1): 125-138.

Bott, K.M., A.W. Cappelen, E.O. Sorensen and B. Tungodden. 2017. You’ve got mail: a

   randomised field experiment on tax evasion. NHH Norwegian School of Economics

   Discussion Paper SAM 10 2017.

Bracco, E., B. Lockwood, F. Porcelli and M. Redoano. 2015. Intergovernmental grants as signals

   and the alignment effect: theory and evidence. Journal of Public Economics 123(1): 78-91.

Brollo, F. and T. Nannicini. 2012. Tying your enemy’s hands in close races: the politics of

   federal transfers in Brazil. American Political Science Review 106(4): 742-761.

Brunner, E., S.L. Ross and E. Washington. 2011. Economics and policy preferences: causal

   evidence of the impact of economic conditions on support for redistribution and other

   proposals. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3): 888-906.

Castro, L. and C. Scartascini. 2015. Tax compliance and enforcement in the pampas: evidence

   from a field experiment. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 116: 65-82.




                                               30
Cebula, R. 2013. New and current evidence on determinants of aggregate federal personal

   income tax evasion in the United States. American Journal of Economics and Sociology

   72(3): 701-731.

Chetty, R., J.N. Friedman, P. Ganong, K.E. Leibel, A.H. Plumley and E. Saez. 2012. Taxpayer

   response to the EITC: evidence from the IRS National Research Program. Slide deck access

   March 17, 2018. http://www.rajchetty.com/chettyfiles/eitc_nrp_tabs.pdf

Chetty, R., J.N. Friedman and E. Saez. 2013. Using differences in knowledge across

   neighborhoods to uncover the impacts of the EITC on earnings. American Economic Review

   103(7): 2683-2721.

Christensen, D.M., D.S. Dhaliwal, S. Boivie and S.D. Graffin. 2015. Top management

   conservatism and corporate risk strategies: Evidence from manager’s personal political

   orientation and corporate tax avoidance. Strategic Management Journal 36: 1918-38.

Clotfelter, C.T. 1983. Tax evasion and tax rates: an analysis of individual returns. The Review of

   Economics and Statistics 65(3): 363-73.

Congdon, W., J.R. Kling and S. Mullainathan. 2009. Behavioral economics and tax policy.

   National Tax Journal 62(3): 375-86.

Conley, T.G. 1999. GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence. Journal of Econometrics

   92(1): 1-45.

Cummings, R.G., J. Martinez-Vazquez, M. McKee and B. Torgler. 2009. Tax morale affects tax

   compliance: Evidence from surveys and an artefactual field experiment. Journal of Economic

   Behavior & Organization 70: 447-57.

De Neve, J., C. Imbert, J. Spinnewijm, T. Tsankova and M. Luts. 2019. How to improve tax

   compliance? Evidence from population-wide experiments in Belgium. CEPR Discussion




                                                31
   Paper 13733.

DeBacker, J., B. Heim, A. Tran and A. Yuskavage. 2015. Once bitten, twice shy? The lasting

   impact of IRS audits on individual tax reporting. Working paper.

Dell, M. 2015. Trafficking networks and the Mexican drug war. American Economic Review 105

   (6): 1738-1779.

Dorrenberg, P and A. Peichl. 2017. Tax morale and the role of social norms and reciprocity:

   evidence from a randomized survey experiment. IFO Working Paper 242.

Dwenger, N., H. Kleven, I. Rasul and J. Rincke, 2016. Extrinsic and intrinsic motivations for tax

   compliance: evidence from a field experiment in Germany. American Economic Journal:

   Economic Policy 8(3): 203-232.

Dynes, A.M. and G.A. Huber. 2015. Partisanship and the allocation of federal spending: do

   same-party legislators or voters benefit from shared party affiliation with the President and

   House Majority? American Political Science Review 109(1): 172-86.

Falkinger, J. 1988. Tax evasion and equity: a theoretical analysis. Public Finance 43(3): 388-95.

Feinstein, J.S. 1991. An econometric analysis of income tax evasion and its detection. The RAND

   Journal of Economics 22(1): 14-35.

Feldman, N. and J. Slemrod. 2007. Estimating tax noncompliance with evidence from unaudited

   tax returns. The Economic Journal 117(518): 327-352.

Feldman, N. and J. Slemrod. 2009. War and taxation: when does patriotism overcome the free-

   rider impulse? In I.W. Martin, A.K. Mehrotra, and M. Prasad (eds.), The new fiscal

   sociology: taxation in comparative and historical perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge

   University Press.

Fortin, B., G. Lacroix and M. Villeval. 2007. Tax evasion and social interactions. Journal of




                                               32
   Public Economics 91: 2089–2112.

Francis, B.B., I. Hasan, X. Sun and W. Wu. 2016. CEO political preference and corporate tax

   sheltering. Journal of Corporate Finance 38: 37-53.

Gandelman, N. and R. Hernández-Murillo. 2014. Risk aversion at the country level. Federal

   Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Number 2014-005B.

Gerber, A.S. and G.A. Huber. 2009. Partisanship and economic behavior: do partisan differences

   in economic forecasts predict real economic behavior? The American Political Science

   Review 103(3): 407-426.

Gomez. B.T. and J.M. Wilson. 2001. Political sophistication and economic voting in the

   American electorate: a theory of heterogeneous attribution. American Journal of Political

   Science. 45(4): 899-914.

Guyton, J., K. Liebel, D.S. Manoli, A. Patel, M. Payne, and B. Schafer. 2018. Tax enforcement

   and tax policy: evidence on taxpayer responses to EITC correspondence audits. National

   Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24465.

Hallsworth, M.J., J.A. List, R.D. Metcalfe and I. Vlaev. 2017. The behavioralist as tax collector:

   using natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Journal of Public Economics 148:

   14-31.

Hanousek, J. and F. Palda. 2004. Quality of government services and the civic duty to pay taxes

   in the Czech and Slovak Republics, and other transition countries. Kyklos 57(2): 237-52.

Hsiang, S.M. 2010. Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic production in

       the Caribbean and Central America. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of

       the United States of America 107(35): 15367–372.

Ingraham, C. 2014. Americans have no idea how the government spends money. Washington




                                                33
   Post Wonkblog, October 2. Accessed 9/3/2017:

   https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/10/02/americans-have-no-idea-how-

   the-government-spends-money/?utm_term=.c3f13f3dc227

Internal Revenue Service. 2007. Reducing the federal tax gap: a report on improving voluntary

   compliance. Accessed May 31, 2018. https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-

   news/tax_gap_report_final_080207_linked.pdf

Internal Revenue Service. 2014. Compliance estimates for the Earned Income Tax Credit

   claimed on 2006-2008 returns. Publication 5162 (8-2014).

Internal Revenue Service. 2016. Tax gap estimates for tax years 2008-2010. Accessed

   9/13/2017:

   https://www.irs.gov/pub/newsroom/tax%20gap%20estimates%20for%202008%20through%

   202010.pdf

Kernell, S. 1977. Presidential popularity and negative voting: an alternative explanation of the

   midterm congressional decline of the president’s party. American Political Science Review.

   71(1): 44-66.

Key, V.O. 1966. The Responsible Electorate. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Kleven, H.J., M.B. Knudsen, C.T. Kreiner, S. Pedersen and E. Saez. 2011. Unable or unwilling

   to cheat? Evidence from a tax audit experiment in Denmark. Econometrica 79(2): 541-692.

Konrad, K.A. and S. Qari. 2012. The last refuge of a scoundrel? Patriotism and tax compliance.

   Economica 79: 516-33.

Luttmer, E.F.P. and M. Singhal. 2014. Tax morale. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(4):

   149-68.

Mian, A., A. Sufi and N. Khoshkhkou. 2015. Government economic policy, sentiments, and




                                                34
   consumption. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21316.

Migues, M. 2013. The effect of political alignment on transfers to Portuguese municipalities.

   Economics & Politics 25(1): 110-133.

Mullainathan, S. and E. Washington. 2009. Sticking with your vote: cognitive dissonance and

   political attitudes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1): 86-111.

Pew Research Center. 2013. As sequester deadline looms, little support for cutting most

   programs. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. Accessed 9/3/2017: http://ww.people-

   press.org/files/legacy-pdf/02-22-13%20Spending%20Release.pdf

Rupasingha, A., S.J. Goetz, and D. Freshwater. (2006, with updates). The production of social

   capital in US counties. Journal of Socio-Economics 35: 83–101.

Rutsch, P. 2015. Guess how much of Uncle Sam’s money goes to foreign aid. Guess again! NPR

   website. Accessed 9/3/2017:

   http://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2015/02/10/383875581/guess-how-much-of-

   uncle-sams-money-goes-to-foreign-aid-guess-again

Saez, E. 2010. Do taxpayers bunch at kink points? American Economic Journal: Economic

   Policy 2: 180-212.

Scholz, J.T. and M. Lubell. 1998. Trust and taxpaying: testing the heuristic approach to

   collective action. American Journal of Political Science 42(2): 398-417.

Steenbergen, M.R., K.H. McGraw and J.T. Scholz. 1992. Taxpayer adaptation to the 1986 Tax

   Reform Act: do new tax laws affect the way taxpayers think about taxes?” In J. Slemrod

   (ed.), Why people pay taxes: tax compliance and enforcement. Ann Arbor: University of

   Michigan Press.

Stein, R. 1990. Economic voting for governor and U.S. senator: the electoral consequences of




                                               35
       federalism. Journal of Politics. 52(1): 29-53.

Torgler, B. 2003. Tax morale, rule-governed behaviour and trust. Constitutional Political

   Economy 14(2): 119-140.

Torgler, B. 2005. Tax morale and direct democracy. European Journal of Political Economy

       21(2): 525-31.

Webley, P., H.S.J. Robben, H. Elffers and D.J. Hessing. 1991. Tax evasion: an experimental

   approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                                36
Figure 1. Role of the individual income tax in federal tax noncompliance, 2008-2010



      Underreporting: Individual Income Tax


          Underreporting: Other Federal Tax


             Nonfiling: Individual Income Tax


                 Nonfiling: Other Federal Tax


      Underpayment: Individual Income Tax


          Underpayment: Other Federal Tax


                                                 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6
                                                      Share of Gross Federal Tax Gap

Notes: These statistics are from the Internal Revenue Service “Federal Tax Compliance Research: Tax Gap
Estimates for Tax Years 2008-2010” (https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/p1415.pdf). On average for tax years 2008-
2010, the total estimated federal tax liability including all major taxes (i.e., individual income, corporate income,
FICA payroll, unemployment, self-employment, estate and excise taxes) was $2.5 trillion dollars, with a gross tax
gap of $458 billion. The gross tax gap is the amount owed that is not paid voluntarily and on time, and exceeds the
net tax gap by $52 billion. The bars show the share of the gross tax gap attributable to the individual income tax vs.
the other major federal taxes by type of noncompliance. Evasion consists of the first two categories of
noncompliance – underreporting ($387 billion) and nonfiling ($32 billion).




                                                          37
Figure 2. Underreporting by the extent of withholding and information reporting, 2008-2010
                                              150




                                                                                                                       100
   Underreporting Tax Gap, Billions of Dollars


                                                                                                         $136B
                                     125




                                                                                                                                                80
                                                                                                                       Net Misreporting Percentage
                            100




                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                 63%
                      75




                                                                                                                               40
               50




                                                                                       $33B




                                                                                                                       20
       25




                                                                                              19%
                                                                   $15B
                                                    $5B
                                                                          7%
                           0




                                                                                                                       0
                                                          1%
                                                      1                2                    3                4
                                                               Income Visibility Category, High to Low

                                                                   Billions $2010              Percentage


Notes: These statistics are from the Internal Revenue Service “Federal Tax Compliance Research: Tax Gap
Estimates for Tax Years 2008-2010” (https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/p1415.pdf). The bars show the average annual
underreporting tax gap by type of income, while the markers show the associated net misreporting percentages
(NMP). The NMP is the ratio of the net misreported amount (i.e., understatements less overstatements) to the sum of
the absolute values of the amounts that should have been reported, expressed as a percentage. Income is grouped
into categories by type according to the degree of visibility. Category 1 includes amounts subject to substantial
information reporting and withholding, and consists of wages and salaries. Category 2 includes amounts subject to
substantial information reporting but no withholding, such as pensions and annuities, unemployment compensation,
dividend income, interest income and Social Security benefits. Category 3 includes amounts subject to some
information reporting including partnership and S-corporation income, capital gains and alimony. Category 4
includes amounts subject to little or no information reporting, such as nonfarm proprietor income, rents and
royalties, farm income and other income.




                                                                                         38
Figure 3. Party alignment with the president and tax morale


                                65.6%
                        60.1%

     54.0%


                                                                43.2% 43.4%

                                                                                       35.8%
             31.4%
                                                                               28.8%              27.7% 26.9%
                                                  25.3%
                                          22.8%




       HIGH      OWN INCOME               GOV. SPENDS          GOV. SPENDS    GOV. SHOULD        GOV. SHOULD
   CONFIDENCE IN TAX TOO HIGH              TOO MUCH            TOO LITTLE       DO LESS           DO MORE
     FEDERAL
    EXECUTIVE
     BRANCH

                                              Aligned          Not Aligned

Notes: Each set of bars is estimated from a separate ordinary least squares regression for the dependent variable
indicated, using data drawn from the 1972-2014 General Social Survey. The dependent variables are normalized to
range from 0 to 1. All specifications include survey version-by-year fixed effects and a comprehensive set of
respondent characteristics including an index for where the respondent falls on the partisan scale, ranging from
strong Democrat (0) to strong Republican (1). The key independent variable of interest is party-alignment with the
president, which is equal to this index under Republican administrations and 1 – this index under Democratic
administrations. Reported here are the mean predicted value when party-alignment is set to 1 (aligned) and the mean
predicted value when party-alignment is set to 0 (not aligned). More details on the sample, variables and regression
results are provided in Appendix A.




                                                          39
Figure 4. Time series for alignment and macroeconomic conditions, by county partisan status
                   1    .8
   Alignment / Approval
        .4      .6 .2
                   0




                                    2000         2002        2004        2006         2008          2010
                                                                Year

                                             Democratic Alignment            Republican Alignment
                                             Democratic Approval             Republican Approval
                   .05
    Unemployed Persons Per Capita
     .01    .02    0.03     .04




                                    2000         2002         2004       2006         2008          2010
                                                                 Year

                                           Democratic Unemployed             Republican Unemployed


Notes: Partisan counties are classified as Democratic (454 counties) or Republican (1,453 counties) based on the
two-party vote shares across the 1996-2008 presidential elections. County partisan alignment is the average share
cast for the current president’s party across these elections, so only changes following turnover elections.
Presidential approval is based on Gallup’s measure of national presidential approval averaged across the tax year,
stratified by party. Shown in the bottom panel are the average numbers of unemployed persons per capita across
counties of each type by year.



                                                                        40
Figure 5. County partisanship status, 1996 through 2008 elections




Notes: The black shading indicates Democratic counties, identified as those that have a minimum Democratic share
of the two-party vote across the 1996, 2000, 2004 and 2008 elections above 0.5. The white shading indicates
Republican counties, where the maximum is always below 0.5. The dark grey shading indicates nonpartisan
counties, where the share does not always fall on the same side of the threshold of 0.5. The light grey shading
indicates counties (located primarily in Florida and Virginia) that are excluded from our analysis sample due to data
quality issues, as described in the text. Three Hawaii counties included in the analysis are not depicted.




                                                         41
Table 1a. Summary statistics for dependent variables, IRS aggregates for policy constant filers
                                                                2000 and 2008 elections
                                                                                        Non-
                                                               D             R
                                                                                      partisan
 Reported income, per capita $2010
                                                            20,575        18,186       17,457
   Gross income less capital gains
                                                            (9,246)       (6,152)     (5,818)
     Information-reported and withheld (wages, salaries     15,578        13,592       13,251
     and tips)                                              (6,538)       (4,674)     (4,268)
     Substantial information reporting (interest, dividend   3,078         2,882        2,662
     and retirement income)                                 (1,783)       (1,312)     (1,211)
     Little information reporting (Schedules C and E         1,831         1,886        1,520
     income)                                                (1,726)       (1,506)     (1,130)
 Filing rates, per capita
                                                             0.398         0.382        0.376
   Filed an income tax return
                                                            (0.056)       (0.057)     (0.052)
       Claimed the EITC                                      0.096         0.077        0.086
                                                            (0.048)       (0.025)     (0.029)
       Filed a Schedule C and claimed the EITC               0.016         0.016        0.016
                                                            (0.010)       (0.007)     (0.007)
       Filed a return exhibiting sharp bunching              0.001         0.001        0.001
                                                            (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.001)
       Return was audited                                    0.004         0.002        0.002
                                                            (0.003)       (0.001)     (0.002)
       Return was audited and found to owe taxes             0.003         0.002        0.002
                                                            (0.003)       (0.001)     (0.002)
 Number of observations (county x year)                      1,816         5,812        4,392
Notes: The sample is the 3,005 analysis counties for the four years (1999, 2001, 2007, 2009) bracketing the turnover
elections in 2000 and 2008. Means are shown for counties by partisan status, with standard deviations in
parentheses. The county aggregates are derived from returns filed by the subset of filers who would have been
expected to file absent policy changes, such as the stimulus credits, as described in the text (and Appendix B). Sharp
bunchers are those with dependents who both filed a Schedule C and reported net earnings within $500 of the first
kink in the relevant EITC schedule. For sharp bunching and audits, the sample is restricted to counties with
populations of at least 10,000 for which the data are rarely censored due to nondisclosure rules. Annual population
estimates are from the Census.




                                                         42
Table 1b. Summary statistics for independent variables
                                                                              2000 and 2008 elections
                                                                                                   Non-
                                                                             D          R
                                                                                                  partisan
 Partisanship measure
  Average Democratic two-party vote share, 1996-2008                       0.619          0.336          0.475
                                                                          (0.071)        (0.074)        (0.048)
 Information return amounts, per capita $2010
   Wages, tips and other compensation (W2 box 1)                          15,752         13,778         13,417
                                                                          (6,508)        (4,665)        (4,253)
     Share linked to S-corporation by employer id                          0.151          0.160          0.158
                                                                          (0.045)        (0.050)        (0.047)
     Share linked to C-corporation by employer id                          0.209          0.205          0.205
                                                                          (0.074)        (0.067)        (0.069)
     Share linked to partnership by employer id                            0.049          0.051          0.047
                                                                          (0.027)        (0.029)        (0.028)
   Financial income (1099INT taxable interest, 1099DIV                      839            791            706
     ordinary dividends)                                                   (687)          (401)          (386)
   Retirement income (1099R gross pension distributions;                   5,185          5,280          5,223
     1099SSA Social Security net payments)                                (1,695)        (1,640)        (1,435)
   Unemployment compensation (1099G UI payments)                            206            150            184
                                                                           (173)          (160)          (166)
 Differential cyclicality
  Self-employed, per capita in 1990                                        0.038          0.061          0.048
                                                                          (0.020)        (0.035)        (0.024)
 Housing market controls
  Mortgage-months serviced per capita                                     1.471           1.262          1.112
                                                                         (1.059)         (0.935)        (0.908)
   Median home value ($2010)                                             159,184        112,481        107,632
                                                                        (142,945)       (52,112)       (57,808)
 Number of observations (county x year)                                   1,816           5,812          4,392
Notes: The sample is the 3,005 analysis counties for the four years (1999, 2001, 2007, 2009) bracketing the turnover
elections in 2000 and 2008. Means are shown for counties by partisan status, with standard deviations in
parentheses. The wage, financial, retirement and unemployment incomes are derived from the sums of all
information return amounts received by county residents using the IRS CDW. The 1990 self-employment count and
annual population estimates are from the Census. The annual number of mortgage-months serviced per capita is
calculated from CoreLogic’s Lender Processing Services Inc. (LEP) data. These include installment-type residential
loans serviced by the largest servicers in the U.S. Since coverage (in terms of mortgage dollars) increases over our
sample period, the counts are scaled by dividing by year-specific coverage rates. Real median home value is
calculated by scaling the county value from the 2000 Census to account for nominal changes in county home prices
since that year and then adjusting for the CPI. County nominal home price indices are estimated by taking
population-weighted averages of the 3-digit zip code indices produced by the Federal Housing Finance Agency
(FHFA) using a repeat sales methodology. The weights are based on the share of 2000 county populations residing
in each 3-digit zip code. For the subset of large counties for which FHFA has produced county-level indices, the
correlation between our estimates is 0.95.




                                                        43
Table 2. Estimates of the impact of alignment on proxies for tax compliance, baseline alignment measure
                                                      Log per capita reported income                          Log per capita number of returns
                                                      Wages     Financial
                                                                               Sched              Claims       Sched C         Sharp                       Audit
 Control set                                              &          &                                                                       Audit
                                                                                C&E               EITC         & EITC          Bunch                       Owe
                                                      salaries retirement
                                                         (1)        (2)          (3)                (4)           (5)       (6)               (7)           (8)
                                                       -0.004     -0.001      0.086***           -0.029***     -0.048*** -0.077***         -0.128***     -0.072***
 Baseline specification
                                                      (0.003)    (0.005)      (0.026)             (0.004)       (0.010)   (0.026)           (0.024)       (0.026)
 More restrictive control set
 Omitting unemployment (U) x self-                     -0.005         0.006        0.090***      -0.028***     -0.020**        -0.015      -0.107***       -0.037
  employment intensity                                (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.025)        (0.004)       (0.009)       (0.024)       (0.023)       (0.025)
 More expansive control sets
 Adding U x predicted propensity to be                 -0.004         -0.000       0.076***      -0.027***     -0.063*** -0.097***         -0.137***     -0.085***
  partisan Democrat                                   (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.025)        (0.004)        (0.010)    (0.027)         (0.024)       (0.026)
 Adding U x predicted propensity and U                 -0.004         -0.005       0.051**        -0.010*      -0.148*** -0.204***         -0.131***     -0.099***
  x avg. Dem. vote share                              (0.003)        (0.006)       (0.024)        (0.005)        (0.013)    (0.033)         (0.029)       (0.030)
 Adding housing market controls (H)                    -0.004         -0.004       0.088***      -0.031***     -0.050 ***
                                                                                                                          -0.078***        -0.126***     -0.068***
                                                      (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.026)        (0.004)        (0.010)    (0.026)         (0.024)       (0.026)
 Adding H and H x predicted propensity                 -0.005         -0.004       0.095***      -0.029***     -0.040 ***
                                                                                                                           -0.068**        -0.136***     -0.076***
  to be partisan Democrat                             (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.026)        (0.005)        (0.010)    (0.027)         (0.025)       (0.027)
 Adding H, H x predicted propensity,                  -0.006*         -0.001       0.090***      -0.028***      -0.027 **
                                                                                                                           -0.068**        -0.091***       -0.028
  and H x avg. Dem. vote share                        (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.026)        (0.005)        (0.012)    (0.030)         (0.027)       (0.029)
 Dependent variable mean (in levels)                  14,067           2,929        1,872          0.083          0.015      0.001           0.003          0.002
 Dependent variable standard deviation                 5,249           1,441        1,561          0.032          0.008      0.001           0.002          0.002
Notes: Each cell reports results from a separate regression. The regressions pool the years on either side of the two turnover elections (1999, 2001, 2007, 2009)
and include only partisan counties. There are 1,907 partisan counties in the medium run (over the 1996 to 2008 elections). The estimated coefficient on the
political alignment measure is shown, with standard errors robust to clustering at the level of the county in parentheses. Political alignment is based on the
average two-party vote shares across the medium run and is equal to the share cast for the party of the current president. Rows indicate the control set, while
columns indicate the dependent variable. The dependent variables in columns 1-3 are expressed as log real ($2010) per capita amounts, and those in columns 4-8
are log counts of returns per capita. Both the amounts and counts are based on the subset of policy constant filers. Due to missing or negative values for some of
the outcomes, the number of observations varies slightly across cells, but the samples are always balanced in the sense that every county included in the
estimation is represented all four years. Further, for the bunching and audit counts in columns 6-8, the sample is restricted to the subset of partisan counties with
populations over 10,000 to avoid missing data due to masking for nondisclosure. In addition to county and state-by-year fixed effects, the baseline specification
includes log per capita information return amounts (wages, financial income, retirement income and unemployment compensation), the shares of wages paid by


                                                                                 44
different types of businesses (S-corporations, C-corporations and partnerships), and an interaction between log per capita unemployment compensation and self-
employment intensity (i.e., self-employed per capita in 1990). The more restrictive control set drops this final interaction. The more expansive control sets add
similar interactions with i) the predicted propensity for a county to be partisan Democrat (based on 1990 (log per capita) non-farm private employment,
government employment, unemployment, and number of establishments, as well as number of housing starts and share of establishments by industry), and then
also ii) the average Democratic two-party vote share across the medium run. The housing market controls are the log of the number of mortgage-months serviced
per capita and log real ($2010) median home value. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                               45
Table 3. Estimates of the impact of alignment on proxies for tax compliance, alternative alignment measures
                                            Log per capita reported income                Log per capita number of returns
                                            Wages      Financial
                                                                     Sched      Claims Sched C          Sharp                                             Audit
Key independent variable                        &           &                                                      Audit
                                                                     C&E         EITC       & EITC     Bunch                                              Owe
                                            salaries retirement
                                               (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)                                     (8)
Continuous alignment measures
Baseline alignment measure, vote share       -0.004      -0.001     0.086*** -0.029*** -0.048*** -0.077*** -0.128***                                    -0.072***
  1996 to 2008                              (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.025)     (0.004)     (0.010)    (0.026)    (0.024)                                (0.026)
Long-run alignment measure, vote share       -0.006       0.001     0.089*** -0.033*** -0.053*** -0.090*** -0.122***                                    -0.078***
  1988 to 2008                              (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.029)     (0.005)     (0.011)    (0.030)    (0.028)                                (0.029)
Binary alignment measures
Indicator for party alignment, baseline      -0.001      -0.002     0.022*** -0.007*** -0.010*** -0.016** -0.035***                                     -0.018***
  partisanship status                       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.007)     (0.001)     (0.003)    (0.007)    (0.007)                                 (0.007)
Indicator for party alignment, long-run      -0.001      -0.001     0.026*** -0.008*** -0.014*** -0.020** -0.034***                                      -0.020**
  partisanship status                       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.008)     (0.001)     (0.003)    (0.009)    (0.008)                                 (0.008)
Continuous alignment x turnout
Baseline alignment measure x avg. two-       -0.006      -0.000     0.127*** -0.055*** -0.093*** -0.164*** -0.224***                                     -0.110**
  party turnout 1996 to 2008                (0.006)     (0.010)     (0.048)     (0.009)     (0.019)    (0.054)    (0.051)                                 (0.052)
                                                                           ***        ***         ***        ***
Long-run alignment measure x avg. two-       -0.009       0.004     0.142      -0.061      -0.103     -0.194     -0.214***                               -0.125**
  party turnout 1988 to 2008                (0.007)     (0.011)     (0.057)     (0.011)     (0.022)    (0.063)    (0.059)                                 (0.061)
Presidential approval
Party-specific presidential approval         -0.001     -0.004*     0.043*** -0.013*** -0.023*** -0.028** -0.070***                                     -0.040***
  rating, baseline partisanship status      (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.012)     (0.002)     (0.004)    (0.012)    (0.011)                                (0.012)
Party-specific presidential approval         -0.002      -0.002     0.050*** -0.015*** -0.028*** -0.035** -0.067***                                     -0.042***
  rating, long-run partisanship status      (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.014)     (0.002)     (0.005)    (0.015)    (0.013)                                (0.014)
Notes: Each cell reports results from a separate regression. The top row reproduces results for the baseline specification from the top row of Table 2. The other
rows match this specification except for variations in the measure of political alignment and corresponding changes in the set of partisan counties. There are
1,907 partisan counties in the medium run (over the 1996 to 2008 elections), and 1,618 partisan counties in the long run (over the 1988-2008 elections). The
estimated coefficient on the political alignment measure is shown, with standard errors robust to clustering at the level of the county in parentheses. Presidential
approval is based on Gallup’s measure of national presidential approval averaged across the tax year, stratified by party. We assign the Democratic (Republican)
approval measure to the Democratic (Republican) counties. To compare the magnitudes of the estimates, note that the average change in the key independent
variable associated with moving into alignment is 0.30 for the continuous alignment measures, 1 for the binary measures, 0.16 for the interactions with average
turnout and 0.57 for presidential approval. The implied impacts of moving into alignment are quantitatively similar across measures, since the magnitude of the



                                                                                 46
estimated coefficients shrink (grow) in proportion to increases (decreases) in the magnitude of the swings in the alignment measures. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.10




                                                                               47
Table 4. Estimates of the impact of alignment on proxies for tax compliance, by election
                                            Log per capita reported income                                Log per capita number of returns
                                            Wages      Financial
                                                                     Sched     Claims                       Sched C       Sharp                       Audit
 Control set                                   &           &                                                                            Audit
                                                                      C&E       EITC                        & EITC        Bunch                       Owe
                                            salaries retirement
                                              (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)                          (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
 Baseline specification
                                           0.000      -0.001       -0.041     0.009*                       -0.089*** -0.210***        0.014         0.004
  Alignment x 2000 election
                                           (0.003)    (0.006)      (0.027)    (0.005)                      (0.014)   (0.039)          (0.036)       (0.039)
                                           0.004*     -0.000       0.115*** -0.019**                       -0.121*** -0.093**         -0.017        -0.023
  Alignment x 2004 election
                                           (0.002)    (0.006)      (0.027)    (0.008)                      (0.015)   (0.039)          (0.042)       (0.049)
                                           -0.008     -0.003       0.218*** -0.070***                      0.000     0.071**          -0.272***     -0.147***
  Alignment x 2008 election
                                           (0.006)    (0.009)      (0.046)    (0.007)                      (0.014)   (0.035)          (0.030)       (0.034)
 Adding U x predicted propensity to be
  partisan Democrat
                                           0.000      -0.001       -0.039     0.009                        -0.085***     -0.208***    0.018         0.009
  Alignment x 2000 election
                                           (0.003)    (0.006)      (0.027)    (0.005)                      (0.014)       (0.039)      (0.036)       (0.039)
                                                                         ***
                                           0.004      0.001        0.108      -0.018**                     -0.132***     -0.107***    -0.029        -0.037
  Alignment x 2004 election
                                           (0.002)    (0.006)      (0.027)    (0.009)                      (0.016)       (0.040)      (0.043)       (0.050)
                                                                         ***
                                           -0.009     -0.001       0.202      -0.066***                    -0.027*       0.037        -0.301***     -0.181***
  Alignment x 2008 election
                                           (0.006)    (0.009)      (0.047)    (0.007)                      (0.015)       (0.037)      (0.032)       (0.035)
 Adding H and H x predicted
  propensity to be partisan Democrat
                                           -0.001     -0.002       -0.035     0.009                        -0.080*** -0.205***        0.011         0.003
  Alignment x 2000 election
                                           (0.003)    (0.006)      (0.028)    (0.006)                      (0.014)   (0.039)          (0.036)       (0.039)
                                           0.003      -0.003       0.111*** -0.024***                      -0.098*** -0.074*          -0.022        -0.025
  Alignment x 2004 election
                                           (0.002)    (0.006)      (0.028)    (0.008)                      (0.015)   (0.039)          (0.041)       (0.048)
                                           -0.009     -0.009       0.237*** -0.070***                      0.003     0.079**          -0.286***     -0.157***
  Alignment x 2008 election
                                           (0.006)    (0.009)      (0.046)    (0.007)                      (0.014)   (0.036)          (0.031)       (0.035)
Notes: This table replicates rows from Table 2 and the notes to Table 2 apply. The differences are that the window years surrounding the 2004 election (2003 and
2005) have been added to the sample, county x 2004 election fixed effects have been added to the control set (to account for the average level of county
alignment in these years) and the baseline alignment measure is interacted with indicators for each of the three elections. For the 2004 election, alignment is
coded as if there were a turnover from Democratic to Republican, though in fact a Republican was reelected. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10



                                                                              48
Table 5. Estimates of the impact of alignment on proxies for tax compliance, by state income tax systems and politics
                                             Log per capita reported income                Log per capita number of returns
                                             Wages     Financial
                                                                      Sched     Claims Sched C            Sharp                                              Audit
 Key controls                                   &            &                                                       Audit
                                                                      C&E         EITC       & EITC      Bunch                                               Owe
                                            salaries retirement
                                               (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)                                     (8)
                                                                           ***         ***          ***        **
                                             -0.001       -0.002    0.022      -0.007       -0.010      -0.016    -0.035***                                -0.018***
 Baseline indicator for binary alignment
                                            (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.007)    (0.001)      (0.003)     (0.007)    (0.007)                                 (0.007)
 State income tax piggybacking
 Baseline indicator for binary alignment    -0.003*       -0.001      0.016    -0.011*** -0.017*** -0.031** -0.073***                                      -0.054***
                                            (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.014)    (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.014)   (0.012)                                  (0.012)
 Interaction with indicator for state tax    0.004*       -0.001      0.009     0.006***      0.010*      0.021    0.053***                                 0.051***
   system tied to reports on the federal    (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.016)    (0.002)      (0.006)     (0.016)    (0.014)                                 (0.015)
   return
 Dual alignment with president and
 governor
 Aligned with president only                 -0.000       -0.002     0.016** -0.005*** -0.009*** -0.015 -0.044***                                          -0.030***
                                            (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.007)    (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.009)    (0.008)                                  (0.009)
 Aligned only with governor                   0.002        0.000      0.006       0.006     -0.043*** -0.013       -0.048**                                 -0.057**
                                            (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.020)    (0.006)      (0.013)     (0.025)    (0.020)                                  (0.023)
 Aligned with both president and              0.000       -0.002     0.045**     -0.006 -0.062*** -0.031 -0.060***                                          -0.045**
 governor                                   (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.018)    (0.005)      (0.013)    (0.026)    (0.019)                                   (0.021)

Notes: The top row shows the baseline specification with a binary version of the continuous alignment variable used in Table 2. The bottom two panels report
results for the key variables of interest from otherwise identical specifications that allow for heterogeneity based on state income tax systems or politics. The first
adds an interaction with whether the state income tax “piggybacks” on the federal system. States whose systems are tied to reports on the federal return are those
that begin state tax calculations with federal AGI, taxable income or tax liability. Nearly three quarters (72 percent) of sample counties are in such states. The
second decomposes alignment with the president according to whether the county is also aligned with the governor. Party alignment with the governor is based
on the governor’s party and the average two-party vote share in gubernatorial elections over the same period as for the presidential alignment measure. In this
sample, 35, 16 and 15 percent of county-years are aligned with the president only, the governor only, and both, respectively. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                                                  49
