                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MEASURING THE EQUILIBRIUM IMPACTS OF CREDIT:
                 EVIDENCE FROM THE INDIAN MICROFINANCE CRISIS

                                          Emily Breza
                                         Cynthia Kinnan

                                       Working Paper 24329
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24329


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




We thank Patricia Anghel, Connie Dang, Paul Friedrich, Sumit Gupta, Sang Kim, Cecilia Peluffo,
Osman Siddiqi, Gabriel Tourek, and especially Bruno Barsanetti for excellent research assistance.
All mistakes are are own. We thank Abhijit Banerjee, Paco Buera, Clement Imbert, Seema
Jayachandran, Dean Karlan, Asim Khwaja, Marti Mestieri, Rohini Pande, and Eric Verhoogen for
their helpful contributions. We also thank the Microfinance Institutions Network (MFIN) for
coordinating the collection of the data and Parul Agarwal and the Centre for Microfinance (CMF)
for their help in researching the AP crisis. Anthony D’Agostino generously shared the RBI data.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Emily Breza and Cynthia Kinnan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Equilibrium Impacts of Credit: Evidence from the Indian Microfinance Crisis
Emily Breza and Cynthia Kinnan
NBER Working Paper No. 24329
February 2018
JEL No. D50,G21,O16

                                          ABSTRACT

In October 2010, the state government of Andhra Pradesh, India issued an emergency ordinance,
bringing microfinance activities in the state to a complete halt and causing a nation-wide shock to
the liquidity of lenders, especially those with loans in the affected state. We use this massive
dislocation in the microfinance market to identify the causal impacts of a reduction in credit
supply on consumption, earnings, and employment in general equilibrium. Using a proprietary,
hand-collected district-level data set from 25 separate, for-profit microlenders matched with
household data from the National Sample Survey, we find that district-level reductions in credit
supply are associated with significant decreases in casual daily wages, household wage earnings
and consumption. We also find that wages in the non-tradable sector fall more than in the tradable
sector (agriculture), suggesting that one important impact of the microfinance contraction was
transmitted through its effect on aggregate demand. We present a simple two period, two-sector
model of the rural economy illustrating this channel and show that our wage results are consistent
with a simple calibration of the model.


Emily Breza
Harvard University
Littauer Center, M28
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ebreza@fas.harvard.edu

Cynthia Kinnan
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-kinnan@northwestern.edu
MEASURING THE EQUILIBRIUM IMPACTS OF CREDIT: EVIDENCE FROM THE
                  INDIAN MICROFINANCE CRISIS

                               EMILY BREZA† AND CYNTHIA KINNAN‡

  A BSTRACT. In October 2010, the state government of Andhra Pradesh, India issued an emergency ordi-
  nance, bringing microfinance activities in the state to a complete halt and causing a nation-wide shock to
  the liquidity of lenders, especially those with loans in the affected state. We use this massive dislocation
  in the microfinance market to identify the causal impacts of a reduction in credit supply on consump-
  tion, earnings, and employment in general equilibrium. Using a proprietary, hand-collected district-level
  data set from 25 separate, for-profit microlenders matched with household data from the National Sample
  Survey, we find that district-level reductions in credit supply are associated with significant decreases
  in casual daily wages, household wage earnings and consumption. We also find that wages in the non-
  tradable sector fall more than in the tradable sector (agriculture), suggesting that one important impact
  of the microfinance contraction was transmitted through its effect on aggregate demand. We present a
  simple two period, two-sector model of the rural economy illustrating this channel and show that our
  wage results are consistent with a simple calibration of the model.



                                           1. I NTRODUCTION

    A rich theoretical and empirical literature has investigated the consequences of changes
 in access to financial intermediation on the households and enterprises whose borrowing
 is directly affected. However, there is also a growing recognition that credit access can
 affect even non-borrowing households through general equilibrium effects: changes in fac-
 tor prices resulting from large-scale changes in credit access. Two important channels
 have emerged linking credit market tightening to adverse labor market outcomes. First, the
 investment-finance channel: constrained firms may decrease labor demand in response to
 a negative shock to credit supply, leading to a fall in wages and employment. Second, the
 Date: February 2018.
 We thank Patricia Anghel, Connie Dang, Paul Friedrich, Sumit Gupta, Sang Kim, Cecilia Peluffo, Osman
 Siddiqi, Gabriel Tourek, and especially Bruno Barsanetti for excellent research assistance. All mistakes are
 are own. We thank Abhijit Banerjee, Paco Buera, Clement Imbert, Seema Jayachandran, Dean Karlan, Asim
 Khwaja, Marti Mestieri, Rohini Pande, and Eric Verhoogen for their helpful contributions. We also thank
 the Microfinance Institutions Network (MFIN) for coordinating the collection of the data and Parul Agarwal
 and the Centre for Microfinance (CMF) for their help in researching the AP crisis. Anthony D’Agostino
 generously shared the RBI data.
 †
   Harvard University, Department of Economics, NBER and J-PAL. Email: ebreza@fas.harvard.edu.
 ‡
   Northwestern University, Department of Economics and IPR, NBER and J-PAL. Email:
 c-kinnan@northwestern.edu.
                                                       1
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                2

aggregate demand channel: consumers may decrease demand for goods and services when
faced with tighter borrowing constraints. The resulting decrease in aggregate demand, in
turn, can lead to a fall in labor demand, putting downward pressure on wages and employ-
ment, especially in the non-tradable sector. Both channels appear to have been at work in
the US financial crisis, for example (Chodorow-Reich 2014, Mian and Sufi 2014).
   In this paper, we seek to measure the equilibrium impacts of a large contraction in the
supply of microcredit in India. While the loans are typically very small (approximately
$200 each at market exchange rates), microcredit nevertheless plays an important role. On
one hand, it serves as a vehicle for financing investments in microenterprises for some
households (Banerjee et al. 2018, 2017). Moreover, it allows households to accelerate
consumption, especially the purchase of durables (Devoto et al. 2012, Tarozzi et al. 2014,
Ben-Yishay et al. 2017). Thus, both the investment-finance channel and the aggregate
demand channel may, in principle, be at play in the context of microfinance.
   Theoretical work examining the role of credit in developing countries has largely focused
on the investment-finance channel (Banerjee and Newman 1993, Evans and Jovanovic
1989, Aghion and Bolton 1997). Especially related to our approach is Buera et al. (2017),
who explore theoretically the general equilibrium implications of microfinance for labor
markets, via the investment-finance channel. Against this backdrop, a body of evaluations
of microfinance (discussed below) have tested its impact on business creation, expansion,
hiring, profitability and survival – in partial equilibrium – and have found little evidence
that, on average, microfinance leads to transformative business growth.
   Despite a recognition that microfinance also allows households to bring consumption
forward in time, there has been, to our knowledge, little exploration of how microfinance
affects the real economy through the aggregate demand channel. We present a simple two
period, two-sector model of the rural economy which focuses on this pathway. Firms come
in two types, tradable (agriculture) and non-tradable (non-agriculture), and hire two types
of labor, high- and low-skilled, from the local labor market. Households consume tradable
and non-tradable goods out of their cash on hand (earnings plus credit). Importantly, the
product market for non-tradable goods is limited to local demand.
   In the simplest version of this framework, households borrow only to bring forward
consumption. A contraction in credit supply decreases the cash on hand of households,
thus decreasing their total consumption demand. This triggers a fall in demand for non-
tradable products and a subsequent fall in labor demand in the non-tradable sector, which
puts downward pressure on wages.
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                          3

   Because the aggregate demand channel is, by definition, an equilibrium phenomenon,
shedding empirical light on its importance is challenging. To estimate the equilibrium
effects of microfinance on labor markets, one needs a shock to microfinance access which
is exogenous, large in magnitude, and which plays out at the level of whole labor markets.
We study a unique natural experiment that satisfies all three of these conditions.
   In October 2010, the state government of Andhra Pradesh, India issued an emergency
ordinance, bringing microfinance activities in the state to a complete halt and causing a
nationwide shock to the liquidity of lenders. According to data from the Microfinance
Information Exchange (MIX), the aggregate gross loan portfolio of Indian microlenders
fell by approximately 20%, or more than $1 billion, between fiscal year 2010 and fiscal
year 2011. Panel A of Figure 1 plots India-wide levels of microlending from 2008 to 2013.
The drop in lending post-2010 is visible in the figure.
   With the help of the largest trade association of for-profit microlenders in India, the Mi-
crofinance Institutions Network (MFIN), we hand-collected proprietary district-level data
from 25 separate, for-profit microlenders detailing their loan portfolios from 2008 through
2013. We combine this data with household-level data from the National Sample Survey
(NSS) rounds 64, 66, and 68 (2008, 2010, and 2012, respectively) to create a district-level
panel. The NSS data gives detailed information about employment, wages, earnings, con-
sumption, and self-employment activities.
   We identify the causal impacts of microfinance by using variation in the balance sheet
exposure of each lender to loans in the affected state, Andhra Pradesh (AP), before the cri-
sis, interacted with pre-crisis variation in the geographical footprint of each lender outside
of AP. We show that districts that borrowed more from lenders with portfolio exposure to
AP witnessed much larger declines in lending between 2010 and 2012 than similar districts
with the same amount of overall pre-crisis lending, but whose lenders did not have balance
sheet exposure to AP. Panel B of Figure 1 plots the trends in district-level GLP separately
for districts with high and low balance sheet exposure to AP. Note that low exposure dis-
tricts experience no absolute decrease in credit, while high exposure districts experience a
large contraction following the crisis of 2010.1 We use this massive, differential dislocation
in the microfinance market as a source of quasi-exogenous variation to study the effects
of district-level reductions in credit supply on consumption, entrepreneurship, wages, and

1
 Given that the crisis happened at the end of 2010, one might wonder why the effects of the crisis are most
visible in 2012 rather than 2011. This is explained by the fact that most microloans have a maturity of one
year. The bulk of the drop in credit came from MFIs delaying the issuance of new loans upon the maturation
of existing loans. This means that we only observe changes in district microfinance levels with a 6-12 month
delay.
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 4

employment. Our empirical strategy only considers districts outside of AP, which were
not directly affected by the ordinance and where individuals did not default on their out-
standing loans. This natural experiment is a unique opportunity to study large, exogenous,
labor-market level shocks to microfinance credit supply in a setting where there were no
concurrent demand shocks.
   The impacts of this reduction in microcredit were large enough to affect the labor market.
First, we do indeed find a decrease in the average casual daily wage for the most exposed
districts between 2010 and 2012 relative to districts with the same amount of lending, but
from less-exposed MFIs. Consequently, the reduction in credit supply causes a decrease in
wage labor earnings for the average rural household. We also find that households experi-
ence significant reductions in both non-durable and durable consumption. The fall in the
wage implies that even non-borrowing laborers may experience declines in earnings and
consumption when the local economy is hit by reduced access to credit.
   While agricultural products are tradable and should not respond very intensively to
changes in local demand, non-agricultural businesses mainly engage in services, construc-
tion, or petty trading, all of which are non-tradable and sensitive to changes in local de-
mand. Indeed, we find that the wage response in high exposure districts is almost three
times larger for non-agricultural wages than for agricultural wages, suggesting that the ag-
gregate demand channel is an important part of the ramifications of the AP crisis.
   We directly examine district-level outcomes for the tradable sector by studying crop
yields. On one hand, firms in the tradable sector, which experiences no adverse shock to
demand, will benefit from lower wage bills. But, on the other hand, some of these firms
may be forced to scale back as liquidity constraints bind more tightly. Thus, the net impact
on tradable sector output is ambiguous. We find a fairly precise zero effect for an index of
yields of major crops. This suggests that, in aggregate, any benefits from a fall in the wage
are offset by reductions in the scale of production by constrained businesses.
   We then consider the distributional implications of the contraction of microcredit, ag-
gregating across the two sectors. Using landholdings as a proxy for wealth, we show that
the effects on labor market earnings are most pronounced for the poorest quintile of house-
holds, for whom casual wage employment is the largest contributor to income. Moreover,
we find that intermediate-wealth households, whose ability to accelerate consumption (or
invest in a business) may be most dependent on microfinance, experience the largest de-
clines in non-durable and durable consumption.
   Finally, we conduct a set of back-of-the-envelope exercises to provide further support
for our results. First, we decompose our estimated effects on consumption and durable
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                           5

investment into implied effects on business profits, which we do not observe directly. Re-
assuringly, we find implied effects on business profits that are within the range of estimates
from the RCT literature. Second, we show that our wage results are consistent with a simple
calibration of our model.
   We provide a battery of robustness tests in support of our identification strategy. We
replicate the approach of Khwaja and Mian (2008) to further support our claim that our
identification strategy captures a change in credit supply, rather than demand. We also use
the NSS 70th round “Debt and Investment” survey to obtain a measure of households’ total
credit portfolios. The reduction in MFI credit is clearly present in this dataset, demonstrat-
ing that it is not an artefact of the fact that not all MFIs are represented in our balance sheet
data. We also show that our findings are robust to a number of alternative specifications.
   The paper is directly related to an active debate on the role of microfinance as a tool for
business growth and poverty reduction. A recent wave of papers use RCTs to measure the
partial equilibrium impacts of microcredit expansions. Angelucci et al. (2015), Augsburg
et al. (2015), Attanasio et al. (2015), Banerjee et al. (2015a), Crépon et al. (2015), and
Tarozzi et al. (2015) all find strikingly similar results in a diverse set of countries and set-
tings. This body of short- to medium-run evidence paints a consistent picture of moderate
impacts. Increased access to microfinance in partial equilibrium is generally found to cause
modest business creation and business expansion. While there is evidence that borrowers
do purchase more household durables and business assets, there is almost no support for a
large average impact on business profits or on non-durable consumption one to two years
post intervention.2 In a quasi-experimental study, Kaboski and Townsend (2012) find a
very large short-run consumption response to an expansion of village microcredit in Thai-
land, consistent with many households using the loan proceeds for consumption. Fink
et al. (2017) show that, in Zambia, access to lean-season credit is associated with increased
consumption and higher village-level wages.
   Our study differs from RCT studies in several ways. Most important is the magnitude
and scale of the shock. The Andhra Pradesh crisis moved credit by a large amount, both as a
percentage reduction in credit and in aggregate: more than a billion dollars were wiped out
of the market. Moreover, this shock played out at the level of entire districts, a large enough
area to encompass whole labor markets. Achieving variation at this scale via an RCT would
be extremely challenging. We are also able to study effects on average borrowers in mature
markets, as opposed to studying new markets or marginal (complier) borrowers.

2
 In a meta-analysis of the RCT evidence Meager (2016) confirms this general appraisal of small, positive, but
statistically undetectable effects on most key outcomes.
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                          6

  We attempt to provide complementary evidence to the RCT literature and to fill one of
the gaps in the literature highlighted by Banerjee et al. (2015b):
        We have only scratched the surface of identifying spillover and general equi-
        librium effects ... Nonborrowing wage earners could benefit from increased
        employment opportunities.
   More broadly, the paper is related to the literature on financial access for the poor, espe-
cially Burgess and Pande (2005), who show evidence that bank expansions decrease rural
poverty. This paper also builds on the large literature in macroeconomics and finance study-
ing the effects of credit supply shocks and bank balance sheet effects.3 A smaller literature
stemming from Peek and Rosengren (2000) traces out effects of such credit supply shocks
on real activity.4 Our paper is also related to recent work examining general equilibrium
effects of large-scale programs and economic shocks in developing countries.5
   Our paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we discuss the setting and describe the
predictions of a simple model exploring the effects of a credit shock on labor markets, via
investment by borrowing entrepreneurs. Section 3 discusses the data and empirical strategy.
Section 4 presents our main results, Section 5 discusses evidence on the firm liquidity
and aggregate demand mechanisms, and Section 6 discusses the results in relation to the
RCT literature and discusses profit imputation and calibration exercises that benchmark the
magnitudes of our results. Section 7 concludes.

                2. S ETTING , F RAMEWORK ,          AND   E MPIRICAL P REDICTIONS

2.1. The Andhra Pradesh Ordinance of 2010. On October 15, 2010, the AP govern-
ment unexpectedly issued an emergency ordinance (The Andhra Pradesh Micro Finance
Institutions Ordinance, 2010) to regulate the activities of MFIs operating in the state. The
government stated that it was worried about widespread over-borrowing by its citizens and
alleged abuses by microfinance collection agents. On October 28, 2010, the Wall Street
Journal ran the headline “India’s Major Crisis in Microlending: Loans Involving Tiny
Amounts of Money Were a Good Idea, but the Explosion of Interest Backfires.” Other
voices in the microfinance debate claimed that the government was using the ordinance
to promote its own preferred financial inclusion initiative, bank-financed self-help groups
3
  Many papers, such as Khwaja and Mian (2008), have shown that in diverse settings, negative shocks to bank
liquidity are often passed on to borrowers through reductions in lending. Also see Paravisini (2008), Khwaja
and Mian (2008), and Schnabl (2012).
4
  Other related papers include Chodorow-Reich (2014), Jiménez et al. (2014), and Greenstone et al. (2014).
5
  See Imbert and Papp (2015), Muralidharan et al. (2017), Jayachandran (2006), Mobarak and Rosenzweig
(2014), Akram et al. (2017).
                                     EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                               7

(SHGs).6 On November 4, 2010, the Harvard Business Review Published an article entitled
“India’s Microfinance Crisis is a Battle to Monopolize the Poor.”
   Regardless of the origins of the Ordinance, its provisions brought the activities of MFIs
in the state to a complete halt. Under the law, MFIs were not permitted to approach
clients to seek repayment and were further barred from disbursing any new loans.7 In
the months following the ordinance, almost 100% of borrowers in AP defaulted on their
loans.Furthermore, fearing similar problems in other states, Indian banks pulled back tremen-
dously on their willingness to lend to any MFI across the country. The effects of the crisis
can be seen in the aggregate country-wide patterns displayed in Figure 1. Using data from
the Microfinance Information Exchange (MIX), the figure shows that total microfinance
loan portfolios fell by over one billion dollars following the crisis.8
   Important for this paper, lending even in areas outside of Andhra Pradesh was affected by
the crisis. Notably, the shock in AP was transmitted to other districts through the balance
sheets of the lenders – that is, MFIs with high exposure to the defaults in AP were forced to
reduce their lending in other states that were not directly affected. In general, they were not
able to secure additional financing from the Indian banks to maintain their desired levels
of lending. In many cases, exposed lenders ceased lending in some districts outside AP
altogether. Figure B.1 shows the number of MFIs per district, before and after the crisis:
throughout India, reductions in the number of MFIs active are visible in many districts,
illustrating geographical variation in the footprint of the crisis.
   Perhaps surprisingly, the defaults in Andhra Pradesh did not spread across the country:
individuals continued to make their regular loan repayments even though they may have
anticipated that their lender would not be able to give them more credit immediately upon
full repayment.9 Thus there was no direct “windfall” effect outside of AP.
   Bank lending to MFIs resumed in mid-2012 when the RBI exerted its regulatory au-
thority over the sector, resolving concerns that another state might promulgate a similar
ordinance. Note that Figure 1 also shows that lending had begun to recover by 2013.



6
  In Section 4.1, we investigate whether SHGs were able to offset the decrease in microcredit.
7
  However, it was not illegal for borrowers to seek out their lenders to make payments.
8
  Note that the crisis hit the lender’s loan portfolio with a lag. Given the year-long maturity of most microloans,
it took up to twelve months for the loans to fully default. Further, many MFIs waited to write off their non-
performing loans.
9
  In conversations with executives from six different lenders, we learned that MFIs went to great lengths to
manage the expectations of borrowers. In many cases, individuals were able to observe the delayed loan
disbursements of peers. In these cases, the loan officers played a significant role in explaining the delays and
answering borrower questions.
                                     EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                              8

2.2. Framework. In this section we lay out a simple, illustrative model of microfinance
credit supply, aggregate demand, and the labor market. Full details and proofs are in Ap-
pendix A. We focus on the aggregate demand channel for several reasons. One is the
empirical evidence that microfinance has limited effects on business expansion for the av-
erage business. Another is to illustrate that the aggregate demand channel alone is able to
generate a number of testable predictions, for which we will find support in the data. We
also discuss below an extension in which some households have an opportunity to invest in
a business, but lack the wealth to do so, creating another motive to borrow.10
   The model spans two periods – today and the future. Impatience combined with pre-
dicted income growth creates a desire to bring consumption forward in time, and therefore,
a demand for consumption credit. The economy comprises two sectors: Tradables (mainly
agricultural commodities), and Non-tradables (locally-priced goods and services).

Consumers and workers. Household i obtains utility from consuming goods from both
sectors, tradables (T) and non-tradables (NT), via a Cobb-Douglas aggregator:

(2.1)                                       Ci = CT,i α CN T,i 1−α

    Consumers are risk neutral, but impatient, and discount period 2 consumption by β < 1.
Moreover, each household is endowed with deterministic non-labor income in each period,
yt . We assume this income is growing over time: y2 > y1 . This, along with β < 1, ensures
a consumption smoothing motive for borrowing.11
    All households are endowed with fixed amounts of two types of human capital: high-
skilled (e.g., numeracy), and low-skilled (e.g., physical strength).12 We assume for sim-
plicity that households supply labor inelastically. The aggregate endowment of low-skilled
human capital is N ` , and that of high-skilled human capital is N h .

MFI borrowing and the AP Crisis. We model microfinance as a source of a fixed amount
of credit. If microfinance is available in a community, the MFI will be willing to extend a
loan of size B with gross interest rate R to all individuals who wish to borrow. The loans
are disbursed in period 1 and repaid in period 2. The assumption that all loans have the
same terms matches the stylized fact in our data that MFIs standardize their loan offers.

10
  See Mian et al. (2017) for a model of credit supply that includes both channels.
11
   Consistent with this, the microfinance literature finds robust increases in durable purchases. Another po-
tential motive for borrowing is to mitigate idiosyncratic shocks. However, the microfinance contract structure
is not particularly well-suited for risk-smoothing (Field et al., 2013; Greaney et al., 2016).
12
   We refer to the two labor types as high- and low-skilled for simplicity, but the distinction could also capture
horizontal differentiation, such as interpersonal skills vs. mechanical skills.
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                           9

  We model the balance sheet effects of the crisis as reducing the amount of microcredit
available in exposed districts, so that households, who, in the absence of the crisis could
have borrowed more to bring consumption forward, are now more constrained.

Firms and Equilibrium. District-level equilibrium occurs as follows: In both the tradable
and non-tradable labor markets, the wage is set in each period by market clearing, such that
labor supply equals labor demand, for both high- and low-skilled labor.
   Labor markets are likely to be somewhat, but not completely, segmented.13 Thus, we al-
low for imperfect segmentation across the high- and low-skilled labor markets. We assume
that the tradable (agricultural) sector employs only low-skilled labor, but the non-tradable
(non-agricultural) sector employs both low- and high-skilled labor, which are combined via
a constant elasticity of substitution aggregator. Production functions in each sector are:

                                                    γ
(2.2)                           Y T = AT LT,`
                                                                         γ
(2.3)                         Y N T = AN T (LN T,` )ρ + θ(LN T,h )ρ         ρ




   In equilibrium, the wage must be such that the non-tradable sector employs the full
endowment of high-skilled labor, and the tradable and non-tradable sectors together employ
the endowment of low-skilled labor. The tradable good price is normalized to 1 and the
relative price of the non-tradable good is pinned down by supply and demand.
   With partially segmented labor markets, it is not possible to obtain closed-form solutions
for the high- and low-skilled wages.14 The following result gives the signs and relative
magnitudes of how high- and low-skilled period 1 wages respond to credit supply B.
Proposition: When high- and low-skilled labor are imperfect substitutes in the
                     dwh       dw`
non-tradable sector, dB1 wBh > dB1 wBl > 0.
                           1         1
Proof: See Appendix A.
   The proposition implies that the equilibrium high-skilled, period 1 wage falls when B
falls, due to the aggregate demand effect. Moreover, a reduction in aggregate demand also
induces non-tradable firms to substitute toward the now-cheaper high-skilled labor, pushing
down the low-skilled wage across both sectors. There is a higher elasticity of high-skill
wages to borrowing than of low-skilled wages to borrowing. The proposition also implies

13
  Emerick (2017) shows that increases in agricultural productivity in rural India increase the labor share of
the non-agricultural sector.
14
  In Appendix D we consider the case of fully segmented labor markets, which has the advantage of produc-
ing closed form solutions.
                                    EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                             10

that, if the marginal product of high-skilled labor is higher than that of low-skilled labor,15
a reduction in credit access will also cause the high-skilled wage to fall by more in Rupees.


2.3. Empirical Predictions. This framework delivers several key predictions about the
effects of exposure to the AP crisis. We focus here on predictions for the first period in the
model, t = 1, to match the timing of our empirical results.16
   Note that, in our data, we do not observe wages separately for high- and low-skilled
workers. We instead observe sectoral wages, wN T and wT , which are weighted averages
of the wages for the high- and low-skilled human capital considered above.17 There will
be a decrease in average daily wage in both sectors when credit access falls, due to the
reduction in labor demand resulting from the drop in aggregate demand as households are
less able to borrow to bring consumption forward. The fall in the wage will be particularly
strong for non-agricultural businesses (non-tradables), who are directly hit by the reduction
in aggregate demand. The tradable sector will experience a smaller wage decline, resulting
from some (low-skilled) workers shifting into the tradable from the non-tradable sector.
   The model also predicts declines in total labor earnings for all laborer households at
t = 1. Consumption falls, both in response to the decline in wages and the reduction in
consumption credit.18


Investment Channel. The above framework only allows microfinance to affect equilibrium
wages through a reduction in consumption and, thus, a reduction in aggregate demand in
the non-tradable sector. However, a rich theoretical literature has analyzed the potential
for credit directed at poor households to matter via the channel of business creation and
expansion (e.g., Banerjee and Newman 1993, Buera et al. 2017, Ahlin and Jiang (2008)).
In practice, some businesses supplying rural areas are not owned by urban shareholders,
but by rural households who may face credit constraints. While the RCT literature finds

15
  This assumption is consistent with the fact that non-tradable wages are higher in the data in our setting.
16
  That MFIs resumed lending outside of AP after 2012 makes our empirical setting less well-suited to ex-
amine longer-term effects. Moreover, the two-period nature of our model is extremely stylized and is not
equipped to make predictions about any given year following the shock.
17
  One might worry that our model predicts changes in the allocation of low-skilled labor across sectors.
However, our empirical test is able to detect a pure decrease in the high-skilled wage. Note that a decrease in
credit supply should lead to relative reallocation of skilled labor to the tradable sector. However, if anything,
this composition effect should make it more difficult to detect a fall in the non-tradable wage.
18
  An additional implication of our model is that the relative non-tradable good price will fall. However, we
are unable to empirically test this prediction as the NSS does not collect information on quantities consumed
for either services or durable goods.
                                  EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                        11

little evidence of effects of microfinance on business scale or profitability for the average
complier, some borrowers do use microfinance to expand profitable businesses.19
    Adding an investment channel to our framework would strengthen the magnitude of the
predicted effects of reduced access to microfinance on tradable and non-tradable wages,
labor earnings and consumption. If (some) businesses are forced to scale back employment
or close their businesses due to the direct effects of the credit decrease, this will cause
labor demand to decline in both the tradable and non-tradable sectors, magnifying the wage
drop. Moreover, in an occupational ladder model (Banerjee and Newman 1993), adding this
channel suggests that the effects may be heterogeneous across the wealth distribution. See
Section 6.3 for a discussion and calibration of a version of the model that incorporates both
the aggregate demand and investment channels.
    We now turn to testing these predictions, after detailing the data and empirical strategy.

                             3. DATA AND E MPIRICAL S TRATEGY

3.1. Data. We use data from several sources in our empirical analysis. Appendix E pro-
vides additional details.

Hand-Collected MFI Data. The first requirement for our proposed analysis of the AP crisis
is a measurement of district-level balance sheet exposure to Andhra Pradesh pre- October
2010. Because no commonly-available datasets contain such information, we partnered
with the Microfinance Institutions Network (MFIN), the primary trade organization of for-
profit MFI-NBFCs (non-bank, financial corporations).20 MFIN allowed us to ask each
of their 42 members for district level balance sheet snapshots from 2008 to 2012; 25 of
MFIN’s 42 member organizations agreed to share their data for the study.
   Given that we do not have the whole universe of Indian lenders, we explore the sample
composition. We are able to cross-check our sample with the aggregate data that many
firms choose to report to MIX Market, an online repository of information about global
microfinance. We examine characteristics of MFIs in 2009, the year before the AP crisis.
In total, 115 Indian MFIs provide 2009 data to MIX. Of the 25 MFIs in our sample, 21
report to MIX; these comprise 36% of all reporting for-profit lenders in India. Our sample
represents approximately 18% of the total microfinance market by loan volume.
   Table 1 examines the selection of reporting firms into the sample. In panel A, we observe
that the reporting firms are smaller: they have fewer borrowers, and fewer borrowers per
19
  Banerjee et al. (2018) show that households who selected into entrepreneurship before getting access to
microfinance experience sustained positive treatment effects of microfinance, including effects on hiring.
20
  Non-profit lenders represent a very small slice of total loan volume in India.
                                 EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                      12

staff member. This is not surprising given that several of the largest lenders in India, who
have achieved greater economies of scale, chose not to participate in our study.21 How-
ever, the loan-level details look much more similar between reporting and non-reporting
institutions; the average loan sizes are very similar (around $180) and are not statistically
different, and the default rates (write-offs and 30-day portfolio at risk) are quite low in
both samples. (Though the 30-day portfolio at risk is significantly lower in the reporting
sample.)
   In Panel B, we restrict the sample to reporting firms, and examine whether the charac-
teristics of firms exposed to the crisis (i.e., firms with loans in AP on the eve of the crisis;
see below) have different characteristics than those which are not exposed. Whereas dif-
ferences between reporting firms and non-reporting firms in Panel A affect the external
validity of our results, any differences between exposed and unexposed lenders could pose
a threat to internal validity. Reassuringly, exposed and unexposed firms look quite similar
in terms of loan size, number of borrowers, borrowers per staff member, write-off ratio
and portfolio at risk. We examine an additional outcome within this sample: the MFI’s
age, as measured by the first year it reports positive loan volume in our data. (We cannot
examine this outcome in Panel A since it is only available for reporting firms.) Exposed
and unexposed firms are also similar in this dimension.
   Based on the final MFI data set, Table 2 shows that the total 2012 gross loan portfolio in
districts where lenders were not exposed to the crisis is 1694 lakhs (roughly INR 170 mil-
lion). Scaled by the number of rural households, this translates to INR 411 per household
(averaging across borrowers and non-borrowers) in the average non-exposed district.

Measuring exposure to the AP Crisis. In order to calculate the level of exposure of each
district to the AP crisis, we proceed as follows. First, for each lender l, we calculate the
share of the MFI’s overall portfolio that was invested in Andhra Pradesh on the eve of the
AP Crisis (the beginning of October, 2010):

                                             GLPl,AP,Oct2010
                                 f racAPl =                     .
                                            GLPl,T otal,Oct2010
  Then, for each district d, we construct an aggregate exposure measure by taking the
weighted average of f racAPl over all lenders who had outstanding loans in the district
pre-crisis, where the weights are that lender’s total loan portfolio in the state, GLPdl,Oct2010 :
                                                    f racAPl × GLPdl,Oct2010
                                            P
                                                l
(3.1)                    ExpAPdT otal   =              P                     .
                                                         l GLPdl,Oct2010

21
  This is likely because the larger lenders had more outside equity holders and wanted to maintain data
privacy and also had the most to fear from negative press coverage.
                                  EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                       13

   Thus, ExpAPd is a measure of the extent to which the district’s loan portfolio on the
eve of the crisis was exposed to the crisis. For instance, consider a district served by two
lenders, each of whom makes 50% of the loans in the district. One lender operates solely
in Northern India and has 0% of its portfolio in AP. The other is based in Southern India
and has 40% of its portfolio in AP. Then ExpAPdT otal = .4+0 2
                                                                = 0.20.
   We scale the exposure ratio (defined by equation 3.1) by the amount of credit outstanding
per rural household. We calculate the rural population using the 2010 round of the NSS
(discussed below). This scaling captures the idea that the same amount of outstanding credit
will have a greater per-household impact in a less populous district vs a more populous one:
                                                           P
                                                             GLPdl,Oct2010
                                                             l
(3.2)                     ExpAPd =      ExpAPdT otal   ×
                                                            RuralP op2010
NSS Data. Our primary outcome measures come from the Indian National Sample Survey
(NSS). We use household data from waves 64, 66, and 68 of the NSS, which correspond
to years 2007-2008, 2009-2010, and 2011-2012, respectively.22 We focus on the schedules
containing household composition, consumption and employment. Key variables are sum-
marized in Table 2. (We summarize the 2012 values in low exposure districts for ease of
comparison to the reduced form results, below.) Household total weekly earnings average
INR 855. The agricultural casual daily wage averages INR 140, and the non-agricultural
casual daily wage averages INR 195.23 Almost a third (29%) of households report engaging
in non-agricultural self-employment.
   The NSS waves 64, 66, and 68 do not contain detailed data on household indebtedness.
However, as discussed below, we can use the NSS 70th wave contains a “Debt and Invest-
ment” survey, collected in 2012 and 2013. Its questions are asked to allow a researcher to
reconstruct a household’s total credit outstanding on June 30, 2012. The average household
in a low-exposure district had INR 347 of MFI loans (narrowly defined). Using a broader
definition that likely captures some microloans that the narrower one does not, average
holdings of uncollateralized loans from formal sources other than banks are INR 2103.
(Note that these measures average across borrowers and non-borrowers.)

Auxiliary Data Sources. Finally, throughout our analysis we introduce several outcomes
and covariates from several complementary data sources. These cover variables such as
rainfall, inter-district travel times, political party affiliation, and crop yields. We describe

22
  As discussed below in Section 4.1, we also use the credit module of the 70th wave of the NSS to provide
an alternate measure of the credit response to the crisis.
23
  We exclude work performed as part of public works programs such as NREGA from the wage calculations
since NREGA wages are set administratively, not via market clearing.
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                  14

the sources of those variables when we introduce the empirical specifications and results,
below; more detail is available in Appendix E.

3.2. Empirical Strategy. We estimate ITT impacts of reduced access to microfinance on
a range of outcomes. The main estimating equation takes the difference-in-difference form
                                                                      0
(3.3)          yidt = α + δt + δd + β × Exposured × P ostt + Xidt γ + εidt

where yidt are outcome variables for individual i in district d at time t; δt and δd are fixed
effects for survey round (time) and district, respectively; Exposured is a measure of the
exposure of district d to the AP crisis (discussed below); and β is the coefficient of interest.
   0
Xidt includes controls for the calendar month when the survey was conducted; household
size; the rural population of the district at t and its square; and dummies for quintiles of
2008 and 2010 gross loan portfolio, interacted with round. Note that we do not observe
a household panel, but rather repeated cross-sections, which form a district-level panel.
Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
    We use two measures of exposure to the AP crisis, both based on ExpAPd (defined in
equation 3.2). First is the log of the exposure ratio (defined by equation 3.2) plus one.
Second is a dummy for the presence of a lender that had any exposure to the AP crisis. The
proportion of districts with a positive exposure ratio is 37.3%; the proportion of household-
level observations located in these districts is very similar, at 36.9%.
    Our identification comes from the differential change in outcomes of household cohorts
in otherwise-similar districts with differing degrees of exposure to the crisis. Given the
time-varying controls we include, our identifying assumption is that households in districts
with the same rural population and the same level of total MFI lending in 2008 and 2010
are on similar trends regardless of whether the MFIs lending in the district were highly
exposed to the AP crisis or not.
    One piece of evidence supporting this assumption is the fact that microlenders before
the crisis tended to offer a very homogeneous product. Most lenders used all of the follow-
ing features: interest rates of approximately 25-30% APR, weekly or monthly meetings,
meetings held in groups, similar loan sizes, and similar dynamic incentives. Given this
standardization, the identifying assumption appears a priori reasonable. Moreover, we
present robustness and placebo checks below that lend direct support to this assumption.
    As a way to shed light on our identification strategy, Table C.1 compares baseline char-
acteristics of exposed vs. unexposed districts. (Recall that, since we use a difference-in-
difference strategy, level differences across exposed vs. unexposed districts do not in and
of themselves pose a concern, but trend differences would be a concern.) Columns 1 and
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 15

2, respectively, examine whether exposed districts are closer to AP or more likely to border
AP. Unsurprisingly, they are: MFIs that operated in AP also operated in nearby districts. In
Section 4.3, we will show a variety to checks to rule out that differential trends by distance
are driving our results. Columns 3 through 7 shows that exposed and unexposed districts
do not differ in their baseline levels of agricultural or non-agricultural daily wages, weekly
labor earnings, or non-durable or durable consumption.


                                        4. R ESULTS

4.1. First Stage. Table 3 presents the first stage, estimated by equation 3.3 with a measure
of credit outstanding in 2012 on the left-hand side. We show results for the district-level
total gross loan portfolio (column 1), the gross loan portfolio per rural household (column
2) and the log of the district-level total gross loan portfolio (column 3). Row 1 of column
1 shows that a 1 log point increase in exposure to the crisis (as measured by the pre-
crisis portfolio weighted exposure of the district’s lenders to the AP crisis) is associated
with roughly INR 33,680,000 (337 lakhs) less credit outstanding in the district in 2012
(significant at 1%). The second row of column 1 indicates that those districts with an
AP-exposed lender have INR 110,550,000 (1106 lakhs) less credit outstanding in 2012
(also significant at 1%), corresponding to a drop of almost two thirds compared to similar
districts whose lenders were not exposed to the crisis. Row 1 of column 2 shows that a 1
log point increase in exposure to the crisis is associated with INR 97 less credit outstanding
per rural household in 2012 (significant at 1%). The second row of column 2 indicates that
those districts with an AP-exposed lender have INR 308 less credit outstanding per rural
household in 2012 (significant at 1%), compared to other similar districts whose lenders
were not exposed to the crisis. Column 3 shows an analogous specification in logs; again,
the effects are large and highly significant.
   These effects imply that AP-exposed lenders cut back significantly on lending and this
shortfall was not fully made up by other, non-exposed microlenders. It is not surprising that
other microlenders were unable to target the borrowers of exposed MFIs. First, expanding
to new villages requires fixed investments in branch infrastructure and in staff. Second,
even non-exposed MFIs report having trouble obtaining credit from the Indian banking
sector, which traditionally provided most of the funding to the MFIs, due to uncertainty in
the aftermath of the AP Crisis. Third, borrowers often were allowed to take larger loans
only after establishing a successful repayment record with their lenders. Given that there
was no microfinance credit registry, even if households were able to secure new loans from
new lenders, those loans would have been smaller in size.
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                         16

Did banks fill the gap? To understand the effects of the crisis on total access to credit, it
is important to understand whether other sources, such as commercial bank lending, filled
some or all of the gap left by the reduction in access to microcredit. To examine this,
we use information from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) “District-Wise Classification
of Outstanding Credit of Scheduled Commercial Banks.” These data allow us to examine
whether more-exposed districts saw a differential change in commercial bank lending after
the AP crisis. We focus on the category of agricultural loan accounts as this category
includes most forms of lending to households, including “artisans,” i.e. non-agricultural
microenterprises. Results are shown for the log of number of accounts and the log of the
total amount outstanding.
   Table 4 reports the results. There is no effect of exposure to the crisis on the number
of agricultural loan accounts, nor the amount outstanding. When we distinguish direct
accounts (largely made to individuals) from indirect counts (largely made to other entities,
including MFIs, for on-lending) we again see no effect for direct accounts or amounts, and a
fall in indirect accounts, likely reflecting reduced lending to MFIs in response to regulatory
uncertainty surrounding the MFI sector. In sum, there is no evidence that commercial bank
lending filled the gap.24

Alternative Credit Data. Our hand-collected credit data is not without limitations. In par-
ticular, it represents approximately 18% of the Indian market by loan volume: a large share
of the market was comprised of MFIs who declined to share their data with us. If the re-
sponding firms are a random sample of all firms, this will only add noise to our measure
of exposure, attenuating our measures of the effect of exposure to the crisis toward zero.
However, one may worry that the subset of firms who responded is somehow non-random.
   As a check, we draw on an alternative source of data, based on survey reports of house-
hold indebtedness, rather than MFI reports of their loan portfolios. The source we use is the
NSS 70th round “Debt and Investment” survey, collected in 2012 and 2013. Its questions
are asked in such a way as to allow researchers to reconstruct a household’s total credit
outstanding on June 30, 2012.
   This is an entirely different data source than that used in Table 3. It is reported by house-
holds, not MFIs, and covers a nationally representative sample of Indian households. Thus,
to the extent that we observe similar patterns in this data and in the data we collected with
24
  Neither the NSS nor RBI data allows us to examine the effect of the crisis on informal lending; however,
the results in Table 5, discussed below, show that the effect on total lending is negative and large, albeit
imprecisely estimated, so there is no evidence that informal lending filled the gap. This is intuitive since
the credit shock was aggregate to districts, so the social networks of affected households were themselves
affected.
                                    EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                          17

MFIN, it confirms that the patterns of exposure we observe are not artefacts of MFI report-
ing decisions. However, the “Debt and Investment” data is not without its own drawbacks:
most significantly, we only have this data for 2012, so we are unable to use our preferred
differences-in-differences empirical strategy. We must instead rely on cross-sectional com-
parisons.25 This should be viewed as complementary to our analysis above.
   Another challenge with the “Debt and Investment” data relates to the classification of
MFI loans. The credit survey asks households to enumerate each loan outstanding and
aims to capture detailed data on the type of lender. There are 17 different lender types.
The NSS handbook (NSSO, 2014) states that for-profit microfinance should be grouped
as SHG-NBFC (self-help group - non-banking financial company); however, non-profit
microfinance and bank-linked SHGs are grouped under SHG-BL (self-help group - bank-
linked). Further, there are three other categories that describe non-bank formal loans from
financial institutions, which can be collateralized or uncollateralized. In sum, there is un-
certainty about how respondents and surveyors would choose to treat a MFI loan.26
   To address this ambiguity, we construct two measures intended to capture MFI borrow-
ing. First, we present a measure based on the narrow NSS definition, those classified as
SHG-NBFC. Because microloans are almost always uncollateralized, we also present a
measure that captures all uncollateralized non-bank credit from formal institutions. We in-
clude in this definition all non-collateralized SHG loans, some of which may be linked to a
bank. As well as addressing mis-classification, our broader definition allows us to capture
impacts on microcredit that are net of any offsetting SHG supply response.
   Table 5 presents OLS regressions of household credit on our pre-crisis AP exposure
variables. Because we cannot use our differences-in-differences strategy, we instead con-
trol for numerous pre-crisis, district-level covariates.27 In columns 1 and 5 we consider
impacts on the narrow definition of microfinance, SHG-NBFC.28 Remarkably, we find im-
pact estimates that are strikingly close to those in Table 3. Districts that are exposed to AP


25
  The NSS collected a small household indebtedness survey as a part of Round 66. However, the module was
given only to landless agricultural households, and cannot adequately capture district-level microloan access.
26
  Our experience in the field suggests that these differences in legal structure of loans—e.g., whether an MFI
lender is for-profit or non-profit—are not always salient to respondents.
27
  MFI balance sheet controls include levels and quintiles of GLP measured in 2008 and 2010. RBI con-
trols include amount of credit outstanding and number of accounts for agricultural loans, direct loans, and
indirect loans. NSS 66 controls include average monthly household expenditures, annual durables expendi-
tures, weekly earnings from and days worked in self-employment and non-self employment, daily wage, and
percent of weekly earnings from self-employment.
28
  Columns 1 to 4 use data winsorized at the 99th percentile of non-zero observations, while columns 5 to 8
use logs. Non-winsorized levels data give very similar results.
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 18

pre-crisis experience a decrease in per household microcredit outstanding of INR 310 (col
1, row 2); the corresponding figure in Table 3 was INR 308 (col 2, row 2).
   Next, in columns 2 and 6, we examine the impacts of high exposure on the broader
measure of non-collateralized formal credit. Here, we find that pre-crisis exposure reduces
outstanding credit in 2012 by Rs. 1,353. As with the narrower measure, this represents
a large fall compared to the control mean of INR 2395. This suggests that SHGs did not
in fact fill the void left by reduced access to microcredit loans. It also suggests that it is
indeed likely that some for-profit microfinance loans were mis-classified in the NSS surveys
as SHG-BL rather than SHG-NBFC loans.
   In columns 3, 4, 7 and 8, we present bank credit and total credit as outcomes. While the
coefficients are estimated imprecisely, we again find, in column 3, no evidence that bank
credit increased and thereby offset the fall in microcredit. (A finding which is consistent
with Table 4, which uses a different source of data, namely RBI data on banks’ balance
sheets.) Finally, we observe a negative, but imprecisely measured, coefficient on total
credit outstanding, suggesting that, as expected given the aggregate nature of the shock,
other sources such as informal lending could not compensate for the loss of microcredit.
   Importantly, the fact that this was a microfinance shock matters for aggregate outcomes,
over and above its impact on total district-level credit. The propagation of a credit supply
shock will depend critically on the uses to which the credit would have been put, and
microcredit serves specific needs, namely accelerating lumpy consumption and financing
business investment, that are not well met by other sources.
   The results from the “Debt and Investment” survey data are reassuring in that they find
very similar patterns as those seen in the MFIN data. Thus, the first-stage effects of ex-
posure to the crisis are not an artefact of differential reporting to MFIN or of geographical
clustering across MFIs.




Khwaja and Mian (2008) exercise. As an additional check on the first stage, we conduct
an exercise exploiting within-district variation, modeled after Khwaja and Mian (2008).
We focus on districts with both exposed and unexposed MFIs, and show that the fall in
credit is driven by exposed MFIs. This also serves as an additional test of the identifying
assumption that exposed and unexposed districts would have had similar counterfactual
outcomes in the absence of the crisis: if exposed districts differed in some unobservable
way, or suffered a demand shock due to being exposed to the AP crisis via other channels,
we would expect unexposed lenders’ portfolios to fall in those districts as well.
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 19

  We examine this relationship via the following regression:
                                                                     0
(4.1)         ∆yld12−10 = α + δd + β × Exposurel × P ostt + Xld γ + εidt

   where ∆yld12−10 is the change in per rural household GLP lent by MFI l to district d
between September 2010 and March 2012. The δd are district fixed effects, and Exposurel
is the exposure of lender l to the AP crisis, measured by either the share of its portfolio in
Andhra Pradesh as of September 2010, or a dummy equal to one if the MFI operated in
                                                                 0
Andhra Pradesh in September 2010. In some specifications, Xld is a control for the log of
the MFI’s size September 2010, measured by its total GLP outside AP (so that size is not
proxying for exposure).
   Appendix table C.2 shows the results. Column 1 shows that moving from 0 to 100% ex-
posure of the MFI, captured by the share of its portfolio in Andhra Pradesh as of September
2010, is associated with a INR 281 fall in GLP per rural household over 2010 to 2012. The
constant reflects any excess change GLP for an unexposed MFI in a district where some
MFIs were exposed; it is very small and not significantly different from zero. Column 2
uses an exposure dummy equal to one if the MFI operated in Andhra Pradesh on the eve of
the crisis. Exposed MFIs saw an average decline in GLP per rural household of INR 153;
again, the constant shows that unexposed MFIs saw no excess change. Columns 3 and 4
show that controlling for MFI size does not change the results. (Note that the constant no
longer has the same interpretation as it reflects the average positive growth rate of an MFI
that was very small in 2010.)

4.2. Reduced Form Results.

Labor Outcomes. We begin by examining how the reduction in distract-level credit access
observed in Table 3 affects the local labor market. Table 6 reports treatment effects on
casual daily wages, household total labor supply, total labor earnings, involuntary unem-
ployment and entrepreneurship. We begin by noting that the reduction in credit did have
economically and statistically significant effects on the casual daily wage. Exposed districts
experienced a fall in the daily wage of INR 8.9, significant at the 1% level, which is dis-
played in row 2 of column 1. This represents roughly a 6% reduction from the unexposed
district mean of INR 153. We next ask if this decrease in wage affected total household
labor supply and total labor earnings. Column 2 shows that there are no detectable ef-
fects on total days worked in self-employment and wage employment combined. However,
column 3 shows that household days worked in casual daily wage labor did decrease by
almost half a day on a base of 3.5 person days. Given that wages and paid days worked
both fell, this leads to an overall decline in household weekly labor market earnings of
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 20

INR 75 in exposed districts relative to unexposed districts after the AP crisis, significant at
the 5% level (column 4). We also observe that households do not change their assessment
of whether they are involuntarily unemployed differentially in high versus low exposure
districts after the crisis (column 5). Thus we do not find evidence the the crisis resulted
in rationing in the market for casual labor, suggesting that adjustments to the crisis were
equilibrated via the wage. Column 6 examines effects on the likelihood that a household
has a business which employs others. Pooling across agricultural and non-agricultural em-
ployers, the point estimate on the extensive margin of being an employer is negative, but
not significant at conventional levels (p = .199 for the binary indicator). (Of course, the
businesses we capture in this measure are likely only a small fraction of total labor demand,
as many businesses will not be owned by rural households; the data also do not allow us to
examine the intensive margin of labor demand.)
   Our strong wage and labor earnings results echo the predictions of Buera et al. (2017)
and highlight the importance of incorporating general equilibrium effects into the analysis
of the effects of credit access.




Consumption. Table 7 reports the effects of reduced credit access on total expenditure
and its components: nondurables and durables, measured on a monthly basis. Column
1, row 1 shows that a 1 log point increase in exposure to the crisis is associated with a
reduction of INR 84 in per household monthly total expenditures in 2012 (significant at
1%). Column 1, row 2 indicates that those districts with an AP-exposed lender have INR
319 lower per household monthly total expenditure (significant at 1%), compared to other
similar districts whose lenders were not exposed to the crisis. Column 2 examines per
household monthly nondurable expenditures. Row 1 shows that a 1 log point increase in
exposure to the crisis is associated with a reduction of INR 69 (significant at 1%), and row
2 shows that those districts with an AP-exposed lender have INR 247 lower per household
monthly nondurable expenditure (significant at 5%). Column 3 repeats the analysis for
per household monthly durable expenditures. Row 1 shows that a 1 log point increase in
exposure to the crisis is associated with a reduction of INR 16 (significant at 5%), and
row 2 shows that those districts with an exposed lender have INR 80 lower per household
monthly durable expenditure (significant at 1%). In sum, reduced credit access resulted in
reduced total consumption, stemming from falls in both nondurables and durables. In the
context of our model, this consumption fall arises both from reduced labor earnings and
tighter constraints on the ability to borrow against future income.
                                  EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                               21

  In column 4, we also examine whether exposure to the crisis has any effect on whether
households are below the poverty line.29 We find no significant effect on this outcome,
suggesting that the reduction in consumption is concentrated higher up in the distribution.
We should also note that poverty headcounts in India have fallen substantially since the
banking reform studied by Burgess and Pande (2005). During the timeframe of their study,
48% of rural households were classified as below the poverty line. In our data from 2010,
the poverty count is only half as large, at 25%.

4.3. Robustness checks. We next provide evidence to rule out several key threats to iden-
tification.

Placebo regression. To provide support for the identifying assumption that exposed and
unexposed districts had similar counterfactual outcomes in the absence of the balance sheet
effects of the crisis, Table 8 conducts a placebo test, dropping the round 68 data and assign-
ing the round 66 observations the status of Post. If districts that were more exposed to AP
were on differential trends prior to the crisis, we should see significant spurious “effects” in
round 66. Reassuringly, for none of the main outcomes is the placebo treatment significant
at standard levels. Moreover, the point estimates are all much smaller in magnitude than
those of the main regressions and can be statistically distinguished from the main treatment
effects. This suggests that pre-existing differential trends are not driving our results.

Geographical Distance to AP. Recall from Table C.1 that exposure to the AP crisis is
correlated with distance to Andhra Pradesh. Thus, if places closer to AP systematically
had different (worse) economic trends post 2010, then our identification strategy would
be compromised. Moreover, it is also conceivable that the direct fallout of the AP crisis
could have “spilled over” onto nearby districts through channels other than the MFI balance
sheet effect we measure (such as economic uncertainty, decreased trade, etc.). We perform
several tests to check that our results are not simply capturing such an effect.
   In Table 9, we conduct three robustness exercises using distance measures to Andhra
Pradesh. First, in Panel A, we rerun our main specification for key consumption and labor
supply outcomes, but drop districts with a geographical border with Andhra Pradesh. Sec-
ond, in Panel B, we instead include the geographical (“as the crow flies”) distance of each
district from AP, interacted with survey round. While the district fixed effects control for
time invariant correlates with distance, this specification allows for differential trends by
distance. Raw geographical distance may not adequately capture some types of relation-
ships between districts, such as trade costs, due to variation in the quality of infrastructure.
29
 See Appendix E for details on the construction of the below poverty line variable.
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 22

As a third distance measure, we add the travel times between a given district and Hyder-
abad, as measured in Allen and Atkin (2016). Panel C of Table 9 displays the results.
Across these iterations, the results look very similar to those in our main specification.
  Finally, we also conduct Altonji-type tests in Appendix Table C.3, systematically drop-
ping each state from the analysis. We find that no single state is driving the results, even
those bordering AP.

Randomization Inference. As a further check of the possibility that our results are spuri-
ous, Table C.5 performs randomization inference (RI) by performing 500 permutations, in
each of which a different draw of 132 districts was selected to be assigned the status of
“exposed.” As noted by Blattman et al. (2017), randomization inference estimates p-values
based on the empirical distribution of all treatment effects that could arise under a given
research design and dataset. If our results arise from a chance correlation between ex-
posure to the crisis and negative outcomes, then many permutations that randomly assign
“exposure” will generate similar patterns. On the other hand, if the observed results are
far in the tails of the distribution generated by the RI procedure, this suggests that they are
not arising by chance. Reassuringly, for all five of the key consumption and labor market
outcomes examined, the p-values are 0.024 or smaller, meaning that the actual coefficients
are unlikely to be due to spurious correlation.

Placebo Shocks. Another, related, concern is that the states that were exposed to AP might
also have been exposed, via trade or other linkages, to negative shocks originating else-
where and thus, we might attribute effects to exposure to the AP crisis that were instead
due to some other factor. To address this issue, we permute the identity of the state in which
the placebo “crisis” takes place. There are 23 states other than AP in our data, but only 22
unique placebo shocks, because a single MFI in our sample operated in both Sikkim and
Tripura before the AP crisis, and therefore these states are counted as a single permutation.
Thus, we construct 22 placebo measures of exposure (via MFI balance sheets): exposure
to Assam, exposure to Bihar, etc. Table C.5 reports the results. For all five of the key
consumption and labor market outcomes examined, the true measure of exposure (to AP)
generates outcomes that are the lowest or second-lowest in the distribution.

Political Affinity with AP. While distance and trading relationships represent the most seri-
ous threats to identification, we also investigate whether the shock to AP may have spread
to other places with similar political ideologies, for instance because of greater concern
about a default episode occurring in politically-similar states. Appendix Table C.6 tests for
the possibility that states with greater exposure to the crisis may have been more “aligned”
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                  23

with Andhra Pradesh through having similar political parties in power. We add as controls
indicator variables for the political party of the state’s chief minister in 2010, at the time of
the crisis, interacted with round. This allows all states with a certain party in power to be
on a differential trend. Again, our results remain robust.

Rainfall and Other Economic Conditions. Finally, we also check that our results are not
coming from time-varying differences in other economic characteristics. First, we check
that the differences between high and low exposure districts after 2010 are not coming from
(random but unlucky) differences in rainfall. We construct an index for abnormal rainfall
using the methodology of Jayachandran (2006). In Appendix Table C.7, we run our main
specification, including time varying rainfall realizations, and find no major differences
with our main results.
   Finally, in Appendix Table C.8 we allow for differential trends by baseline economic
conditions. We allow districts with different levels of baseline consumption, poverty, casual
wage, or self-employment to evolve differently. Our results remain robust, showing that
differential trends by initial level of development cannot explain our findings.

4.4. Scaling the Reduced Form Treatment Effects. Due to the concerns with both our
pre-crisis measure of exposure and with our ex post measure of the drop in credit, one needs
to use caution when thinking about scaling the reduced form, intent-to-treat (ITT) effects
into treatment on the treated (TOT) effects.
   One issue with our MFI balance sheet data is a slight timing mis-match. The post-crisis
data reflects balance sheets as of March 2011 and March 2012. Credit likely bottomed out
around the end of 2011, by which time all of the loans outstanding at the time of the crisis
would have rolled over; this is consistent with Figure 1. Thus, our data likely misses the
bottoming-out of the market and hence the full magnitude of the credit contraction. Our
NSS “Debt and Investment” data measures credit at an even later point of time, June 2012.
The outcomes data, on the other hand, come from the NSS round 68 and were measured for
most households at the end of 2011, likely reflecting the full brunt of the credit contraction.
Thus, scaling the reduced form impacts by the measured first stage may imply TOT effects
that are too large, since the denominator may be too small.
   Another issue, discussed above, is that the first stage based on the balance sheet data, as
used in Table 3, only measures lending from the subsample of MFIs who provided their
data. This will attenuate the first stage relationship. A similar issue is present in the narrow
definition of MFI borrowing from the “Debt and Investment” data, to the extent that some
MFI lending is misclassified.
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 24

  In sum, any scaling of reduced form effects by first stage estimates should be done with
caution. If a first stage number is desired for back-of-the-envelope purposes, the broader
measure of microfinance in Table 5, column 2 (Rs. -1353) is arguably most appropriate.

                            5. M ECHANISMS AND I NCIDENCE

   Exposure to the AP crisis reduced access to microfinance loans. This credit contraction,
in turn, caused significant drops in daily casual wages, labor earnings, and durable and
nondurable consumption. We now examine several intermediating variables that shed light
on the mechanisms that give rise to these impacts.

5.1. Impacts on Tradable and Non-tradable Sectors. We next consider the effect of the
AP crisis-induced credit crunch on wages, separately for agriculture (tradable) and non-
agriculture (non-tradable). Table 10 presents the results.
   Column 1 shows the pooled wage result across both genders and sectors, which is iden-
tical to the estimate in Table 6. Columns 2 and 3 disaggregate the wage by sector. We find
negative effects on the wage in both the tradable and non-trabable sectors, but the wage
effects are much stronger for non-agricultural work: the wage drop associated with the bi-
nary measure of exposure is INR 5.15 (significant at 10%) for the agricultural sector, and
INR 15.4 (significant at 1%) for the non-agricultural sector. While the average level of agri-
cultural wages is lower, the effect on the non-agricultural wage is also larger in percentage
terms: it falls by 8.4% of the control mean, compared with 4% for the agricultural wage.
   Columns 4 and 5 further disaggregate the results, showing effects on men’s wages in the
agricultural (tradable) and the non-agricultural (non-tradable) sector, respectively. As in the
results pooling genders, the wage effects are much stronger for non-agricultural work. The
fall in the wage associated with the binary measure of exposure is INR 5.14 (p = .1026)
for the agricultural sector, and INR 16.65 (p = .0014) for the non-agricultural sector.
   Columns 6 and 7 show the wage effect, by sector, for women’s wages. The effects are not
significantly different from zero, partly reflecting the smaller number of observations for
women. The treatment effect on women’s agricultural wages is very similar in magnitude to
that received by men. For non-agricultural wages, the effect on women’s wages is notably
smaller in magnitude than that for men, likely reflecting women working in different non-
agricultural jobs, such as domestic work and services, where the aggregate demand channel
is less strong since these services cannot be bought on credit.
   Finally, columns 8 and 9 examine effects on the likelihood that a household employs
wage workers in an agricultural or non-agricultural business, respectively. There is no
effect on the extensive margin of being an agricultural employer. However, column 9 shows
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                25

that there is a negative and significant effect on the likelihood that a household has a non-
agricultural business which employs others. Thus, one of the channels whereby exposure
to the crisis reduced wages is a reduction in the number of potential employers.
   This pattern of results is consistent with the predicted impacts of a negative shock to
labor demand through the business investment channel, affecting both tradables and non-
tradables, combined with a reduction in aggregate demand putting additional downward
pressure on employment and wages in the non-tradable sector. The asymmetric treatment
effects on both wages and hiring suggest that a reduction in aggregate demand is an impor-
tant factor driving the fall labor demand and hence, wages.


Agricultural wages and nominal rigidity. If agricultural wages display downward rigidity
(Kaur, 2015), a crucial determinant of wages may be whether they adjust upward when
demand is at its peak. To address this possibility, we examine whether the effects of (lack
of) access to microcredit differ in times of peak agricultural labor demand.
   Appendix Table C.9 presents the effects of exposure to the crisis for the subsample of
households surveyed in peak demand periods and those surveyed in non-peak periods. Col-
umn 1 shows that the effect on the agricultural wage is almost three times larger during peak
periods than non-peak periods. Column 2 shows that the effect on the non-agricultural wage
shows no similar pattern—in fact the effect in non-peak periods is slightly larger. This is
as expected since we have focused on peak periods of agricultural labor demand and reaf-
firms that agricultural and non-agricultural labor markets are somewhat segmented. The
total effect on weekly labor earnings (column 4) is markedly stronger in peak periods. As
a result, the peak effects on total consumption are also larger.


5.2. Impacts on Agricultural Output. We next look for district-level impacts of the
credit supply shock on output in the tradable (agricultural) sector. While tradables ex-
perienced no shock to product demand, the effect on total output is nevertheless unsigned.
On one hand, agricultural firms will benefit from lower wage bills, but on the other hand,
some of these farms may be forced to scale back as liquidity constraints bind more tightly.
   We examine district-level crop yields to shed light on this question. Given the impor-
tance of agriculture to rural Indian economies, effects of microfinance on crop yields are
also of independent interest. We use data from the Ministry of Agriculture, Directorate of
Economics and Statistics, which collects information on crop production. Following Jay-
achandran (2006), we consider a weighted average of log yield (production in tonnes per
area cropped, in hectares) for the five major crops: rice, wheat, sugar, jowar (sorghum),
                                  EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                26

and groundnuts.30 We also consider each crop separately. The results appear in Table 11.
We find a fairly precise zero effect for the index and for all crops but sugarcane, where the
effect is less precise but still insignificant. This suggests that, in aggregate, for the agricul-
tural (tradable) sector, the benefit from the wage reduction cancels out the cost from tighter
liquidity constraints.

5.3. Distributional Effects. Another question of interest is how the effects of the credit
contraction are felt across the wealth distribution. While we do not have panel data at
the household level and so cannot follow households over time, we can examine effects
separately for different parts of the distribution, defined by contemporaneous but “sticky”
measures of household wealth. One such measure is land holdings.
   Table 12, reports effects on key outcomes separately for each quintile of the within-
district land distribution. Column 1 shows the first stage: the second quintile of the land
distribution experiences the largest percentage reduction in credit access. Column 2 shows
the effects on household weekly labor earnings associated with a high exposure to the
crisis. Given that the poorest households are most likely to supply casual labor, households
in quintile 1 (landless and near-landless) experience the largest fall in earnings (INR 21.5,
significant at 5%). For higher land households, the effects are insignificant, with a pattern
of point estimates that are generally shrinking in magnitude as land holdings increase.
   Column 3 shows effects on monthly consumption. The largest magnitude effects are
seen in the fourth quintile of the distribution, where monthly consumption falls by INR
139 (significant at 1%). Households in the poorest quintile see a fall of INR 49 (p = .113);
those in the third quintile see a fall of INR 80 (significant at 10%). The effect for the
wealthiest is insignificant. Thus the effects are largest for intermediate-wealth households.
Finally, column 4 examines monthly durable consumption, and finds a similar pattern: large
and highly significant effects for the fourth quintile of the distribution, where monthly
durable consumption falls by INR 30 (significant at 1%). The effects at both lower and
higher quintiles are smaller in magnitude, suggesting that intermediate wealth households
are particularly forced to scale back purchases of household/business durables.
   This pattern suggests that medium-sized landholders, whose ability to accelerate con-
sumption or invest in a business may be most sensitive to microfinance access, respond to
reduced credit supply by reducing consumption and investment in household businesses
(proxied by durable spending). The landless and near-landless experience falls in earnings,
due to the reduced wage arising from reduced labor demand from local businesses.

30
 As in Jayachandran (2006), the weights are the district-average revenue share of the crop.
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                  27

          6. D ISCUSSION : P UTTING THE T REATMENT E FFECTS IN C ONTEXT

   The fall in consumption resulting from exposure to the AP crisis results from three dis-
tinct channels: the reduction in credit that, for some, would have been used for consump-
tion; the change in business profits for those who would have borrowed for entrepreneur-
ship; and the reduction in labor earnings from the fall in the wage stemming from the aggre-
gate demand and business financing channels. Unfortunately, we cannot observe business
profits in our data, and moreover, the repeated cross section nature of the data does not
allow us to identify ex ante entrepreneurs. So, we cannot directly decompose these three
channels. Instead we put our results in context in three ways: a back-of-the envelope ex-
ercise to examine if implied effects on business profits are plausible; a comparison of our
results with other GE results; and a calibration of our model. Each exercise requires its
own assumptions, but they all give similar conclusions, namely, that the magnitudes of the
effects we find are consistent with related findings in the literature.


6.1. What are we implicitly assuming about profits? Here, we present a back-of-the
envelope exercise to try to understand the extent to which changes in profits might be driv-
ing the consumption response. Recall that the microfinance RCT literature typically finds
modest, often statistically insignificant, partial equilibrium treatment effects (Banerjee et al.
2015b). Thus, one goal of the exercise is to check whether our implied effects on profits
seem plausible in light of this previous evidence.
   Of course any such exercise requires a set of assumptions. We begin with the simple
observation that, in the absence of consumption credit, HH Consumption = M P C ×
Income = M P C × (LaborEarnings + BizP rof its). For this exercise, we make the
conservative assumption that households do not consume directly from microcredit (i.e.,
we shut down the aggregate demand channel). Note that we observe total consumption and
labor earnings in our data. Thus if we knew the marginal propensity to consume (MPC),
we could back out business profits. Our strategy is to calculate this implied profits effect
for a range of possible MPCs.
   Table 13 steps through this exercise. Panel A contains the treatment effects estimated
in Section 4.2 used for the calculation along with other key assumptions. It is likely that
households include expenses for their businesses in their NSS survey responses regarding
durables spending. Thus, we first approximate the portion of total consumption that is
not used to purchase a business durable. We use the fraction of durables purchased which
are for business use from the RCT results of Banerjee et al. (2015a) in this calculation,
along with the total treatment effect we find on durables consumption. Panel B shows the
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                28

implied IV treatment effect on profits, assuming different MPCs. The estimates range from
approximately Rs. 0 in profits per Rs. 1 in credit when MPC = 0.9 to Rs. 0.265 in profits
per Rs. 1 in credit for MPC = 0.4.
   We do not have a credible way to estimate the MPC for our setting, so we look to the
development literature for guidance. Gertler et al. (2012) and Ravallion and Chen (2005)
calculate MPCs of 61% for a permanent shock and 50% for a semi-permanent shock in
Mexico and China, respectively. Again to be conservative, we assume MPC = 0.4 and
compare the Rs. 0.265 treatment effect to the RCT results. Our implied effect is in the
range of the RCT findings. The estimates in Crépon et al. (2015) imply an IV profits effect
of 0.210 Moroccan dirham per 1 dirham of credit (reduced form significant at the 10%
level), and those of Banerjee et al. (2015a) imply an effect of Rs. 0.275 per Rs. 1 of credit
(insignificant) in their study in Hyderabad, India.
   We view this exercise as a sanity check of sorts and show that under generally conserva-
tive assumptions, our results are consistent with the RCT literature.



6.2. GE Effects in the Development Literature. Another way of benchmarking our re-
sults is to compare them to related empirical findings. The development literature has
recently made considerable progress in measuring GE effects of public and private inter-
ventions in the labor and financial markets. Table 14 presents the results of five studies
in South and Southeast Asia that measure the impacts of large programs or other types of
large shocks on wages. Two of the papers, Burgess and Pande (2005) and Kaboski and
Townsend (2012) measure the change in the wage in response to an increase in access to
finance. Burgess and Pande (2005) study the coordinated expansion of rural bank branches
in India and find a 7% agricultural wage increase from one additional branch per 100,000
people. Kaboski and Townsend (2012) find a comparable agricultural wage response to a
43% increase in short term credit stemming from an increase in rural credit supply provided
by the Thai government. Consistent with our results, Kaboski and Townsend (2012) find
a much larger wage impact for jobs in construction, a non-tradable sector. They also find
large short-run consumption effects which are consistent with an aggregate demand story.
   We believe that the pathway from credit to wages is likely mediated through labor de-
mand in our setting. Businesses hit with an aggregate demand shock hire less, and con-
strained entrepreneurs that close or shrink their businesses when credit dries up also reduce
labor demand. The table highlights two studies of the impacts of a change in labor demand
on the wage. Both study NREGA, India’s nationwide work-fare program, as the source of
the shock. Imbert and Papp (2015) use the staggered roll-out of the program to show that
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 29

agricultural wages increase by 4.7% as a result of a 1.3% demand shift from NREGA. Mu-
ralidharan et al. (2017) improve the functioning of NREGA through digitization of worker
payments and cause a 6% increase in demand from NREGA. This shift in labor demand
is accompanied by a 6.1% increase in the total wage. In Bangladesh, Akram et al. (2017)
studies the change in wage resulting from a change in labor supply due to out-migration.
The authors conduct a field experiment that encourages a 30% increase in migration from
rural villages to urban centers and find that wages rise by 4.5-6.6%. These estimates point
to reasonably high elasticities of wages to labor demand and supply. We take this as sug-
gestive evidence that in our setting, the credit shock does not need to cause an implausibly
large drop in labor demand or supply to lead to wage effects of the estimated magnitude.


6.3. Model Calibration. A drawback of the approach above is that it is difficult to com-
pare directly our wage results to those in Table 14 due to the varying nature of the interven-
tions they evaluate. As an alternative, we extend and calibrate the simple model presented
in Section 2.2. Of course, this requires us to make a number of additional assumptions and
to shut down plausible channels for which we do not have sufficient information. As with
the back-of-envelope profits exercise, we view this calibration largely as a sanity check,
showing that plausible parameter values can deliver wage effects in the range of our esti-
mated magnitudes.


Additional Model Assumptions. We adjust the model in several ways to more closely match
our empirical setting. First, rather than businesses being owned by urban shareholders, we
allow some rural households to own and operate businesses, each with production functions
of the type in Equations 2.2 and 2.3. Second, and related, we allow the possibility that
some microcredit is used to invest in starting and operating a profitable business, rather
than assuming that borrowing is only for accelerating consumption.


Calibrated Parameters of the model. Appendix F provides details on the parameter values.
We calibrate the parameters describing households’ skilled and unskilled labor endowments
and tradable and nontradable consumption shares using NSS data. Production function
parameters (TFP and returns to scale) are chosen to match those for India in Buera et al.
(2017). Finally, the credit market parameters are chosen to match the real interest rate
charged by Indian microlenders, the size of a loan, as a share of annual labor earnings
and the share of households who borrow from microfinance. We examine how our results
change as we vary the share of microcredit borrowers who borrow for business investment.
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 30

Calibration Results. We present the calibrated treatment effects on wages in the tradable
and non-tradable sectors in Figure 2. We calculate these effect sizes for a range of assump-
tions on the extent to which microfinance is used to invest in profitable businesses.
   Recall that the estimated effects, pooling men and women, are a 4.01% fall in the agri-
cultural (tradable) wage and a 8.36% drop in the non-agricultural (non-tradable) wage (see
table 10, columns 2 and 3). When approximately one third of microfinance is used for
business investment, and the remainder is used for consumption smoothing, the wage ef-
fects implied by the calibrated model can match the treatment effect that we estimate on the
non-tradable (non-agricultural) wage. The finding that roughly one-third of microfinance
loans are used for businesses in the non-agricultural sector is consistent with Banerjee et al.
(2018), who show that the top tercile of urban households experiences persistent and posi-
tive effects on business profitability and scale from the Hyderabad microfinance RCT.
   The estimated treatment effect in the tradable sector is matched by the calibration when
approximately 20% of microfinance loans are used for business investment. The finding
that the implied investment share is smaller in the agricultural sector is consistent with the
widely-acknowledged fact that microfinance is less well-suited to agriculture (Morvant-
Roux, 2011), due to e.g., the lag between investment and production.
   The fact that the calibration can match our estimated effects with plausible parameter val-
ues demonstrates that the aggregate demand and business investment channels together can
deliver the wage effects we find. We should note, however, that there are other, unmodeled,
channels which could also contribute to the size of the empirical effects. A precautionary
savings motive as in Kaboski and Townsend (2011) would amplify the aggregate demand
effect as households save to re-build buffer stocks. And a labor supply response as in
Jayachandran (2006) would magnify the wage fall, as households respond to consumption
drops by increasing labor supply.


                                      7. C ONCLUSION

   We use the Andhra Pradesh microfinance ordinance as a natural experiment to measure
the real impacts of the loss of microfinance on rural households. Given the scale and
maturity of the microfinance sector in India before the ordinance and the extent of the
crisis, which wiped roughly a billion dollars off of lenders’ balance sheets, this episode
presents a unique opportunity to study the impacts of microfinance in general equilibrium.
   Our results show that the actions of politicians in Andhra Pradesh had large negative
externalities on microcredit supply to the rest of the country. Microfinance institutions
were no longer able to finance creditworthy borrowers in other states, which in turn led to
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 31

decreased wages, earnings and consumption. This episode shows that microfinance, despite
its small loan sizes, can have meaningful impacts on rural economies.
   Insofar as credit not borrowed today does not need to be repaid in the future, one might
think that, over time, the net effect of the crisis will “wash out.” However, for poor house-
holds, utility is likely quite concave and so the volatility in the credit market, which trans-
lates into volatility in wages, earnings, and consumption, may be quite costly. The loss
in total welfare resulting from a pronounced short term consumption fall will not be fully
offset by a future stream of slightly higher consumption. Moreover, some effects of the
credit crunch could persist, due to, for instance, durable investment or adjustment costs.
   Ultimately, we believe that our findings complement the RCT literature. Randomized
evidence has documented that microfinance has modest effects and has largely explored
the direct effects on likely borrowers. By studying quasi-exogenous variation in credit
supply at a larger level of aggregation, we find evidence of important equilibrium effects
through changes to labor demand. These results together can paint a more complete picture
than either taken alone.



                                        R EFERENCES

AGHION , P. AND P. B OLTON (1997): “A theory of trickle-down growth and development,”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151–172.
A HLIN , C. AND N. J IANG (2008): “Can micro-credit bring development?” Journal of
  Development Economics, 86, 1–21.
A KRAM , A. A., S. C HOWDHURY, AND A. M. M OBARAK (2017): “Effects of Migration
  on Rural Labor Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 23929.
A LLEN , T. AND D. ATKIN (2016): “Volatility and the Gains from Trade,” NBER Working
  Paper, 22276.
A NGELUCCI , M., D. K ARLAN , AND J. Z INMAN (2015): “Microcredit Impacts: Evi-
  dence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos
  Banco,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 151–82.
ATTANASIO , O., B. AUGSBURG , R. D E H AAS , E. F ITZSIMONS , AND H. H ARMGART
  (2015): “The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in Mon-
  golia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 90–122.
AUGSBURG , B., R. D E H AAS , H. H ARMGART, AND C. M EGHIR (2015): “The Impacts
  of Microcredit: Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 7, 183–203.
                             EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                               32

BANERJEE , A., E. B REZA , E. D UFLO , AND C. K INNAN (2018): “Do Credit Constraints
  Limit Entrepreneurship? Heterogeneity in the Returns to Microfinance,” Working Paper.
BANERJEE , A., E. D UFLO , R. G LENNERSTER , AND C. K INNAN (2015a): “The Mira-
  cle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation,” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 22–53.
BANERJEE , A., E. D UFLO , AND R. H ORNBECK (2017): “How Much do Existing Bor-
  rowers Value Microfinance? Evidence from an Experiment on Bundling Microcredit and
  Insurance,” .
BANERJEE , A., D. K ARLAN , AND J. Z INMAN (2015b): “Six Randomized Evaluations
  of Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps,” American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 7, 1–21.
BANERJEE , A. V. AND A. F. N EWMAN (1993): “Occupational Choice and the Process of
  Development,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274–298.
B EN -Y ISHAY, A., A. F RAKER , R. G UITERAS , G. PALLONI , N. B. S HAH , S. S HIRRELL ,
  AND P. WANG (2017): “Microcredit and willingness to pay for environmental quality:
  Evidence from a randomized-controlled trial of finance for sanitation in rural Cambodia,”
  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 86, 121–140.
B LATTMAN , C., D. G REEN , D. O RTEGA , AND S. T OBÓN (2017): “Pushing Crime
  Around the Corner? Estimating Experimental Impacts of Large-Scale Security Inter-
  ventions,” NBER Working Paper No. 23941.
B UERA , F. J., J. P. K ABOSKI , AND Y. S HIN (2017): “The macroeconomics of microfi-
  nance,” Working Paper.
B URGESS , R. AND R. PANDE (2005): “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian
  Social Banking Experiment,” American Economic Review, 95, 780–795.
C HODOROW-R EICH , G. (2014): “The employment effects of credit market disruptions:
  Firm-level evidence from the 2008–9 financial crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 129, 1–59.
C RÉPON , B., F. D EVOTO , E. D UFLO , AND W. PARIENTÉ (2015): “Estimating the Impact
  of Microcredit on Those Who Take It Up: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in
  Morocco,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 123–50.
D EVOTO , F., E. D UFLO , P. D UPAS , W. PARIENTÉ , AND V. P ONS (2012): “Happiness on
  tap: Piped water adoption in urban Morocco,” American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 4, 68–99.
E MERICK , K. (2017): “Agricultural productivity and the sectoral reallocation of labor in
  rural India,” .
                             EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                              33

E VANS , D. S. AND B. J OVANOVIC (1989): “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial
   Choice under Liquidity Constraints,” The Journal of Political Economy, 97, 808–827.
F IELD , E., R. PANDE , J. PAPP, AND N. R IGOL (2013): “Does the classic microfinance
   model discourage entrepreneurship among the poor? Experimental evidence from India,”
   The American Economic Review, 103, 2196–2226.
F INK , G., B. K. JACK , AND F. M ASIYE (2017): “Seasonal liquidity, rural labor markets
   and agricultural production: Evidence from Zambia,” Tech. rep., Working paper.
G ERTLER , P. J., S. W. M ARTINEZ , AND M. RUBIO -C ODINA (2012): “Investing cash
   transfers to raise long-term living standards,” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
   nomics, 4, 164–192.
G OVERNMENT OF I NDIA P LANNING C OMMISSION (2014): “Report of the expert group
   to review the methodology for measurement of poverty,” Tech. rep.
G REANEY, B. P., J. P. K ABOSKI , AND E. VAN L EEMPUT (2016): “Can Self-Help Groups
   Really Be “Self-Help”?” The Review of Economic Studies, 83, 1614–1644.
G REENSTONE , M., A. M AS , AND H.-L. N GUYEN (2014): “Do credit market shocks
   affect the real economy? Quasi-experimental evidence from the Great Recession and
   normal economic times,” NBER Working Paper.
I MBERT, C. AND J. PAPP (2015): “Labor market effects of social programs: Evidence
   from india’s employment guarantee,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
   7, 233–263.
JAYACHANDRAN , S. (2006): “Selling labor low: Wage responses to productivity shocks in
   developing countries,” Journal of political Economy, 114, 538–575.
J IMÉNEZ , G., A. M IAN , J.-L. P EYDRÓ , AND J. S AURINA (2014): “The Real Effects of
   the Bank Lending Channel,” Working Paper.
K ABOSKI , J. P. AND R. M. T OWNSEND (2011): “A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale
   Quasi-Experimental Microfinance Initiative,” Econometrica, 79, 1357–1406.
——— (2012): “The impact of credit on village economies,” American economic journal.
   Applied economics, 4, 98.
K AUR , S. (2015): “Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets,” Tech. rep., NBER
   Working Paper No. 20770.
K HWAJA , A. I. AND A. M IAN (2008): “Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks:
   Evidence from an emerging market,” The American Economic Review, 1413–1442.
M EAGER , R. (2016): “Understanding the Impact of Microcredit Expansions: A Bayesian
   Hierarchical Analysis of 7 Randomised Experiments,” Working Paper.
                             EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                              34

M IAN , A. AND A. S UFI (2014): “What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment?”
   Econometrica, 82, 2197–2223.
M IAN , A. R., A. S UFI , AND E. V ERNER (2017): “How Do Credit Supply Shocks Affect
   the Real Economy? Evidence from the United States in the 1980s,” Working Paper.
M OBARAK , A. M. AND M. ROSENZWEIG (2014): “Risk, insurance and wages in general
   equilibrium,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
M ORVANT-ROUX , S. (2011): “Is microfinance the adequate tool to finance agriculture?”
   in The Handbook of Microfinance, World Scientific, 421–436.
M URALIDHARAN , K., P. N IEHAUS , AND S. S UKHTANKAR (2017): “General equilibrium
   effects of (improving) public employment programs: Experimental evidence from india,”
   Tech. rep., NBER WP.
NSSO (2014): Key Indicators of Debt and Investment in India, NSS 70th Round, Govern-
   ment of India, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, National Sample
   Survey Office.
PARAVISINI , D. (2008): “Local bank financial constraints and firm access to external fi-
   nance,” The Journal of Finance, 63, 2161–2193.
P EEK , J. AND E. S. ROSENGREN (2000): “Collateral damage: Effects of the Japanese
   bank crisis on real activity in the United States,” American Economic Review, 30–45.
R AVALLION , M. AND S. C HEN (2005): “Hidden impact? Household saving in response
   to a poor-area development project,” Journal of public economics, 89, 2183–2204.
S CHNABL , P. (2012): “The international transmission of bank liquidity shocks: Evidence
   from an emerging market,” The Journal of Finance, 67, 897–932.
TAROZZI , A., J. D ESAI , AND K. J OHNSON (2015): “The Impacts of Microcredit: Evi-
   dence from Ethiopia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 54–89.
TAROZZI , A., A. M AHAJAN , B. B LACKBURN , D. KOPF, L. K RISHNAN , AND J. YOONG
   (2014): “Micro-loans, insecticide-treated bednets, and malaria: evidence from a random-
   ized controlled trial in Orissa, India,” The American Economic Review, 104, 1909–1941.
                                                                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                                                                                                          35

                                                                                              F IGURES




                                                                                                        GLP (Normalized to Sept 2010)
                       6                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                         1.75
                                                                                                                                                                  Low Exposure
                       5
                                                                                                                                                                  High Exposure
  GLP (USD billions)




                                                                                                                                          1.5
                       4
                                                                                                                                         1.25
                       3                                                                                                                   1
                                                                             India-wide GLP (MIX)                                        0.75
                       2
                                                                                                                                          0.5
                       1
                                                                                                                                         0.25
                       0                                                                                                                   0
                       2008     2009    2010                                 2011      2012    2013




                                                                                                                                                Mar-08

                                                                                                                                                         Sep-08

                                                                                                                                                                   Mar-09

                                                                                                                                                                            Sep-09

                                                                                                                                                                                     Mar-10

                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep-10

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mar-11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sep-11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sep-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mar-13
                              ( A ) Panel A: India-Wide GLP                                                                                     ( B ) Panel B: GLP in High vs. Low Ex-
                                                                                                                                                posure Districts

                           F IGURE 1. Growth of Microfinance Gross Loan Portfolio: India and Anal-
                           ysis Sample
Note: Panel A plots the India-wide gross loan portfolio (GLP) aggregated across microfinance institutions
and states as reported in USD in the MIX database. Panel B shows the evolution of microfinance using the
hand-collected data (reported in Indian rupees) from 25 microfinance institutions. The figure in Panel B splits
the districts between low and high AP exposure (ex AP). High and Low exposure are defined as in Section
3.1. GLP in each year is scaled by the pre-crisis district level of microcredit on September 30, 2010.




                                                                 0.01
                                                                                                                                         Tradable Sector
                                                                    0                                                                    Non-Tradable Sector
                                                                 -0.01
                                         Wage Treatment Effect




                                                                 -0.02

                                                                 -0.03

                                                                 -0.04

                                                                 -0.05

                                                                 -0.06

                                                                 -0.07

                                                                 -0.08

                                                                 -0.09
                                                                         0      0.05    0.1   0.15    0.2                               0.25       0.3            0.35        0.4
                                                                                Fraction MFI Borrowing for Entrepreneurship


       F IGURE 2. Calibrated Wage Effects by Share Borrowing for Entrepreneurship
Note: The figure shows the percentage drops in the sector-specific wages resulting from a withdrawal of
access to credit in the calibrated model. The x-axis is the fraction of borrowers who borrow to invest in a
business. For details and parameter values, see Section 6.3 and Appendix F.
                                  EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                          36

                                                TABLES

                                   TABLE 1. Sample Selection
                             (1)           (2)               (3)       (4)           (5)        (6)
                        Average Loan    Number of      Borrowers per Write-off Portfolio at     MFI
                        per Borrower    Borrowers      Staff Member   Ratio    Risk, 30 Days    Age

     Panel A: Selection into the Sample
     MFI in the Sample      -25.164      -34132.611     -72.491**     -0.002     -0.017***
                            (21.324)    (103178.714)     (35.782)     (0.002)      (0.006)
     Control mean           176.064      245201.611      267.591       0.005        0.023
     Control SD             198.024      782389.257      256.144       0.012        0.047
     Observations             114           115            113           82           84


     Panel B: Sampled MFIs, relation to exposure
     Exposure to AP      -0.750        166780.191         72.574      -0.002       0.002        0.132
                         (8.776)      (241593.920)       (56.126)     (0.002)     (0.006)      (0.500)
     Control mean       152.000        177160.059        179.176       0.004       0.007        1.118
     Control SD          29.180        215349.208        103.882       0.005       0.007        0.993
     Observations           21             21               21           18          18           21
 Note: Data from the Microfinance Information Exchange (MIX). In panel A, the left-hand side
variable is a dummy indicating if the institution is in our sample. Write-off ratio and Portfo-
lio at risk are fractions of the overall portfolio. In panel C, the left-hand side variable is a
dummy indicating if the MFI was exposed to the AP crisis. The left-hand side variable in col-
umn (6) refers to the number of years before 2010 that the MFI reports positive GLP; it is a
measure of age in 2010, top-censored at 2 years (2008). Since it is available only for sam-
pled MFIs, this dependent variable is used only in Panel B. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                  EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                37

                                   TABLE 2. Summary Statistics
            Variable                                                Obs     Mean    Std. Dev

            District-level variables from balance sheet data
            Any exposed lender, 2010                                354       0.35   0.48
            Gross loan portfolio in lakhs (100,000 INR)             145     1693.74 1895.74
            Gross loan portfolio, per rural household               145     410.97 528.93

            Household-level variables from NSS (round 68)
            HH Weekly Labor Earnings                                16340 854.81 1434.83
            Casual Daily Wage: Ag                                    1176 140.53   58.53
            Casual Daily Wage: Non-Ag                                2460 194.71 107.40
            HH Weekly Days Worked: Total                            16340 10.28     6.74
            Household weekly days worked in self-employment         16340   6.55   7.04
            Household weekly days worked in non-self-employment     16340  3.73    5.16
            Any HH Member Invol. Unemployment                       16340   0.10   0.30
            HH size                                                 16340   4.52   2.23
            (mean) num_hh_earners                                   16340   1.89    0.35
            HH Monthly Consumption: Total                           16340 5643.40 4531.70
            HH Monthly Consumption: Durables                        16340 382.25 1891.40
            Any non-Ag. Self Employment                             16340   0.22   0.41


            Household-level variables from NSS (round 70)
            MFI amt outstanding, win                                17961    391     4005
            Uncollateralized formal non-bank amt outstanding, win   17961    2395    13201
            Total loan amt outstanding                              17961   53256   128823

 Note: Outcomes variables in first panel are from the balance sheet data collected with MFIN;
see text for details. Sample is restricted to only low exposure districts with some MFI activ-
ity in 2010. However, the "Any exposed lender" measure is computed based on the full sam-
ple. Outcome variables in the second panel are from NSS round 68 (2012). Outcomes vari-
ables in the third panel are from NSS round 70 (2014) and are winsorized at the 99th percentile.
                                     EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                                  38

     TABLE 3. Exposure to the AP Crisis and total MFI lending: Balance sheet data
                                                 (1)                       (2)                     (3)
                                      District total gross loan   District gross loan   District total gross loan
                                         portfolio in lakhs     portfolio per household    portfolio in lakhs
                                          (100,000 INR)                  (INR)                  (in logs)

   Log(Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010         -336.801***                -97.232***                -0.478***
                                              (43.314)                  (11.133)                 (0.084)
   Any exposed lender × Post 2010         -1105.546***               -308.068***                -1.786***
                                             (178.472)                  (44.942)                 (0.370)
   Control mean                                1693.7                    411.0                    6.814
   Control SD                                  1895.7                    528.9                    1.365
   Observations                                 1048                      1048                     1048

 Note: Outcomes data from MFI balance sheets. Each cell provides coefficients from separate differences-
in-differences regression specifications. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous ex-
posure measure. The second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indica-
tor for high esposure to AP. The outcome of interest in column 1 is total district-level credit outstand-
ing (GLP) in lakhs (100,000 INR), while column 2 scales this value by the number of rural house-
holds. In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, number of rural households
times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies times
round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.


      TABLE 4. Exposure to the AP Crisis and commercial bank lending: RBI data
                                           (1)           (2)         (3)      (4)                (5)           (6)
                                           No.          Amt         No.      Amt                No.           Amt
                                        accounts    outstanding accounts outstanding         accounts     outstanding
                                      (agriculture) (agriculture) (direct) (direct)          (indirect)    (indirect)
                                         (logs)        (logs)      (logs)   (logs)             (logs)        (logs)

Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010        -0.001         0.006       0.008        0.010     -0.150***       -0.067**
                                         (0.008)        (0.015)     (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.038)        (0.034)
Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010            0.009          0.026       0.038        0.046     -0.514***       -0.285**
                                         (0.032)        (0.047)     (0.033)      (0.040)      (0.150)        (0.131)
Control mean                             11.564         15.944      11.509       15.795        8.113         13.659
Control SD                                0.732          0.773       0.711        0.772        1.402          1.143
Observations                               1031          1031        1031         1031         1031           1031

 Note: Outcomes data from RBI "District-Wise Classification of Outstanding Credit of Scheduled
Commercial Banks". Each cell provides coefficients from separate differences-in-differences regres-
sions. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The sec-
ond row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure
to AP. In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, quintiles of rural house-
holds times round, quintiles of total households times round, GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies times
round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                                                        39

       TABLE 5. Exposure to the AP Crisis and total MFI lending: NSS round 70 data
                              (1)              (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)              (6)               (7)          (8)
                          MFI amt       Uncollateralized     Bank amt Total loan amt   MFI amt       Uncollateralized     Bank amt Total loan amt
                         outstanding,   formal non-bank     outstanding, outstanding, outstanding,   formal non-bank     outstanding, outstanding,
                             win.     amt outstanding, win.     win.         win.         log.     amt outstanding, log.     log.         log.

Log(HH Exposure Ratio)    -88.242***      -390.241***        -170.543      -926.577    -0.046***        -0.132***           0.028         -0.083
                            (26.619)       (111.150)        (582.900)     (893.325)      (0.014)         (0.026)           (0.046)        (0.060)
Any exposed lender       -310.893***     -1352.917***       -1798.924     -3496.923    -0.159***        -0.436***           0.043         -0.317
                            (99.591)       (385.963)       (2198.649)    (3413.070)      (0.054)         (0.101)           (0.175)        (0.232)
Control mean                391.485         2394.640        29531.260     69353.672       0.191           0.904             2.618          7.492
Control SD                 4004.849        13200.690       104467.426    142601.618       1.345           2.834             4.715          4.950
Observations                 38492           38492            38492         38492         38492           38492             38492          38492


  Note: Otcomes data from the NSS 70th round "Debt and Investment" survey reflecting outstanding credit
 on June 30, 2012. Each cell provides coefficients from separate OLS regression specification. The first
 row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the continuous exposure measure. The second row
 reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure to AP. The out-
 come of interest in columns 1 and 5 is total SHG-NBFC credit outstanding. Columns 2 and 6 consider total
 formal, non-bank, non-collateralized credit, with individual-liability bank credit in column 3 and 7, and to-
 tal credit in column 4 and 8. The dependent variables in columns 1 to 4 are in levels and winsorized at the
 bottom and top 1 percentile, and in log(X+1) transformation for columns 5 to 8. All columns include pre-
 crisis district-level controls. Balance sheet controls include levels and quintiles of GLP measured in both
 2008 and 2010. RBI controls include amount of credit outstanding and number of accounts for agricultural
 loans, direct loans, and indirect loans. NSS 66 controls include average monthly household expenditures,
 annual durables expenditures, weekly earnings from and days worked in self-employment, daily wage,
 and percent of weekly earnings from self-employment. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                                  TABLE 6. Labor Outcomes
                                                 (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                Casual      HH Weekly HH Weekly HH Weekly     Any HH       HH is
                                                Daily       Total Days Casual Days  Labor   Member Invol. Employer
                                                Wage         Worked      Worked    Earnings Unemployed

     Log(Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010 -2.179***                 -0.031         -0.091**        -16.522**           0.003              -0.001
                                       (0.640)                 (0.046)         (0.042)          (7.124)          (0.003)             (0.001)
     Any exposed lender × Post 2010 -8.866***                  -0.066         -0.431**        -74.784**           0.011              -0.004
                                       (2.887)                 (0.190)         (0.176)         (29.285)          (0.011)             (0.003)
     Control mean                     153.361                  10.275           3.455          854.812            0.098               0.026
     Control SD                        87.097                   6.738           5.134         1434.832            0.297               0.160
     Observations                       40584                  119668          119668           119668           119668              119668

Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. Each cell provides coefficients from separate differences-
in-differences regressions. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The
second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure to AP.
In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of household size,
number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in
2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round. Standard errors are clustered at the
district level.
                                    EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                              40

                                 TABLE 7. Consumption Outcomes
                                                  (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)
                                              HH Monthly HH Monthly HH Monthly        Below
                                              Consumption: Consumption: Consumption: Proverty
                                                 Total     Nondurables    Durables     Line

           Log(Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010     -82.845***     -68.694***       -15.729**    0.003
                                                 (25.666)       (23.024)         (6.415)   (0.004)
           Any exposed lender × Post 2010     -319.339***     -246.690**      -80.170***    -0.004
                                                (118.234)      (107.493)        (24.421)   (0.019)
           Control mean                         5643.397       5278.214         382.247     0.254
           Control SD                           4531.698       3694.260        1891.396     0.435
           Observations                           111692         119668          111692    111692

Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. Each cell provides coefficients from separate differences-
in-differences regressions. Notice that due to missing values the sample size for durable consumption is lower
than for nondurable consumption. Total consumption and poverty are then considered missing when durable
consumption is missing. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The
second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure to AP.
In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of household size,
number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in
2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round. Standard errors are clustered at the
district level.


                                   TABLE 8. Robustness: Placebo
                                                (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)
                                            HH Monthly HH Monthly HH Weekly HH Weekly Casual
                                            Cnsumption: Consumption:  Labor   Casual Days Daily
                                               Total      Durables   Earnings   Worked    Wage

     Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2008        -4.426         1.156         -1.235      -0.003        -0.378
                                             (19.966)        (3.487)        (5.908)    (0.051)       (0.369)
     Any Exposed Lender × Post 2008           -67.405        15.685         -2.525       0.009        -1.441
                                             (83.994)       (16.217)       (23.065)    (0.198)       (1.634)
     Observations                              75850          75850          83826      83826         30506
Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64 and 68. Each cell provides coefficients from separate differences-
in-differences regressions. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The
second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure to AP.
In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of household size,
number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in
2008 dummies times round.
                                    EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                            41

                       TABLE 9. Robustness: Distance to Andhra Pradesh
                                             (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)                (5)
                                         HH Monthly HH Monthly HH Weekly HH Weekly                Casual
                                         Consumption: Consumption:  Labor   Casual Days           Daily
                                            Total       Durables   Earnings   Worked              Wage

   Panel A: Drop border districts
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010     -74.149***      -15.083**     -13.691*     -0.082**    -1.899***
                                            (28.573)        (6.962)      (7.754)      (0.041)      (0.698)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010         -258.567**     -75.449***    -60.469**     -0.382**     -7.718**
                                           (125.869)       (25.769)     (30.367)      (0.172)      (3.010)
   Observations                              105801         105801       113346       113346        37774


   Panel B: Control for distance to AP × round
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010 -81.465***         -17.952***    -19.080***      -0.039    -2.552***
                                            (27.210)        (6.609)       (7.125)     (0.043)      (0.682)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010         -306.946**     -87.093***    -82.724***      -0.251    -9.992***
                                           (122.320)       (25.401)      (29.113)     (0.175)      (3.027)
   Observations                              111692         111692        119668      119668        40584


   Panel C: Control for travel time to Hyderabad × round
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010      -91.124**    -23.649***     -19.581**       -0.041    -2.339**
                                            (36.117)       (8.242)       (9.771)      (0.054)     (0.903)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010         -342.418**   -103.610***     -81.661**       -0.277    -8.210**
                                           (160.153)      (34.365)      (38.492)      (0.222)     (3.802)
   Observations                              63071          63071         67939        67939       22868
Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. In each panel, each cell provides coefficients from sepa-
rate differences-in-differences regressions. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous expo-
sure measure. The second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for
high exposure to AP. In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles
of household size, number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round,
GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round. In the first panel,
the sample is restricted to districts that share no border with Andhra Pradesh. In the second panel, the linear
distance to Andhra Pradesh interacted with the round is also included as control. In the third panel, we use
instead the road travel time between each district and Hyderabad as calculated by Allen and Atkin (2016).
Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                               42

                                   TABLE 10. Casual Daily Wages by Sector
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)      (9)
                                    Casual      Casual      Casual      Casual      Casual      Casual      Casual      Ag.     Non-ag
                                  Daily Wage: Daily Wage: Daily Wage: Daily Wage: Daily Wage: Daily Wage: Daily Wage: Employer Employer
                                    Pooled        Ag        Non-ag     Men, Ag    Men, Non-ag Women, Ag Women, Non-ag

Log(Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010   -2.179***     -1.310**    -4.167***     -1.241*    -4.579***      -1.113      -1.105    -0.000   -0.001**
                                    (0.640)      (0.663)      (1.162)     (0.732)      (1.224)     (0.732)     (1.765)   (0.001)    (0.000)
Any exposed lender × Post 2010    -8.866***      -5.151*   -15.399***      -5.140   -16.647***      -3.717      -4.043    -0.001   -0.003**
                                    (2.887)      (2.995)      (4.998)     (3.149)      (5.222)     (3.426)     (7.904)   (0.003)    (0.001)
Control mean                       153.361      128.581      184.242      140.534     194.709      102.236     113.578    0.017      0.009
Control SD                          87.097       57.000      106.180      58.525      107.398      43.071      61.620     0.131      0.093
Observations                         40584        23444        17140       14554        14939        8890        2201    119668     119668


Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. Each cell provides coefficients from separate differences-
in-differences regressions. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The
second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure to AP.
In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of household size,
number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in
2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round. Standard errors are clustered at the
district level.
                                                 TABLE 11. Crop Yields
                                                      (1)          (2)       (3)      (4)           (5)       (6)
                                                   Crop Yield     Rice      Wheat    Jowar       Sugarcane Groudnut
                                                     Index        Yield     Yield    Yield         Yield    Yield

          Log(Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010             0.011       0.015 0.025 0.010               -0.852     -0.009
                                                     (0.013)     (0.026) (0.025) (0.017)          (1.031)    (0.019)
          Any exposed lender, 2010                    0.050       0.113 0.053 0.032                -2.802     -0.062
                                                     (0.057)     (0.108) (0.103) (0.067)          (4.789)    (0.080)
          Control mean                                0.145       2.706 2.714 1.033               73.480      1.674
          Control SD                                  0.192       0.880 1.116 0.433               38.551      0.926
          Observations                                 963         910     783     622              833        758

Note: Outcomes data from the Ministry of Agriculture, Directorate of Economics and Statistics. Index in
column 1 is a revenue-weighted average of the log of yield for the five major crops: rice, wheat, sugarcane,
jowar (sorghum), and groundnuts. Yields in columns 2-6 are in tonnes per hectare. In all columns, controls
include round and district fixed effects, survey month, number of rural households times round, number of
rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010
dummies times round, and rainfall shocks. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                     EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                       43

                                    TABLE 12. Heterogeneity: Land
                                                  (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)
                                            Uncollateralized HH Weekly HH Monthly HH Monthly
                                               amount          Labor   Consumption: Consumption:
                                             outstanding      Earnings    Total       Durables
                                                  log

         1st Quintile District Land Dist.     -0.146***     -21.467**      -48.883       -7.792
                                                (0.048)      (10.582)     (30.961)       (5.850)
         2st Quintile District Land Dist.     -0.203***      -15.627       -16.474     -12.040*
                                                (0.038)      (17.284)     (39.958)       (7.142)
         3st Quintile District Land Dist.     -0.125***       1.984       -78.924*       -9.294
                                                (0.037)      (19.320)     (43.764)       (6.245)
         4st Quintile District Land Dist.      -0.106**      -14.441    -139.061***   -29.671***
                                                (0.042)      (10.583)     (36.428)      (10.051)
         5st Quintile District Land Dist.     -0.143***       -2.355       -90.256      -11.101
                                                (0.052)      (14.204)     (59.235)      (28.719)

 Note: For column (1), outcomes data are from NSS round 70; for columns (2)-(4), outcomes data
are from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. Each cell provides coefficients from a different regression. All
specifications use the continuous exposure measure. The rows report the sample restriction by quin-
tile of the district wealth distribution. The columns reflect different outcomes. In all cells of column
(1), we included pre-crisis district-level controls. Balance sheet controls include levels and quintiles of
GLP measured in both 2008 and 2010. RBI controls include amount of credit outstanding and num-
ber of accounts for agricultural loans, direct loans, and indirect loans. NSS 66 controls include average
monthly household expenditures, annual durables expenditures, weekly earnings from and days worked
in self-employment, daily wage, and percent of weekly earnings from self-employment. In all cells
of columns (2)-(4), controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of house-
hold size, number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round,
GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round. For col-
umn (1), the number of observations are, for quintiles one to five, respectively 7,471, 7,330, 7,351,
7,327 and 7,366. For columns (2)-(4), the number of observations are, for quintiles one to five, re-
spectively 30,238, 21,906, 21,527 and 19,251. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                     EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                       44

           TABLE 13. Decomposing Effects into Profits, Capital and Consumption
          Panel A: Calibrated Effects from the Empirical Results
               (1)        Total Consumption                             319
               (2)        Total Durables                                  80
               (3)        Business Durables, (2)×0.64                     51
               (4)        Non-business Consumption, (2)-(3)             268
               (5)        Labor Earnings                                 320
               (6)        Credit                                        1319
          Panel B: Effects for Different Assumptions on the Marginal Prop. to Consume
               (7)                (8)               (9)                 (10)
          Marginal Prop. Implied Profits         Implied        "IV": Implied Profits
           to Consume + Labor Earnings            Profits            per Credit
                                  (4)                                     (8)
                                  (7)
                                                  (8)-(5)                 (9)
               0.9               298                -23                -0.017
               0.8               335                15                 0.011
               0.7               383                62                 0.047
               0.6               447               126                 0.096
               0.5               536               216                 0.163
               0.4               670               350                 0.265
 Note: Values (1) and (2) are from table 7. Value (5) is from table 6. Value (6) is from ta-
ble 5. Share of durables for business purposes used in (3) is from Banerjee et al. (2015a).


                         TABLE 14. General Equilibrium Effect Studies
Channel         Study                        Country    Wage Impact              "First Stage" Scaling

                Burgess and Pande (2003)    India       7% (ag wage)            1 bank branch per 100,000 people
Credit Supply   Kaboski and Townsend (2012) Thailand    7% (avg wage)
                                                                                43% increase in short term credit
                                                        28% (construction wage)

                Imbert and Papp (2014)       India      4.7% (ag wage)           1.3% demand shift from NREGA
Labor Demand
                Muralidharan et al (2017)    India      6.1% (total wage)        6% demand shift from NREGA

Labor Supply    Akram et al (2017)           Bangladesh 2.8% (ag wage)           10% increase in emigration
                                  EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                          45

                                          Online Appendix


                                A PPENDIX A. M ODEL A PPENDIX

A.1. Setting up the Problem. 31 Firms come in two sectors: S ∈ {T, N T }, and workers
in two types: k ∈ {`, h} . The N T sector uses both types of labor, while the T sector uses
only ` labor. Production functions are:
                                                        γ
(A.1)                             Y T = AT LT,`
                                                             ρ                  ρ
                                                                                     γ
(A.2)                           Y N T = AN T LN T,` + θLN T,h                         ρ




where ρ < γ < 1.
  Firms sell their products for price P S . We normalize P T = 1 and denote P N T = P .
Firms make hiring decisions by maximizing profits, which are given by:

(A.3)                            ΠS = P S Y S − w` LS,` − wh LS,h

   Consumers of worker type k maximize within-period utility subject to a budget con-
straint:
                                                             α               1−α
(A.4)                                     max
                                         T,k N T,k
                                                   C T,k              C N T,k
                                     C     ,C
                                         T,k
                                s.t.C          + P C N T,k ≤ wk + y + B

For simplicity, we normalize y = 0. Given the Cobb-Douglas structure, consumers will
spend constant budget shares on each good:

                                         C T,k = α (wk + B)
                                     1−α
                                     C N T,k =
                                           (wk + B)
                                       P
A.2. Equilibrium Conditions. Both labor markets and the non-tradable product market
clear:


(A.5)                           LT,` + LN T,` = N `
(A.6)                                      LN T,h = N h
                                                                          ρ              ρ
                                                                                              γ
(A.7)                 N ` C N T,` + N h C N T,h = AN T LN T,` + θLN T,h                        ρ




31
 We are particularly grateful to Bruno Barsanetti for developing an elegant method of proving these results.
                                        EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                                                 46

A.3. Solving the Problem. T firms solve the following FOC:
                                                                           γ−1
                                                 γAT LT,`                           = w`

Rearranging,
                                                                                        1
                                                                            γAT
                                                                                   !
                                                                                       1−γ
                                                      T,`
                                                     L           =
                                                                             w`
The maximization problem of N T firms yields the following FOCs:
                                                        ρ                     ρ
                                                                                    γ −1                     ρ−1
                              γP AN T LN T,` + θLN T,h                                 ρ
                                                                                                LN T,`               = w`
                                                                                       γ
                                                     ρ                        ρ
                                                                                        −1                   ρ−1
                             γθP AN T LN T,` + θLN T,h                                 ρ
                                                                                               LN T,h                = wh

Simplifying,
                                                                     !    1
                                                             w` θ        1−ρ
                             LN T,h = LN T,`
                                                             wh
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                   ρ     γ−ρ  1−γ
                                                      NT
                                                                                               !             ρ
                                            γP A                                  w` θ             1−ρ
                             LN T,` =                           1 + θ                                        
                                                 w`                                wh
                                                                                                                


  Plugging the demands into the equilibrium conditions yields:
                                                                                                1
                   1
                                                                       ρ     γ−ρ  1−γ
          T
              !
                                  NT
                                                                  !              ρ
    γA            1−γ
                          γP A                           w` θ          1−ρ
                        +             1 + θ                                                           = N`
                                                                                   
     w`                       w`                          wh
                                                                                    

                                                                        1
                                              ρ     γ−ρ  1−γ                                1
                   NT
                                           !            ρ                                  !
       γP A                   w` θ                                            w` θ
                                               1−ρ                                             1−ρ
                        1 + θ                            
                                                                                                        = Nh
              w`               wh                                              wh
                                                          


                    1−α                  1−α                          ρ         ρ
                                                                                   γ
                        N1(w` + y) + N2          (wh + y) = AN T LN T,1 + θLN T,2 ρ
                      P                     P
To simplify, we can solve for P using the third equation
                              1−α                                                                                         
                                                      γ          N ` w` + N h wh + B N ` + N h                                   =P
                  AN T (LN T,`ρ + θLN T,hρ ) ρ
                                                                       −1                                  −1
                                                             w` θ                                  w` θ
and we can substitute LN T,` = LN T,h                        wh
                                                                        1−ρ
                                                                               = Nh                wh
                                                                                                              1−ρ
                                                                                                                    . So,
                                                                                                                       
                                                     N ` w` + N h wh + B N ` + N h
                              P = (1 − α)                                                                         !γ
                                                                                              −ρ                  ρ
                                                             AN T Nhγ              w` θ
                                                                                   wh
                                                                                               1−ρ
                                                                                                          +θ
                                            EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                                                         47

Similarly, from the equilibrium condition of the type 2 workers,
                                                             ρ     ρ−γ                               ! −(1−γ)
                                                       !                   ρ
                             w` θ                            1−ρ
                                                                                w`            w` θ             1−ρ
                  P = 1 + θ                                                                                           Nh1−γ
                             wh                                                γAN T          wh
Combining the P equations yields
                                                                                                                    1                  !
                                                                             w`                        wh                    wh
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                 1−ρ
             `            h                        `           h
          N w` + N wh + B N + N                                        =                                                   +    Nh
                                                                         γ (1 − α)                     w` θ                  w`
Rearranging and using the first condition A.5, we can collapse the equilibrium conditions:
                                                                                              1                                   1
                                                                               γAT
                                                                                        !
                                                                                             1−γ
                                                                                                                     wh
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                 1−ρ
                                                                                                   + Nh                                − N` = 0
                                                                                w`                                   w` θ
                                   1               !
         w`           wh                    wh
                             
                                  1−ρ                                            
                                          +    N h − N ` w` + N h wh + B N ` + N h = 0
     γ (1 − α)        w` θ                  w`
  To solve the system and derive comparative statics, we introduce a change of variables.


     • ω = wwh` be the relative wage to high-skill (non-tradable) workers;
     • ν = w1` be the inverse of low-skill (tradable) wages.


If we divide the second equation by w` and replace the variables, our system becomes:

                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                        1
                                                                                                               ω
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                     1−ρ
                                                                               T                       h
                                                                           γA ν        1−γ
                                                                                             +N                              − N` = 0
                                                                                                               θ
                                           1
             Nh
                                                       !
                                  ω
                                     
                                          1−ρ                                                                         
                                                + ω − N ` − N h ω − y N1 + N h ν = 0
          γ (1 − α)               θ
We can isolate ν in the second equation to obtain:
                                                         h             1           i
                                                  Nh
                                                γ(1−α)
                                                             ( ωθ ) 1−ρ + ω − N ` − N h ω
                                   ν=
                                                                   B(N ` + N h )
                                                         1
                                     nh ( ωθ ) 1−ρ + nh ω[1 − γ(1 − α)] − n`
                                  ν=
                                                     γ(1 − α)B
               Ni
where ni =   N1 +N h
                     .   If we replace ν in the first system equation, after rearranging we have:
                                                                   1
                         (1 − α)B   nh ( ωθ ) 1−ρ + nh ω[1 − γ(1 − α)] − n1
                                  =                               1
                            AT                  [N ` − N h ( ω ) 1−ρ ]1−γ               θ
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                48

   The LHS is a linear and increasing function of B, and the RHS is strictly increasing
in the relative wages ω. Hence, wwh` is increasing in B; that is, the elasticity of the high-
skilled wage (with respect to B) will be higher than the elasticity of the low-skilled wage.
If wh > w` in equilibrium, then the absolute change in wh will be larger than for w` .
   Finally, we can show that both wages go up with B. First, notice that:

            ω [1                                   (1 − α)B `     h ω 1−ρ1
       [nh ( ) 1−ρ + nh ω[1 − γ(1 − α)] − n` =           T
                                                           [N − N  (   )   ]1−γ
            θ                                         A              θ
And so we can substitute in the expression for ν to get:

                                 1     `     h ω 1−ρ1
                               ν= T
                                    [N   − N  (   )   ]1−γ
                                A               θ
which depends on B only through ω. Hence, ν is decreasing in B, so both w` and wh are
increasing in B.
  No. of MFIs operating (2010 Sep)                                                        No. of MFIs operating (2012)
                                                   A PPENDIX B. S UPPLEMENTARY F IGURES




                                                                                                                                                                EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT
                               ( A ) September 2010                                                                 ( B ) March 2012

                                                    F IGURE B.1. Number of MFIs by District
Note: These maps present visualizations of the hand-collected data from 25 microfinance institutions. The first subfigure plots the number of lenders per
district in our dataset in September 2010, on the eve of the AP crisis. Subfigure 2 plots the number of lenders per district after the contraction in lending
was underway in March 2012. Districts without coloration indicate that none of the 25 lenders in our sample were lending in those districts at the time.




                                                                                                                                                                49
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                         50

                            A PPENDIX C. S UPPLEMENTARY TABLES

                                   TABLE C.1. Baseline Balance
                         (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)
                      Distance    District  Casual Daily Casual Daily HH Weekly HH Monthly HH Monthly
                       to AP     Borders AP    Wage:        Wage:        Labor   Consumption: Consumption:
                                            Agriculture Non-agriculture Earnings Non-durables   Durables

Log(Exposure Ratio) -15.126**    0.043***       0.062         -0.368         -9.761         4.417        -2.575
                      (5.860)     (0.012)      (0.382)        (0.412)        (8.378)      (29.966)       (5.578)
Any exposed lender   -44.747*    0.102***       0.789         -1.131        -23.374       -23.734        19.022
                     (24.634)     (0.035)      (1.488)        (1.419)       (29.110)     (104.108)      (18.838)
Observations            354         354          340            340            340           340           340
Note: Outcomes from NSS round 66 . Each row provides coefficients from separate regressions. The first row
reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The second row reports coefficients from
separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure to AP. The dependent variable is the aver-
age across households in each district in round 66. In all columns, controls include state-dummies, number
of rural households, number of rural households squared, GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies, and GLP quintiles
in 2010. In columns (3) to (7), the average of the dependent variable in round 64 is also used as a control.
Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                          51

    TABLE C.2. First Stage Results Using Within-District Variation in MFI Exposure
                                               (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)

                  Fraction of Exposed GLP -281.283*               -282.694*
                                          (153.899)               (153.442)
                  Exposed MFI Dummy                 -153.173*                 -154.444*
                                                     (79.348)                  (78.635)
                  Logarithm of MFI Size                            -9.250***  -9.320***
                                                                     (2.888)    (2.872)
                  Constant                    2.635      8.174    194.447*** 201.537***
                                             (6.806)    (9.313)     (60.549)   (60.720)
                  Observations                 426        426          426        426

Note: Analysis uses within-district variation modeled after Khwaja and Mian (2008). All identifying varia-
tion comes from districts with both exposed and unexposed MFIs. Outcomes data from MFI balance sheets.
In each column, the dependent variable is the difference of per rural household GLP by the MFI to the dis-
trict between September 2010 and March 2012. In columns (1) and (3), exposure of the MFI is captured by
the share of its portfolio in Andhra Pradesh as of September 2010. In columns (2) and (4), we use a exposure
dummy equal to one if the MFI operates in Andhra Pradesh. All specifications include district dummies. In
columns (3) and (4), the logarithm of the total portfolio of the MFI is also used as control. The sample is
restricted only to MFI-district pairs with positive GLP. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                                         TABLE C.3. Robustness: Sequential Exclusion of States
                                       (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)      (8)       (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)      (13)      (14)       (15)       (16)      (17)                                     (18)
Excluding:                             AS       BR        CG         GJ       HR         HP        JH       KA        KL        MP         MH        OD         PB        RJ        TN          UP       UK                                       WB

Total consumption:
Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010 -117.7*** -119.9*** -116.2*** -110.9*** -110.6*** -115.8*** -116.7*** -109.5*** -95.6*** -106.4*** -135.1*** -109.8*** -112.3*** -124.6*** -119.9*** -126.5*** -115.9*** -121.6***
                                      (27.2)   (27.9)     (27.5)    (27.3)   (27.2)     (27.3)    (27.7)    (30.0)    (26.4)    (28.0)    (30.2)    (27.9)    (27.2)    (27.0)   (26.8)     (28.0)    (27.3)   (28.2)
Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010     -426.5*** -443.3*** -418.7*** -386.2*** -398.2*** -418.9*** -421.3*** -375.9*** -316.8*** -397.6*** -508.0*** -373.3*** -403.1*** -449.0*** -438.7*** -468.8*** -421.2*** -458.3***
                                     (119.9)  (124.1)    (120.8)   (120.0)  (119.6)    (120.0)   (121.6)   (126.6)   (115.8)   (122.8)   (125.8)   (124.2)   (119.6)   (120.8)  (119.9)    (126.4)   (120.6)  (127.5)


Labor earnings:
Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010   -16.8**    -14.0*   -15.4**   -16.7**   -16.1**   -16.6**   -15.1**   -17.1**   -14.1**    -13.5*   -23.3***   -14.8**   -16.1**   -16.8**    -16.5**   -20.2***   -16.5**                                 -19.0***
                                       (7.1)     (7.4)     (7.2)     (7.2)     (7.2)     (7.1)     (7.1)     (7.6)     (7.2)     (7.6)      (6.8)     (7.2)     (7.1)     (7.4)      (7.1)      (7.2)     (7.1)                                    (7.3)
Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010       -75.4**   -63.7**   -70.8**   -74.0**   -72.7**   -74.8**   -68.8**   -73.4**   -62.2**   -63.2**   -95.5***   -64.4**   -72.5**   -76.0**   -79.3***   -97.2***   -74.4**                                 -87.4***
                                      (29.3)    (30.4)    (29.5)    (29.7)    (29.5)    (29.3)    (29.1)    (30.3)    (29.4)    (30.1)     (28.3)    (30.1)    (29.3)    (30.2)     (29.4)     (29.9)    (29.3)                                   (30.9)
Observations                         119412    115856    118756    117471    118229    119668    118612    114937    114675    114651     109971    114983    118844    113512     117188     107536    119138                                   112646




                                                                                                                                                                                                                EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT
Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. In each panel, each row provides coefficients from separate differences-in-differences regressions. The
first row reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary
indicator for high exposure to AP. In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of household size, number of
rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dum-
mies times round. In the first panel, the dependent variable is monthly total expenditures. In the second panel, the dependent variable is weekly labor
earnings. In each column, observations in the state indicated at the top of the column are excluded from the sample; all other 17 states are included.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                52
                                     EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                         53

            TABLE C.4. Randomization Inference: District Level Permutations
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)
                                   HH Monthly HH Monthly HH Weekly HH Weekly Casual      Casual
                                   Cnsumption: Consumption:  Labor   Casual Days Daily Daily Wage
                                      Total      Durables   Earnings   Worked    Wage   Non-ag

 Estimated Coefficient               -319.339    -80.170      -74.784       -0.431    -8.866    -16.647

 Distribution Mean                    -6.622     -2.262        -0.029       -0.013     0.031     0.074
 Distribution Standard Deviation     122.794     28.715        28.938       0.176      3.239     6.564
 Rank                                 3/500      0/500         3/500        6/500      1/500     1/500
 P-value                              0.012       0.000         0.012       0.024      0.004     0.004
 Note: The estimated coefficient refers to the dummy exposure variable. The mean and standard devi-
ation refer to the distribution of estimated coefficients on permutations of the exposure dummy across
districts. There were 500 iterations; at each iteration, 132 districts were randomly selected to have
an exposure dummy equal to 1, while the remaining districts had an exposure dummy equal to 0.
The rank indicates how the estimated coefficient in the data is located in the distribution of simu-
lated coefficients. The p-value refers to a two-sided test based on the distribution of the coefficients.


              TABLE C.5. Randomization Inference: State Level Permutations
                                       (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)
                                   HH Monthly HH Monthly HH Weekly HH Weekly Casual       Casual
                                   Consumption: Consumption:  Labor   Casual Days Daily Daily Wage
                                      Total       Durables   Earnings   Worked    Wage   Non-ag

Estimated Coefficient                -319.339     -80.170      -74.784      -0.431     -8.866    -16.647

Distribution Mean                     7.581       -31.057      -0.477       -0.148     1.334     2.846
Distribution Standard Deviation      220.512      42.478       47.457       0.211      6.615     12.476
Rank                                  1/22          1/22        1/22         0/22      1/22       2/22
 Note: The estimated coefficient refers to the dummy exposure variable. The mean and standard deviation
refer to the distribution of estimated coefficients on permutations of the exposure dummy across MFIs; a
district is exposed if an exposed MFI operated in it in 2010. There were 23 permutations; at each per-
mutation, a single state was selected and a district was exposed if in October 2010 there was an MFI
which operated in both the district and the selected state. For each regression, the sample does not in-
clude Andhra Pradesh or the selected “exposed” state. Since a single MFI in our sample operated in both
Sikkim and Tripura before the AP crisis, these states are counted as a single permutation. The rank in-
dicates how the estimated coefficient in the data is located in the distribution of simulated coefficients.
                                    EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                           54

                              TABLE C.6. Robustness: Political Party
                                            (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)                 (5)
                                        HH Monthly HH Monthly HH Weekly HH Weekly                 Casual
                                        Consumption: Consumption:  Labor   Casual Days            Daily
                                           Total       Durables   Earnings   Worked               Wage

   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010     -75.001**        -9.689       -11.749       -0.031    -1.934***
                                           (30.614)       (8.180)       (7.473)      (0.047)      (0.673)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010         -254.151*      -56.830*      -57.786*       -0.208    -7.950***
                                          (132.944)      (29.861)      (29.566)      (0.200)      (3.029)
   Observations                             111692        111692        119668       119668        40584
Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. Each row provides coefficients from separate differences-
in-differences regressions. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The
second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure to AP.
In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of household size,
number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in
2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round, and the party affiliation of the state
prime-minister in 2010 times round.
                                     EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                               55

                                   TABLE C.7. Robustness: Rainfall
                                              (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)                    (5)
                                          HH Monthly HH Monthly HH Weekly HH Weekly                    Casual
                                          Consumption: Consumption:  Labor   Casual Days               Daily
                                             Total       Durables   Earnings   Worked                  Wage

   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010       -70.244***      -13.235**      -15.950**     -0.094**    -1.931***
                                              (24.723)        (6.085)        (7.232)      (0.042)      (0.622)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010           -264.535**     -69.667***      -72.200**     -0.442**    -7.832***
                                             (114.737)       (23.040)       (29.886)      (0.177)      (2.796)
   Observations                                111692         111692         119668       119668        40584
Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. Each row provides coefficients from separate differences-
in-differences regressions. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous exposure measure. The
second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for high exposure to AP.
In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of household size,
number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in
2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round, and rainfall shocks. Rainfall data is
from the Global Precipitation Climatology Centre (GPCC) and rainfall shocks are calculated as in Jayachan-
dran (2006): if rainfall in a year is above the 80-th percentile of the rainfall distribution from 1950-2014, then
the rainfall shock equals 1; if it is below the 20-th percentile, the rainfall shock equals -1; otherwise, its value
is zero.
                                    EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                            56

                     TABLE C.8. Robustness: Initial Economic Conditions
                                             (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)                (5)
                                         HH Monthly HH Monthly HH Weekly HH Weekly                Casual
                                         Consumption: Consumption:  Labor   Casual Days           Daily
                                            Total       Durables   Earnings   Worked              Wage

   Panel A: consumption in round 66 × round
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010   -61.210**         -11.079*      -11.740*      -0.082*    -2.183***
                                          (25.201)         (6.117)       (7.116)      (0.043)      (0.643)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010       -202.059*        -55.587**      -49.466*     -0.386**    -9.007***
                                         (117.382)        (22.866)      (29.687)      (0.184)      (2.898)
   Observations                            111692          111692        119668       119668        40584


   Panel B: Poverty head count × round
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010 -78.831***          -15.346**    -15.188**     -0.086**    -2.168***
                                         (25.410)           (6.397)      (7.182)      (0.043)      (0.641)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010      -293.339**        -77.841***    -67.286**     -0.405**    -8.865***
                                        (117.852)          (24.688)     (29.863)      (0.187)      (2.882)
   Observations                           111692            111692       119668       119668        40584


   Panel C: Casual wage in round 66 × round
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010 -95.272***          -17.867**     -18.721**      -0.081    -2.330***
                                           (26.556)         (6.682)       (7.122)     (0.042)      (0.658)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010       -365.082***      -88.237***    -83.363***    -0.389**    -9.424***
                                          (123.455)        (25.763)      (29.098)     (0.177)      (2.944)
   Observations                             111692          111692        119668      119668        40584


   Panel D: Share of self-employment × round
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010 -70.127***         -16.578***    -15.747**     -0.087**    -2.160***
                                           (25.513)         (6.227)      (7.116)      (0.042)      (0.639)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010        -264.565**      -83.072***    -71.395**     -0.412**    -8.824***
                                          (119.442)        (24.389)     (29.059)      (0.173)      (2.880)
   Observations                             111692          111692       119668       119668        40584
Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. In each panel, each row provides coefficients from sep-
arate differences-in-differences regressions. The first row reports specifications that use the continuous ex-
posure measure. The second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the binary indicator for
high exposure to AP.In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, survey month, quin-
tiles of household size, number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times
round, GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round, and rain-
fall shocks In each panel, additional controls are included: average district consumption in round 66 times
round (first panel), district poverty head count in round 66 times round (second panel), average casual wage
in agriculture in round 66 times round (third panel), and district share in self-employment times round (fourth
panel) . Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                    EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                              57

             TABLE C.9. Heterogeneity: Peak agricultural labor demand periods
                                             (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)
                                           Casual      Casual    HH Weekly HH Weekly HH Monthly
                                         Daily Wage: Daily Wage: Casual Days  Labor   Consumption:
                                             Ag       Non-Ag       Worked    Earnings    Total

   Peak labor demand periods
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010      -2.234*          -4.962**   -0.182**     -32.372***      -81.428*
                                           (1.214)           (2.136)    (0.078)       (11.671)      (42.206)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010          -9.941*         -18.366**   -0.641**     -108.163**     -324.969*
                                           (5.366)           (9.102)    (0.302)       (48.983)     (182.678)
   Observations                             2515              3482       25625         25625         25625


   Non-peak labor demand periods
   Log(HH Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010       -0.693       -5.589***      -0.110*          -13.829    -61.961*
                                           (1.010)         (1.505)      (0.056)          (9.559)    (31.727)
   Any Exposed Lender × Post 2010           -3.339      -20.195***     -0.534**          -65.540    -220.215
                                           (3.980)         (6.131)      (0.227)         (39.747)   (146.863)
   Observations                             12039           11457        94043            94043      94043

Note: Outcomes data from NSS rounds 64, 66, 68. Households are administered the NSS survey on a rolling
basis throughout the year. Thus, we split the calendar year into two-week bins and, for a given district, cal-
culate the percentage of households who report that they are employed in agricultural. We identify peak
demand periods as the 6 two-week bins with the highest agricultural employment. Each row provides co-
efficients from separate differences-in-differences regressions. The first row reports specifications that use
the continuous exposure measure. The second row reports coefficients from separate regressions using the
binary indicator for high exposure to AP. In all columns, controls include round and district fixed effects, sur-
vey month, number of rural households times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP
quintiles in 2008 dummies times round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round.
              TABLE C.10. Robustness: Heterogeneous Covariates as Outcomes
                                                      (1)        (2)    (3)       (4)        (5)
                                                                   Land Quintiles
                                                       1         2       3         4          5

                  Log(Exposure Ratio) × Post 2010     -0.004 0.005 -0.001 0.002       0.001
                                                     (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002)
                  Any exposed lender × Post 2010      -0.012 0.016    0.000   0.012   0.003
                                                     (0.013) (0.014) (0.012) (0.010) (0.008)
                  Observations                       119668 119668 119668 119668 119668

  Note: Each cell corresponds to a different regression. The top row uses the continuous exposure in-
 dicator, while the second row uses the binary exposure indicator. In all specifications, controls include
 round and district fixed effects, survey month, quintiles of household size, number of rural households
 times round, number of rural households squared times round, GLP quintiles in 2008 dummies times
 round, GLP quintiles in 2010 dummies times round. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                            EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                             58

                 A PPENDIX D. S UPPLEMENTARY M ODEL A PPENDIX

  Here, we solve for the limiting case of fully segmented labor markets. This has the
advantage of producing simple, closed form solutions for equilibrium wage levels.



D.1. Setting up the Problem. Recall from Section 2.2 that firms come in two sectors:
S ∈ {T, N T }, and workers in two types: k ∈ {`, h} . Here we assume that the N T sector
uses only h labor, while the T sector uses only ` labor. Production functions are:
                                                           γ
(D.1)                                Y T = AT LT,`
                                                                 γ
(D.2)                               Y N T = AN T LN T,h

where γ < 1.
   All assumptions about consumers, goods prices, and borrowing are the same as in the
full model with partially segmented labor markets.



D.2. Equilibrium Conditions. Again, both labor markets and the non-tradable product
market clear:


(D.3)                                       LT,` = N `
(D.4)                                     LN T,h = N h
                                                                        γ
(D.5)                   N ` C N T,` + N h C N T,h = AN T LN T,h

D.3. Solving the Problem. The FOCs of T and N T firms yield:
                                                     1
                                          γAT
                                                !
                                                    1−γ
                                T,`
                                L     =                     = N`
                                           w`
                                                             1
                                          γP AN T
                                                        !
                                                            1−γ
                              N T,h
                            L         =                           = Nh
                                            wh
  From here, we can solve for w`
                                               γAT
                                       w` =
                                              (N ` )1−γ
Note that w` is only a function here of model preliminaries, and is not a function of B.
Thus dw
      dB
        `
          = 0.
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                             59

    Plugging the consumption demands, w` , and P into the equilibrium condition yields:
(D.6)
                                                               1−γ
                                                         (N h )
                        γAT                                          wh
                                   !
                                                                                     γ
                                                           AN T γ
                                                                            
    N` + Nh B + N`                     + N h (wh ) =                      AN T N h
                       (N ` )1−γ                            1−α
                                                                                                           !
                                                                     `    h
                                                        γ (1 − α)  N + N       N`                      γAT
(D.7)                                            wh =                       B +                                  
                                                      1 − γ (1 − α)    Nh       Nh                     (N ` )1−γ

                          γ(1−α)       (N ` +N h )
Finally, note that dw
                   dB
                     h
                       = 1−γ(1−α)         Nh
                                                     > 0. Thus    dwh
                                                                  dB
                                                                        > 0 and   dw`
                                                                                  dB
                                                                                        = 0 when the labor
market is fully segmented
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                60

                             A PPENDIX E. DATA A PPENDIX

E.1. Household Survey Data. Household level data are from several rounds of the Na-
tional Sample Survey (NSS). Most of the analysis in the paper refers to rounds 64, 66 and
68. Round 64 was conducted from July 2007 until June 2008. Round 66 was conducted
from July 2009 until June 2010. Finally, round 68 was conducted from July 2011 until June
2012, after the Andhra Pradesh crisis in October 2010. We also used the round 70 of the
NSS (January 2013 - December 2013), in particular the Debt and Investment schedule.
   We now discuss how household level variables are constructed from the National Sample
Surveys, rounds 64, 66 and 68. All the questions refer to the questionnaire from Schedule
10 (“Employment, Unemployment and Migration Particulars”).
   Labor and Earnings Variables In round 64, labor information is from block 5, while for
rounds 66 and 68 it is from block 5.3. Casual labor wages are calculated at the household
level as the ratio between the sum of total weekly earnings across household members
and the total number of days worked in the week. Earnings are in column 17 and worked
days are in column 14. Wages and earnings are restricted to status 51 (“casual labor in non-
public works”). Prime age individuals are those between 18 to 45 years old. We classify the
work as agricultural if the 2-digit NIC-2004 code is 1, and as non-agricultural otherwise.
Total weekly days worked correspond to the sum of column 14 among household members
with activity status (column 4) below 72, so it excludes domestic activities and education
time. Casual weekly days worked correspond to the sum of column 14 among household
members with activity status 41 (“casual wage labor in public works other than NREG
public works”), 42 (“casual wage labor in NREG public works”), or 51 (“casual labor in
non-public works”). Household weekly labor earnings correspond to the sum of column
17 among all household members with activity status (column 4) below 72. A household
has a member in unemployment if the status (column 4) equals 81 (“did not work but was
seeking and/or available for work”) for some household member. A household has any
non-agricultural self employment if the status (column 4) is less or equal than 21 and the
2-digit NIC-2004 code is larger than 1 for some household member.
   Consumption Variables From round 64, monthly household total consumption expen-
diture is the sum of the answers to items 16 (“sub-total (items 1 to 15)”) and 21 (“sub-total
(items 17 to 20)”) of block 7 (“household consumer expenditure”), with the latter normal-
ized to represent monthly expenditure, instead of yearly. Durable consumption expenditure
is from the answer to item 20 of block 7, again scaled to reflect the monthly average in
the past year. Non-durable consumption expenditure is given by summing item 16 with
items 17-19 of block 7, the latter normalized to reflect the monthly average. From round
                              EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                61

66, monthly household total consumption expenditure is the answer to item 40 of block 9.
Durable consumption expenditure is the sum of items 29 to 37 of block 9, scaled to reflect
the monthly average in the past year. Non-durable consumption is the sum of item 23 and
the monthly equivalent of the sum of item 24 to 28. From round 68, monthly household
total consumption expenditure is the answer to item 40 of block 8. Durable consumption
expenditure is the sum of itens 29 to 37 of block 8, scaled to reflect the monthly average in
the past year. Non-durable consumption is the sum of item 23 and the monthly equivalent
of the sum of item 24 to 28. Finally, the poverty dummy is constructed by comparing per
capita household total consumption with the state-round specific rural poverty line from the
Planning Commission, Government of India, “Report of the Expert Group to Review the
Methodology for Measurement of Poverty”, 2014.
   Household Size and Landholdings For any round, household size is the answer to item
1 of block 3 and household land holdings are from item 7 of block 3.

E.2. Banking Data. District-level banking data is from the Basic Statistical Returns of
Scheduled Commercial Banks in India provided by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). This
information is available at http://dbie.rbi.org.in/DBIE/dbie.rbi?site=
publications#!9 . In particular, the data comes from Table 5.9., “District-Wise Clas-
sification of Outstanding Credit of Scheduled Commercial Banks”.

E.3. Poverty Data. An indicator for whether a household is below the poverty line is con-
structed by comparing total per capita monthly consumption with the state-specific rural
poverty lines presented in the document “Report of the expert group to review the method-
ology for measurement of poverty” (Government of India Planning Commission 2014).
This report is available at http://planningcommission.nic.in/reports/genrep/
pov_rep0707.pdf. See Table B1, pg. 28 and B2,B3,B4 pgs. 29-31. Values for 2007-08
are obtained by inflation-adjusting the 2009-10 values.

E.4. Crop Yield Data. District-level crop yield data is constructed from the Crop Produc-
tion Statistics Information System, Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (http://aps.dac.gov.in/APY/Index.htm). The
crop index is constructed in a similar way as in Jayachandran (2006). For each district and
each of the five crops, (Sugarcane, Rice, Groundnut, Wheat and Sorghum), we normalize
yields to 1 in 2008 and take the weighted average of the logarithms. Weights are the rev-
enue share of each crop. The only difference to the measure in Jayachandran is that we
normalize the yields by the initial yields, instead of the average yield across all periods.
Also, Jayachandran (2006) uses local prices in order to measure the revenue associated to
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                  62

each crop, while we use a national 2008 price index for each crop. The price indexes are
available from FAOSTAT.

E.5. Rainfall. Rainfall data is from the Global Precipitation Climatology Center (GPCC),
available at http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/data/gridded/data.gpcc.
html. The original dataset contains a 0.5x0.5 degree grid on monthly precipitation, which
is interpolated from weather station data. For each district in our sample, we assign the
rainfall of the grid point closest to the district centroid. Monthly rainfall is averaged at the
year level. We construct rainfall shocks as in Jayachandran (2006). If rainfall in a year is
above the 80-th percentile of the rainfall distribution for that district from 1950-2014, then
the rainfall shock equals 1; if it is below the 20th percentile, the rainfall shock equals -1;
otherwise, its value is zero.

E.6. Political Parties. The political party variable is defined as the party affiliation of the
chief minister of the state in September, 2010 (on the eve of the crisis). Party affiliation
information was collected from states’ websites and google searches.

E.7. Road Travel Time. The time travel between Indian districts is from Allen and Atkin
(2016). The dataset is available at the authors’websites. We use the travel time calculated
for the year 2011.

E.8. Hand-collected MFI balance sheet data. We partnered with MFIN, the primary
trade organization of for-profit MFI-NBFCs (non-bank, financial corporations). We worked
with MFIN to ask each of their 42 members for total principal outstanding on active loans,
by district, at annual intervals between September 2008 and September 2012. In total 25
of MFIN’s 42 member organizations agreed to share their data for the study.
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                          63

                          A PPENDIX F. C ALIBRATION A PPENDIX

   Here, we provide details about the calibrations used in Section 6.3. We allow both chan-
nels, the aggregate demand as well as the investment channel, to operate. Households
are heterogeneous: some are unconstrained entrepreneurs (who borrow from sources other
than microfinance), others are permanently constrained workers (who cannot borrow from
microfinance), while we also allow for some individuals to be potential microfinance cus-
tomers. To match the previous literature, we allow some microfinance borrowers to have a
consumption motive, while others use microfinance to start a productive business.


F.1. Workers. All households are endowed with a labor endowment in both the tradable
and non-tradable sector. Worker households supply (`T , `N T ) inelastically to each market.
   Worker households (denoted by type ω) maximize utility, subject to the within-period
budget constraints:

                    max           C1 + βC2
                 CtT,ω ,CtN T,ω
                                 α           1−α
              s.t.Ct = CtT,ω          CtN T,ω
                 CtT,ω + P CtN T,ω ≤ `T wT,t + `N T wN T,t + yt + Bt − RBt−1

where β is the household’s discount rate, wk,t is the period t wage in sector k, yt is non-
labor income, and Bt is the amount borrowed, discussed below. R is the interest rate on last
period’s borrowing. Households are fully savings constrained and can only move money
between periods by borrowing, if available.
   Given the Cobb-Douglas structure, consumers will spend constant budget shares on each
good each period:


                  CtT,ω = α (`T wT,t + `N T wN T,t + yt + Bt − RBt−1 )
                             1−α
                CtN T,ω =        (`T wT,t + `N T wN T,t + yt + Bt − RBt−1 )
                              Pt
   where Pt is the relative price of the non-tradable good. (We normalize the price of the
tradable good each period to 1).


F.2. Entrepreneurs. Some households are endowed with entrepreneurial ability in one of
two sectors, S ∈ {T, N T }. If they choose to operate a business, the production functions
are:
                               EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                 64



                                                      γ
                                     Y T = AT LT,`
                                                           γ
                                   Y N T = AN T LN T,h

where γ < 1. Note here, that for simplicity, we assume a fully segmented labor market. As
before, entrepreneurs maximize profits, ΠSt = PtS YtS − LSt wS , where LSt wS is shorthand
for the total input costs of the sector-specific type of labor and PtS is the price of the good
produced by sector S in period t.
   We assume that running a business in either sector requires the entrepreneur’s full hu-
man capital. Therefore, potential-entrepreneur households must choose whether to run a
business or to supply their labor to the wage labor market. Finally, we assume that open-
ing a business for the first time requires the payment of a fixed cost B̄. We assume that
unconstrained entrepreneurs are all incumbents and have paid the cost in the past.
   Thus, unconstrained entrepreneurs maximize the same objective function as the workers,
subject to an entrepreneur and sector-specific budget constraint:


                              CtT,E:S + P CtN T,E:S ≤ ΠS,t + yt

   We need to check that in equilibrium, all unconstrained entrepreneurs receive more util-
ity from running their business than from closing the business and opting into the wage
labor market.

F.3. Microfinance Borrowing. While in Section 2.2, we considered small changes in the
quantities of microfinance available to borrowers, in reality, the AP Crisis led to a large
discrete decrease in the loan size. We model the change in credit supply for as a fall in B
from B̄ to 0. As shown above in the worker’s budget constraint, consumption borrowing
increases resources in period 1 by B at a cost of RB in the future.
   Microfinance lenders generally target borrowers in the middle of the village income dis-
tribution. The poorest individuals are viewed as unable to repay, while the richest house-
holds are already less constrained and would have lower demand for credit. Consistent
with the empirical facts, we allow for only a fraction of constrained individuals to be able
to avail themselves of microcredit.
   We also allow there to be some potential entrepreneurs who have the ability to enter
entrepreneurship, but who have not yet paid the fixed cost to set up the business. For these
constrained entrepreneurs, they can use the loan to pay this cost. This leads to the following
budget constraint for the EB : S types (entrepreneurial borrowers in sector S).
                                 EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                           65




                       CtT,EB:S + P CtN T,EB:S ≤ ΠS,t + yt − RBt−1

  For an interior microfinance borrowing equilibrium, three conditions must be satisfied:
   (1) Borrowers with a consumption motive must have a higher utility from borrowing
       the fixed quantity B̄ than from borrowing 0 and consuming all labor and non-labor
       earnings.
   (2) Constrained T entrepreneurs must prefer to borrow to start a business than to borrow
       for consumption.
   (3) Constrained NT entrepreneurs must prefer to borrow to start a business than to
       borrow for consumption.

F.4. Types. To summarize the above discussion, the model leads to six different types of
agents:
   (1)   Unconstrained T Entrepreneurs (E : T )
   (2)   Unconstrained N T Entrepreneurs (E : N T )
   (3)   Partially Constrained T Entrepreneurs (EB : T )
   (4)   Partially Constrained N T Entrepreneurs (EB : T )
   (5)   Partially Constrained Workers (ω B )
   (6)   Fully Constrained Workers (ω)
   We can then define the fraction of agents of each type τ by θτ . The following objects
are particularly important: the total fraction of worker households (both borrowers and
non-borrowers) θω ; the total fraction of T entrepreneurs θT ; and the total fraction of NT
entrepreneurs θN T . Note θω + θT + θT E = 1. The weights will change as a function of the
microfinance regime.

F.5. Equilibrium Conditions. As in the pure model of aggregate demand, in equilibrium,
the labor markets and the non-tradable product market must clear:


                                    θT LT,` = θω `T
                                 θN T LN T,h = θω `N T
                                                                  γ
                                  N τ C N T,τ = θN T AN T LN T,h
                            X

                             τ

   As mentioned above, it also needs to be the case that entrepreneurs of both types prefer
to use their human capital to run a business rather than to supply labor to the market.
                                   EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF CREDIT                                         66

F.6. Parameter Assumptions. To calibrate the model, we have to make numerous sim-
plifying assumptions. We describe our assumptions by family of parameters:
                                                       
Production function parameters. γ, AT , AN T : We set AT = AN T = 4.6. This value
is chosen to match the TFP parameter in Buera et al. (2017). We set the returns to scale
parameter, γ = 0.535, again using the value from Buera et al. (2017).

Household parameters. (`T , `N T , α, y1 , y2 ): We set `N T = 89.2216, `T = 104.7384. The
relative endowments of labor in the tradable and non-tradable sectors are set to match the
share of casual labor hours supplied in agriculture (53.6%) and non-agriculture (46.4%) in
the 2012 NSS in control (unexposed) districts.32
   We set the weight on tradables in the utility function to α = 0.55. This is the share of total
household expenditure that is food and tobacco in the 2012 NSS in control (unexposed)
districts. Finally, we set y1 = 22.4, y2 = 60. The high value of y2 relative to y1 is chosen
to capture, in a reduced form way, the factors that make households desire consumption
credit.33

Types. θτ We assume that 25% of households are unconstrained entrepreneurs. Given the
unavailability of detailed business information, we make the assumption that 50% of busi-
nesses are tradable and 50% are nontradable. Finally, the share who borrow from microfi-
nance is set to .0932, which is the share of households who have a microloan in the NSS 70
data, using the broad definition of microfinance, namely non-collateralized formal lending
from a non-bank source. As we discuss in Section 4.4, this is the measure that best captures
households’ total borrowing from microfinance sources.
                                   
Borrowing parameters. B̄, R : We set the size of a microloan to B̄ = 16, chosen to be
58% of economy-wide avergage labor earnings, which is the size of a typical microloan as
a share of labor earnings in the 2012 NSS in control (unexposed) districts. This number
appears large because entrepreneurial households report zero labor earnings and thus bring
down the average. We set R = 1.15. A typical Indian microloan carries a nominal APR of
approximately 25%, and inflation was approximately 10%.




32
   In the calibrated version of the model we assume full segmentation between the two labor markets, so this
is equivalent to choosing the endowments of low- and high-skilled labor.
33
   These factors could include rational expectations of higher income in the future, but also myopic/time-
inconsistent preferences or lack of understanding of the terms of microloans.
