                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FINANCE AND BUSINESS CYCLES:
                THE CREDIT-DRIVEN HOUSEHOLD DEMAND CHANNEL

                                         Atif R. Mian
                                          Amir Sufi

                                      Working Paper 24322
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24322


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2018




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Emil Verner, and Robert Vishny for
comments that substantially improved the draft. We thank Michael Varley for excellent research
assistance. We also thank the Julis Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance at
Princeton and the Initiative on Global Markets and the Fama-Miller Center at Chicago Booth for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Finance and Business Cycles: The Credit-Driven Household Demand Channel
Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi
NBER Working Paper No. 24322
February 2018
JEL No. E32,E5,G01,G2,R2

                                           ABSTRACT

Every major financial crisis leaves its unique footprint on economic thought. The early banking
crises taught us the importance of financial sector liquidity and the lender of last resort. The Great
Depression highlighted the devastating effects of bank failures and the need for counter-cyclical
fiscal and monetary policy. The Great Recession has brought to the surface the importance of
credit-driven business cycles that operate through household demand. We discuss empirical
evidence accumulated over the last decade supporting this view, and we also describe
accompanying theoretical work that helps define these concepts.


Atif R. Mian
Princeton University
Bendheim Center For Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
atif@princeton.edu

Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction

Every major financial crisis leaves its unique footprint on economic thought. The early banking

crises taught us the importance of financial sector liquidity and the lender of last resort. The

Great Depression highlighted the devastating effects of bank failures and the need for counter-

cyclical fiscal and monetary policy. The Great Recession has brought to the surface the importance

of credit-driven business cycles that operate through household demand. We discuss empirical

evidence accumulated over the last decade supporting this view, and we also describe accompanying

theoretical work that helps define these concepts.

    We start with a striking empirical regularity of the Great Recession: the larger the increase in

household leverage prior to the recession, the more severe the subsequent recession. Figure 1 shows

that the change in household debt to GDP ratio from 2002 and 2007 is strongly correlated with the

subsequent increase in unemployment rate from 2007 to 2010, both across states within the United

States as well as across countries around the world.1


                                                                           Figure 1 Household Debt and Unemployment


                                                                     United States                                                                                              World
                                               10                                                                                                   15
      Change Unemployment Rate, 2007 to 2010




                                                                                                           Change Unemployment Rate, 2007 to 2010




                                                                                             NV
                                                                                                                                                                                         ESP
                                               8
                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                IRL

                                                                                            FL    CA
                                               6
                                                                     AL
                                                                      NC        GA          AZ
                                                                                 ID
                                                                               SC RICO                                                               5                           USA
                                                                              WA
                                                                             OR       NJ
                                                                    IN UT                                                                                                               GRC
                                                             WVMS KY CT DE                                                                                                       HUN    DNK
                                               4                                     MD
                                                        WY LA         NMTN IL
                                                                        MO
                                                            TX DC OH NY HIMI                                                                                                   SWE PRT
                                                                                                                                                                               ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                                                                              CZE  GBR
                                                                      MT
                                                                   ARPAWI         MA VA
                                                                                 ME                                                                                      MEXTUR
                                                                                                                                                                             FRA FIN
                                                                                                                                                                   JPN CHE NOR
                                                                                                                                                                           BEL
                                                                                                                                                                          KOR        NLDAUS
                                                           OK                                                                                                    HKGSGP AUT
                                                              KS       SD
                                                                                  MN
                                                                                                                                                     0                  THAPOL
                                               2                 IA                    NH
                                                                NE        VT                                                                                     DEU
                                                        AK                                                                                                               IDN

                                                           ND
                                               0                                                                                                    −5
                                                    0       10     20      30     40      50      60                                                     −20           0          20         40          60
                                                        Change HH debt to GDP Ratio, 2002 to 2007                                                              Change HH debt to GDP Ratio, 2002 to 2007




    This relationship is broader than the Great Recession. King (1994) shows that countries with
   1
     The ability of household debt expansion to predict recession severity across geographical areas during the Great
Recession has been demonstrated by a number of research studies (e.g., Mian and Sufi (2010), Glick and Lansing
(2010), IMF (2012), and Martin and Philippon (2017)).


                                                                                                       1
the largest expansion in household debt to income ratios from 1984 to 1988 witness the largest

shortfall in real GDP growth from 1989 to 1992. Mian et al. (2017a) show that states in the

United States with a larger increase in household debt from 1982 to 1989 see a larger increase in

unemployment and a larger decline in real GDP growth from 1989 to 1992.

   Household debt expansion predicts recession severity conditional on a recession, but it also

unconditionally predicts a decline in real GDP growth. Mian et al. (2017b) utilize a panel of 30

countries over the past 40 years, and they show that a rise in the household debt to GDP ratio in a

given country systematically predicts lower subsequent growth and a rise in unemployment. More

recent research by the IMF (2017) confirms the Mian et al. (2017b) result in a larger sample.

   A large body of research conducted since the onset of the Great Recession explores the links be-

tween household debt, the housing market, and business cycles in order to elucidate the underlying

factors generating the predictive power of household debt expansion for the real economy. Based on

this emerging literature, the specific idea we put forward in this article is that expansions in credit

supply, operating primarily through household demand, are an important driver of business cycles.

We call this the credit-driven household demand channel. While scholars have modeled expansions

in credit supply in different ways, our working definition is that a credit supply expansion is when

lenders increase the quantity of credit or decrease the interest rate on credit for reasons unrelated

to changes in income or productivity of borrowers.

   The credit-driven household demand channel rests on three main pillars. First, an expansion in

credit supply, as opposed to technology shocks or permanent income shocks, is a key force generating

expansion and contraction in economic activity. In Section 2, we review studies showing that shifts

in credit supply lead to a boom-bust cycle the real economy. This phenomena was pervasive in the

2000 to 2010 period, but it has also been a strong force in global business cycle patterns over the

last five decades.

   Credit supply expansions affect the real economy. But what is the precise mechanism? The

second pillar of the credit-driven household demand channel is that the expansionary phase of the

credit cycle affects the real economy primarily through boosting household demand as opposed to

boosting productive capacity of firms in the economy. In Section 3, we describe a methodology that

allows us to separate whether credit supply expansions boost household demand versus productive

capacity, and we highlight a number of research studies showing that the household demand channel

                                                  2
appears to be dominant in recent history. Credit supply expansions can affect the real economy

through business investment, and there are certainly examples in history of such an effect; however,

the household demand channel appears more important in recent episodes.

   What makes the contraction phase of the credit-driven business cycle so severe? The third main

pillar of the credit-driven household demand channel is that the economy faces severe difficulties

in “adjusting” when credit supply ultimately contracts. The contraction in credit supply, often

associated with a banking crisis, precipitates a sharp drop in spending by indebted households. The

economy experiences an aggregate demand shortfall as savers do not sufficiently boost spending

even as short-term interest rates fall to zero. On the supply side, employment cannot easily switch

from the non-tradable to tradable sector. Nominal rigidities, banking sector disruptions, and legacy

distortions also help explain why recessions can be severe following credit booms. We discuss these

factors in more detail in Section 4.

   Our emphasis on both the expansion and contraction phase of the credit cycle is consistent

with the perspective taken by earlier scholars such as Charles P. Kindleberger and Hyman Minsky.

In particular, financial crises and a sudden contraction in credit supply are not exogenous events

hitting a stable economy. Instead, the crash should be viewed at least partially as the result of

preceding excesses associated with credit supply expansions. In short, credit supply expansions

often sow the seeds of their own destruction, and so we must understand the boom to make sense

of the bust. We discuss how the presence of behavioral biases and aggregate demand externalities

may be able to generate such endogenous boom-bust credit cycles in Section 5.

   What causes a sudden increase in credit supply? This is an open question for which existing

research has less definitive answers. In Section 6, we explore potential sources and conclude that

the fundamental shock appears to be most closely related to financial excesses. More specifically,

we see from historical episodes that a shock that leads to a rapid influx of capital into the financial

system often triggers an expansion in credit supply. Recent manifestations of such a shock are the

rise in income inequality in the United States (Kumhof et al. (2015)) and the rapid rise in savings

by many emerging markets (i.e., the “global savings glut” as articulated by Bernanke (2005)).

   While we focus on business cycles, we believe the ideas presented in Section 6 may help us

answer longer-run questions. There is a long term secular rise in private credit to GDP ratios,

especially household credit to GDP ratios (Jordà et al. (2016)). This has been accompanied by a

                                                  3
related decline in long term real rates, and a rise in within-country inequality and across-country

“savings gluts.” There may be a connection between these longer term trends and what we uncover

at the business cycle frequency. We discuss these issues in the conclusion.

       The credit-driven household demand channel we propose is distinct from traditional financial

accelerator models linking business cycles to the financial sector (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1989),

Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), and Bernanke et al. (1999)). In particular, the credit-driven household

demand view places more importance on the expansion phase of the credit cycle, and it views the

subsequent contraction in credit as an outcome of the initial credit expansion. There is room in

the financial accelerator view for the financial sector to amplify the real effects of positive technol-

ogy shocks or monetary policy shocks. However, most of the applications of financial accelerator

models have focused on the contraction phase of the credit cycle. In many of these applications, a

contraction in credit occurs exogenously, pushing the economy into a recession from a previously

stable steady state. In our view, most contractionary shocks emanating from the financial sector

are preceded by credit and housing booms; the economy does not appear to be stable prior to the

negative shock.

       Another important difference is the emphasis on aggregate demand versus aggregate supply. As

the term implies, the credit-driven household demand channel emphasizes fluctuations in household

demand driven by credit supply expansions. Borrowing by households is critical. In contrast,

financial accelerator models operate primarily by amplifying movements in business investment.

The empirical evidence supports the view that the household demand channel has been more

prominent in recent history.

       Finally, the credit-driven household demand view admits an important role for systematic flaws

in expectations formation. We highlight a large body of evidence that suggests that flawed expec-

tations formation is a critical explanation for the boom and bust cycles in credit availability. In

contrast, Bernanke (1983) highlights the lack of behavioral biases as an advantage of the financial

accelerator view.2 In the traditional financial accelerator models, behavioral biases are not central.
   2
    “... it does have the virtues that, first, it seems capable (in a way existing theories are not) of explaining the
unusual length and depth of the depression; and second, it can do this without assuming markedly irrational behavior
by private economic agents” Bernanke (1983).




                                                          4
2        Credit Supply Expansion and Business Cycles

2.1       Credit cycles and business cycles

A robust empirical finding in the literature is the existence of predictable credit cycles that gen-

erate fluctuations in real economic activity. López-Salido et al. (2017) present evidence on the

predictability of the credit cycle; they use evidence from the United States since the 1920s to show

that a narrow spread between mid-grade corporate bonds and U.S. Treasuries predicts a subse-

quent widening of credit spreads. Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017) use a sample of 19 countries

(with data going back to the 19th century for 14 countries) to show that a period of low credit

spreads precedes a sudden widening of credit spreads. The notion of a predictable cycle in credit

is also highlighted by Borio (2014), who reviews a substantial body of research from the Bank of

International Settlements supporting this view.

        This predictable cycle has important effects on the household debt cycle. Using a sample of

30 mostly advanced countries over the last 40 years, Mian et al. (2017b) estimate a VAR in the

level of household debt to lagged GDP, nonfinancial firm debt to lagged GDP, and log real GDP.3

The left panel of Figure 2 shows the impulse response function of household debt to a shock to

household debt. As it shows, a sudden increase in the household debt to GDP ratio in a given

country leads to a three year increase in the household debt to GDP ratio followed by a sharp

fall over the subsequent seven years. There is a predictable decline in household debt following

a positive shock to household debt in a country, which reflects the importance of the predictable

cycle in credit spreads.

        The credit cycle is closely connected to the business cycle. The right panel of Figure 2 shows

the impulse response function of log real GDP to a shock to the household debt to lagged GDP

ratio from Mian et al. (2017b). As it shows, a shock to household debt generates a boom-bust cycle

in the real economy that is similar to the credit cycle. Growth increases for two to three years, and

then falls significantly.

        The IMF (2017) estimates similar specifications using a significantly larger sample of 80 coun-

tries, with some data going back to the 1950s. They confirm the boom-bust pattern associated
    3
    The specification includes country fixed effects and lags of five years in the specification. Identification of the
structural shocks come through Cholesky decomposition with real log GDP ordered first, followed by nonfinancial
debt to lagged GDP, and household debt to lagged GDP. See Mian et al. (2017b) for more details.



                                                          5
with sudden increases in the household debt to GDP ratio. They conclude based on their findings

that “an increase in household debt boosts growth in the short-term but may give rise to macro-

economic and financial stability risks in the medium term.” Their sample includes substantially

more emerging economies, and they are able to show that the same pattern is present in emerging

economies, but it is less pronounced. Drehmann et al. (2017) also confirm this pattern in a panel of

17 advanced economies from 1980 to 2015. They emphasize the importance of rising debt service

burdens in explaining the subsequent drop in GDP.

       The boom-bust cycle in the right panel of Figure 2 represents a large and robust pattern in the

data. The pattern is strong enough that a rise in household debt systematically predicts a decline

in subsequent GDP growth. Figure 3 shows the correlation between the growth in household debt

from four years ago to last year on subsequent real GDP growth from this year to three years later

in the Mian et al. (2017b) sample. There is a robust negative relationship.


2.2      Identification of credit supply expansion in aggregate data

Why does household debt increase all of a sudden? Why might such a rise generate a boom-bust

cycle in real economic activity? An initial approach to answer this question focuses on whether

debt expansion is due to credit demand shocks versus credit supply shocks. By credit demand

shocks, we mean changes in household permanent income, demographics, or beliefs holding fixed

credit supply. By credit supply shocks, we mean an increased willingness of lenders to provide

credit that is independent of the borrower’s income position.4

       There are two approaches used in the literature to distinguish whether credit supply versus credit

demand shocks are responsible for the relationship between credit growth and output growth. The

first focuses on aggregate country-level analysis in data sets that cover a long time series and many

macroeconomic cycles. The second approach examines specific macroeconomic episodes and uses

cross-sectional data across countries or regions to isolate whether credit demand or credit supply

shocks are the driver of economic activity.

       Focusing on longer time series data sets covering many episodes, the most direct empirical
   4
    We note from the outset that the negative relationship between a rise in household debt and subsequent growth
shown in Mian et al. (2017b) casts doubt on the role of credit demand shocks coming from changes in permanent
income. A rise in household debt driven by a positive permanent income shock should predict an increase in subsequent
growth, at least in models with rational expectations. The opposite pattern is found in the data.



                                                         6
method for separating credit supply versus credit demand shocks is an examination of interest

rates and credit spreads during household debt expansions. Such evidence favors the credit supply

expansion view. For example, using the same sample mentioned above, Mian et al. (2017b) show

that large three to four year increases in household debt are associated with low mortgage credit

to sovereign credit spreads. To isolate increases in credit supply, they use low mortgage credit

spread episodes as an instrument for the rise in household debt, and they show that such credit

supply-driven increases in household debt predict subsequent economic downturns.5

       Jordà et al. (2015) use pegged currencies and monetary policy shocks to isolate variation in credit

supply. Countries with fixed exchange rates see changes in short-term interest rates unrelated to

home economic conditions when monetary policy shifts in the pegged country. They show that

monetary policy shocks that lower the short-term interest rate are associated with an increase in

household debt and house prices. Further, the rise in household debt and house prices heightens

the risk of a financial crisis.

       Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017) find similar results when examining growth in private sector

credit. In their sample of 19 countries going back to the 19th century, they show that credit spreads

between lower and higher grade bonds within a country tend to fall in the period of credit growth

that occurs before a financial crisis. They conclude based on the evidence that the “behavior of

both prices and quantities suggests that credit supply expansions are a precursor to crises.”


2.3       Identification of credit supply expansion in specific episodes

The large sample historical evidence points to the importance of credit supply expansion in ex-

plaining a sudden rise in household debt. Scholars have also focused on specific episodes which

allow for a cleaner identification of credit supply shocks.

Europe from 1996 to 2010

       Mian et al. (2017b) treat the introduction of the euro currency in the late 1990s as a shock

that increased credit supply by lowering currency and other risk premia, especially in peripheral
   5
    More specifically, they present the impulse response function of log real GDP to an increase in household debt
from a proxy-SVAR specification in which low credit spread episodes are used as an instrument for a credit-supply
driven increase in household debt. The proxy structural vector auto regression approach is based on Mertens and
Ravn (2013). See Mian et al. (2017b) for details. The impulse response function from this specification shows a
similar boom and bust in real economic activity coming from a credit-supply driven increase in household debt.



                                                        7
European countries. The decline in risk premia for a given country can be most easily seen in the

spread between interest rates on sovereign bonds in the country versus U.S. bonds. For example,

Denmark, Finland, Ireland, and Greece all witnessed substantial declines in their borrowing costs

on sovereign debt relative to U.S. Treasury rates.

    The left panel of Figure 4 shows that countries with the largest decline in the sovereign spread

from 1996 to 1999 experienced the largest increase in household debt from 2002 to 2007. The

middle panel shows that countries seeing the biggest drop in the sovereign spread also see the

strongest GDP growth from 2002 to 2007. The right panel of Figure 4 shows that these same

countries experienced the worse economic downturn from 2007 to 2010. We interpret this evidence

as showing how a credit supply expansion induced by an institutional change led to a boom in

household debt and the real economy followed by a more severe economic downturn.

    An alternative measure of shifts in credit supply are credit standards as reported by loan officers

at banks (e.g., Favilukis et al. (2012)). In the left panel of Figure 5, we present evidence from the

European Central Bank on credit standards on loans for house purchase from 2003 to 2007 across

the Euro area.6 The vertical axis represents the net percentage of loan officers reporting a tightening

of credit standards on loans for house purchase. As it shows, the credit expansion period of 2003

to 2007 was associated with a substantial loosening of credit standards by loan officers on house

purchase loans, especially in late 2004 and 2005.

United States prior to Great Recession

    The rapid increase in household debt in the United States from 2000 to 2007 has been studied

extensively, and the culmination of the evidence on interest rates also points to an expansion in

credit supply as the key factor. For example, risk spreads on mortgage credit fell sharply from

2000 to 2005 (e.g., Chomsisengphet and Pennington-Cross (2007); Demyanyk and Van Hemert

(2011)). Justiniano et al. (2017) point to a “mortgage rate conundrum” in the summer of 2003

when mortgage credit spreads relative to U.S. Treasuries fell 80 basis points, and then continued

to fall through 2005.

    Evidence on credit standards in the United States points the same direction. The middle panel

of Figure 5 shows the net percentage of senior loan officers reporting tighter credit standards on
   6
     The exact question is: “Over the past three months, how have your bank’s credit standards as applied to the
approval of loans to households changed?” The data series begins in 2003.


                                                       8
mortgages from the Federal Reserve Board Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.7 The loosening

of credit standards on mortgages in the United States from 2003 to 2005 is remarkably similar to

the pattern shown in Europe. The right panel provides additional evidence that credit supply as

opposed to credit demand was the driving force behind the rise in household debt. As it shows,

the net percentage of loan officers reporting stronger demand for mortgages actually fell from 2003

to 2005.

    The shift in credit supply can also be seen in the dramatic changes in mortgage markets during

the late 1990s and early 2000s. Levitin and Wachter (2012) conduct a detailed analysis of the rise of

the private label securitization (PLS) market. While securitization was certainly not new, Levitin

and Wachter (2012) argue that the nature of PLS was fundamentally different than previous forms

of securitization. The PLS market increased from about 20% of all mortgage-backed securities

issued by dollar volume to over 50% in 2004 and 2005.

    An extensive body of research shows how the rise of the PLS market, and subprime mortgages

in particular, represented a positive credit supply shock to marginal borrowers who were previously

denied credit (e.g., Mayer (2011); Mian and Sufi (2009); Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2011)).

Scholars have carefully documented how subprime mortgages reduced the incentives of financial

intermediaries to carefully screen borrowers, thereby helping to explain why default rates on these

mortgages were so high (Keys et al. (2010)). Fraud was rampant in the PLS market during the

height of the mortgage credit boom (Piskorski et al. (2015); Griffin and Maturana (2016b); Mian

and Sufi (2017a)), and such fraudulent activity likely helped fuel house price growth in some areas

of the country (Griffin and Maturana (2016a)).

    This is not to say that the subprime mortgage market alone can explain the sharp rise in

household debt in the United States from 2000 to 2007. Borrowing by existing homeowners was

the most important driver of aggregate household debt, and such borrowing occurred even among

higher credit score borrowers (e.g., Mian and Sufi (2011); Mian et al. (2017a)). Further, credit

supply expansion was broader than the subprime mortgage market. For example, Anenberg et al.

(2017) use a frontier estimation strategy to show a significant expansion in credit supply from 2001

to 2005 across the credit score distribution.
   7
     We only include the answers to this survey question through the first quarter of 2007. Beginning in the second
quarter of 2007, the survey split questions on credit standards for mortgages into prime and subprime segments. As
a result, there is no consistent series available from before and after the second quarter of 2007.


                                                        9
Banking Deregulation

   Perhaps the cleanest identification of credit supply shocks in recent literature comes from the

evaluation of banking deregulation episodes. Di Maggio and Kermani (2017) focus on the federal

preemption of state laws against predatory lending for national banks in 2004. Eighteen states

in the United States as of January 1, 2004 had anti-predatory lending rules that applied to all

banks doing business in the state. However, on January 7, 2004, the Office of the Comptroller of

the Currency adopted sweeping regulations preempting these state laws from applying to national

banks. Di Maggio and Kermani (2017) show that the states where anti-predatory lending rules were

preempted witnessed a surge in mortgage credit provided by national banks in 2005 and 2006, which

corresponded to a sudden increase in house prices and employment in the non-tradable sector. The

same states then witnessed a larger decline in house prices, mortgage availability, and employment

in the non-tradable sector from 2006 to 2010. As the title of the article puts it, the preemption of

anti-predatory lending laws induced a credit supply-driven boom and bust.

   Mian et al. (2017a) focus on banking deregulation in the United States in the 1980s. They

document an aggregate positive credit supply shock in the United States from 1983 to 1989. Their

state-level empirical strategy relies on the fact that states with a more deregulated banking sector

as of 1983 witnessed a stronger expansion in credit supply from 1983 to 1989. More specifically,

they classify a state as more deregulated as of 1983 if the state was early to remove restrictions on

inter- and intra-state bank branching restrictions (e.g., Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) and Kroszner

and Strahan (2014)).

   Figure 6 replicates some of the patterns from Mian et al. (2017a). States that deregulated their

banking system earlier witnessed a larger rise in bank credit from 1983 to 1989 relative to states

that deregulated their banking system later. This is one measure of the stronger credit supply

shock in early deregulation states (left panel). During the expansion period, the unemployment

rate fell by more (middle panel) and house price growth was significantly stronger (right panel) in

early deregulation states. When the recession hits, early deregulation states see a relative rise in

the unemployment rate and a relative decline in house prices. States with a stronger credit supply

shock from 1983 to 1989 experience a significantly amplified business cycle.

   While these two studies on bank regulation take the aggregate credit cycle as given, they both



                                                 10
show a precise source of variation in bank regulation to generate differential credit supply expansion

across states. They find similar results: stronger credit supply expansion due to a different bank

regulatory environment generates stronger growth in debt in the short-run and a more severe

recession in the medium run.


2.4   Credit supply expansion and house prices

Increases in household debt are often associated with an increase in house prices (Mian et al.

(2017b)). Both quantitative macroeconomic models (e.g., Favilukis et al. (2017), Justiniano et al.

(2015), Landvoigt (2016)) and microeconomic studies (e.g., Mian and Sufi (2009), Adelino et al.

(2014), Landvoigt et al. (2015), and Favara and Imbs (2015)) show that an increase in credit supply

boosts house prices. In addition, the rise in house prices is an important amplification mechanism

for the real economy because households often borrow aggressively against the rising value of their

home (Mian and Sufi (2011)). Further, a positive credit supply shock tends to boost new residential

construction, which is another channel for effects on the real economy (e.g., Mian et al. (2017a)).

   The important role of house prices in credit supply expansions has led to the question of whether

the increase in house prices is the initial shock and the rise in household debt is a response (e.g.,

Laibson and Mollerstrom (2010), Foote et al. (2012), Adelino et al. (2017)). There are no doubt

feedback effects between house prices and credit supply expansions. An initial expansion in credit

supply may lead to a rise in house prices, thereby encouraging lenders to provide even more credit

because they expect house prices to rise further.

   However, our view is that the weight of the empirical evidence suggests that house prices are

more likely to be a response to credit supply expansion rather than a cause. For example, using the

sample of 30 countries over the past 40 years, Mian et al. (2017b) run a bivariate recursive VAR

to examine the dynamic relationship between increases in household debt and house prices. The

impulse response functions show that a shock to household debt leads to a large and immediate

increase in house prices, followed by substantial mean reversion four years after the initial shock. In

contrast, a shock to house price growth leads to a gradual rise in household debt to a permanently

higher level. There are no boom and bust dynamics associated with a shock to house price growth.

   Favilukis et al. (2012) use credit standards data for the 2002 to 2010 period for 11 countries.

They show that changes in credit standards have strong marginal explanatory power for house

                                                  11
price movements. This is true both within the United States, and in a broader panel of European

countries. They conclude based on the evidence that “... a stark shift in bank lending practices

... was at the root of the housing crisis.” Further, as mentioned above, there are several micro-

economic studies that suggest the direction of causality runs from credit supply expansion to house

price growth instead of vice versa. Di Maggio and Kermani (2017) and Mian et al. (2017a) use

variation in banking regulation as an instrument for credit supply expansion, and they both show

a strong response of house prices.8

       While there is a debate in the literature on the exact source of the rise in house prices, there

is consensus on the real effects. The rise in house prices boosts construction activity, retail em-

ployment, and consumption. Many of these real effects help explain the severity of the subsequent

downturn, and we return to these issues in Section 4.


2.5      The importance of behavioral biases

Behavioral biases are a critical component of credit expansions. As mentioned above, in the United

States, López-Salido et al. (2017) show evidence of predictable mean reversion in credit-market

conditions. Low credit spreads predict a widening of credit spreads, and the widening of credit

spreads is closely tied to contraction of economic activity. Further, this phenomenon of reversal is

present in credit markets but not in the stock market. For example, high price to earnings ratios

for stocks predict lower stock returns going forward, but they do not predict real economic activity.

Greenwood and Hanson (2013) use the share of total new firm debt issues by low credit quality

firms as a measure of credit market overheating, and they show this measure predicts lower bond

returns.

       The examination of bank stock prices by Baron and Xiong (2017) also highlights the importance

of behavioral biases. The compile a data set of bank equity prices for 20 developed economies from

1920 to 2012. The change in the bank credit to GDP ratio over the last three years robustly predicts

a crash in bank equity prices within the next one, two, or three years, where a crash is defined to

be a −30% return in any quarter. In addition to the heightened crash risk, the expansion in bank

credit also predicts lower mean returns on bank equity. The ability of credit expansion to predict
   8
    For further discussion of the relative importance of credit supply expansion versus a rise in house prices, please
see Mian and Sufi (2017b).



                                                         12
lower returns is robust to the inclusion of measures of equity valuations such as the price-dividend

ratio. The expansion in credit predicts returns on bank equity beyond standard measures used in

the stock return predictability literature.

    Fahlenbrach et al. (2017) follow a similar methodology to show the same result at the bank

level within the United States. They examine a panel of banks form 1973 to 2014, and they sort

banks into quartiles based on loan growth in the past three years. They find that banks with

the largest loan growth over the past three years have lower stock returns over the next year, two

years, and three years. They also show that analysts over-predict stock returns for banks with

high loan growth in the past. As they write, “the evidence is consistent with banks, analysts, and

investors being overoptimistic about the risk of loans extended during bank-level periods of high

loan growth.”

    A large and rapid increase in the household debt to GDP ratio predicts lower growth in a

country, and yet professional economic forecasters do not take this into account adequately. Mian

et al. (2017b) examine output growth forecasts by the IMF and the OECD, which are available for

almost all of the countries in their sample after 1990 and advanced economies back to 1973. For

a given year t, the rise in the household debt to GDP ratio from t − 4 to t − 1, which is known

to economic forecasters at time t, predicts GDP growth forecasting errors from t to t + 1, from

t to t + 2, and from t to t + 3. The ability to predict forecasting errors is present even in the

pre-2006 sample, and yet economic forecasters still significantly over-forecasted GDP growth after

2007. The rise in household debt from t − 4 to t − 1 can even predict the revisions forecasters make

between t and t + 1 of growth from t + 2 to t + 3. Forecasters play catch up once the economy turns,

even though their forecasts should have predicted lower growth at time t. The ability to predict

forecasting errors is unique to a rise in the household debt to GDP ratio; the rise in the firm debt

to GDP ratio has no predictive power once household debt is taken into account.



3    The Household Demand Channel

Credit supply expansions generate a boom-bust cycle in real economic activity. But what is the

precise channel? An expansion in credit supply could affect the supply side of the economy by

boosting firm investment or employment. Alternatively, it could boost aggregate demand by en-


                                                13
abling households to increase consumption. From the outset, we want to emphasize that this is

an empirical question; there are good theoretical arguments for why credit supply could operate

through the firm or household channel. While there are certainly episodes in history where credit

supply boosted the economy through the firm sector, recent evidence suggests the household de-

mand channel is more prominent. This can be seen in both country-level analysis of long-run time

series data, or in specific episodes.

   Over the past 40 years, the boom-bust business cycle generated by a rise in debt is unique to

household debt; increases in firm debt or government debt do not produce the same pattern (Mian

et al. (2017b)). For example, the increase in the household debt to GDP ratio over the past four

years predicts lower growth over the next four years, but the rise in firm debt or government debt

has no predictive power once the rise in household debt is taken into account.

   Further, periods of rising household debt are associated with a rise in the consumption to GDP

ratio, an increase in imports of consumption goods, and no change in the investment to GDP ratio.

In advanced economies, a rise in household debt generates a consumption boom-bust cycle that

is significantly more severe than the real GDP boom-bust cycle (IMF (2017)). Household debt

appears to be crucial in generating these cycles; for example, a rise in the consumption to GDP

ratio by itself does not predict subsequently lower growth. But a rise in consumption to GDP ratios

concurrent with a large rise in household debt does predict lower growth (Mian et al. (2017b)).

   Household debt also appears to be important in predicting financial crises. Jordà et al. (2016)

use their disaggregated bank credit data set to estimate the relationship between bank credit and

subsequent financial crises in 17 advanced economies since 1870. Since World War II, elevated

mortgage credit to GDP ratios predict financial crises to the same degree as non-mortgage credit

to GDP ratios. Further, in predicting recession severity since World War II, the mortgage credit

to GDP ratio at the beginning of the recession plays an especially important role.

   The prominence of household debt is also found in emerging economies. Bahadir and Gumus

(2016) focus on Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Korea, Mexico, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey; and

they show that household debt to GDP ratios in almost all of these countries have risen substantially

since the early 1990s. In contrast, business credit to GDP ratios have been relatively stable.

They also show significant comovement between household credit and real economic outcomes such

as output, consumption, and investment. Increases in household credit are also associated with

                                                 14
substantial real exchange rate appreciations. In contrast, changes in business credit have weaker

correlations with other real economic outcomes.

   They use these stylized facts to build a model to distinguish whether shocks to household credit

or business credit are driving the real economy. One insight from the model is that household credit

shocks are unique from business credit shocks in their tendency to simultaneously boost the real

exchange rate and increase employment in the non-tradable sector. Mian et al. (2017a) build on this

model to show that a credit expansion to businesses that boosts productivity is inconsistent with

a simultaneous increase in the price of non-tradable goods and employment growth concentrated

in the non-tradable sector.

   Mian et al. (2017a) test these predictions in their evaluation of bank deregulation in the 1980s.

As mentioned above, states with a more deregulated banking system as of 1983 experience a more

amplified business cycle from 1983 to 1992. Mian et al. (2017a) show that the relative increase

in employment in early deregulation states during the expansionary period is concentrated in the

non-tradable and construction sectors. Figure 7 replicates this result. Further, early deregulation

states see no relative increase in employment in the tradable sector, even among small firms where

bank credit is particularly important. The employment patterns are more supportive of credit

supply expansion operating through household demand than an expansion in productive capacity

by businesses.

   The evidence on nominal prices and wages also points to the critical role of household demand.

Mian et al. (2017a) show that early deregulation states experience a rise in consumer prices driven

by the price of non-tradable goods from 1983 to 1989. At the same time, nominal wage growth

is substantially stronger in early deregulation states. Figure 8 replicates these patterns. Stronger

growth in nominal prices in the non-tradable sector and stronger growth in construction and non-

tradable employment are indicative of a boost in household demand.

   Mian et al. (2017a) also show a similar pattern among peripheral European countries during

the credit expansion period of 2002 to 2007. Countries in the eurozone with the largest decline

in real interest rates experienced employment growth from 2002 to 2007 in the non-tradable and

construction sectors of 12 to 14%, while employment in the tradable sector actually fell 7%. Inflation

rates were higher in these peripheral countries during this time period, as was nominal wage growth.

   Kalantzis (2015) uses a sample of 40 countries from 1970 to 2010. The study isolates 47

                                                  15
episodes of large capital inflows; many are associated with well known financial or capital account

liberalizations such as Latin America in the 1970s and 1990s, Nordic countries in the 1980s, and

Asian countries in the 1990s. He finds that large capital inflows predict a shift of resources from the

tradable to non-tradable sector. The size of the non-tradable sector relative to the tradable sector

increases on average by 4% relative to normal times. This pattern is consistent with the view that

credit supply expansions fuel household demand as opposed to firm productivity.



4        Explaining the Severity of the Bust

4.1       Debt and the initial drop in demand

What makes recessions following expansions in household debt so severe? The initial culprit appears

to be a significant drop in household demand. In the Great Recession, for example, Mian and Sufi

(2010) show that household spending fell substantially even before the heart of the financial crisis

in September 2008. A substantial drop in consumption is one of the defining characteristics of the

aftermath of household debt expansions, as shown by the IMF (2017) . Further, conditional on a

recession, the drop in consumption is stronger in areas where household debt rose the most prior

to the recession (e.g., Mian and Sufi (2010), Glick and Lansing (2010), IMF (2012)). Researchers

have used individual level data in a variety of settings to show the same result: individuals taking

on the most debt during the expansion phase of the credit cycle cut spending the most during the

ensuing economic downturn.9

        A key reason for the fall in demand is high household leverage itself. This channel was first

articulated as the debt deflation hypothesis by Irving Fisher, who pointed out that a slowdown

in economic activity would raise the real burden of debt, which in turn would further slow down

the economy through a reduction in aggregate demand. Fisher’s debt deflation cycle could make

recessions much worse in the presence of high household leverage. Isolating this channel is chal-

lenging because other factors that may also interact with economic shocks are often correlated with

household leverage. However, a compelling case in favor of Fisher’s debt deflation hypothesis is

presented by Verner and Gyongyosi (2017) who investigate the consequences of the increase in the
    9
   See Bunn and Rostom (2015) for evidence from the United Kingdom; Andersen et al. (2014) for evidence from
Denmark; and the IMF (2017) for evidence from a broad sample of households in Europe.




                                                    16
real household debt burden in Hungary due to the large and sudden appreciation of the Swiss Franc

in 2008.

   Verner and Gyongyosi (2017) show that some Hungarian households borrowed in Hungarian

forint during the 2000’s while others borrowed in Swiss francs. This choice of borrowing currency

was partly dictated by bank branching networks and is uncorrelated with pre-2008 levels of leverage

or growth in house prices, unemployment, or consumption. The sudden appreciation of the Swiss

franc in 2008 by over thirty percentage points greatly increased the real burden of debt for a

significant fraction of Hungarian households. This sudden rise in the real debt burden generates a

sharp decline in household spending.

   The effect of debt burdens on consumption during an economic downturn can also be seen in

research evaluating a relief in debt payments during the Great Recession in the United States.

Di Maggio et al. (2017) exploit variation in the timing of resets on adjustable rate mortgages to

show that a 50% reduction in mortgage payments boosts spending on autos by 35%. They also

find evidence of MPC heterogeneity: households with low income and low housing wealth see the

strongest consumption response to the decline in mortgage payments.

   Agarwal et al. (2017a) evaluate the Home Affordable Modification Program. Their empirical

stategy exploits regional variation in the intensity of program implementation by intermediaries,

and they show that lower mortgage payments associated with the program increased spending on

durable goods. Agarwal et al. (2017a) examine the Home Affordable Refinancing Program, also

exploiting geographic variation in exposure to the program. They find that borrowers who were

eligible for HARP reduced their mortgage payments per year by $3500, and this reduction spurred

an increase in both non-durable and durable spending. Further, the spending response was stronger

among more indebted borrowers.

   The evidence from the literature using careful identification in microeconomic data sets reveals

an important clue for why the drop in aggregate consumption is so large after debt expansion:

debtors have a higher marginal propensity to consume out of wealth and income shocks than

those without debt. Mian et al. (2013) show this result explicitly: during the 2006 to 2009 period,

households living in zip codes with higher leverage cut back spending on autos by more for the same

decline in house prices. Baker (2018) shows that individuals with higher debt burdens cut spending

by substantially more in response to the same decline in income during the Great Recession in

                                                17
the United States. In our view, the higher MPC among debtors is a crucial feature in explaining

the severity of recessions following household debt expansions. Debtors cut back on spending

dramatically, while those with less leverage may not increase spending sufficiently. We explore this

idea further in the next subsection.


4.2   Frictions leading to a decline in aggregate demand

The fact that leveraged households cut spending dramatically after a debt expansion does not, by

itself, explain the large drop in aggregate consumption nor the decline in growth. For example,

the decline in demand by indebted households could by offset by higher demand from less-indebted

households through lower interest rates. Or net exports could be boosted through exchange rate

depreciation. However, as we discuss in this section, there are a variety of frictions that prevent

such adjustments from offsetting the initial drop in demand.

   One set of frictions is related to rigidities in prices and interest rates. Many countries find

themselves at the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates in the aftermath of large expansions

in household debt. As illustrated by Hall (2011) and Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), an economy

that hits the zero lower bound during the period in which leveraged households cut demand is

plagued with a real interest rate that is “too high.” As a result, less leveraged households do not

boost spending sufficiently to offset the decline in demand coming from leveraged households.

   This friction is aggravated by the fact that consumption of less leveraged households may in

general be less sensitive to credit conditions and interest rates (e.g., Sufi (2015), Agarwal et al.

(2017b)). Households that in normal times have the highest sensitivity of consumption to interest

rates and credit availability find themselves either unwilling or unable to borrow in the midst of

the downturn that follows credit booms.

   Price rigidities in general appear to play an important role. For example, the negative effect of

household debt expansion on subsequent growth is larger in countries with less flexible exchange

rate regimes (Mian et al. (2017b), IMF (2017)). Further, the effect of a change in household debt

on subsequent growth is non-linear: a large decline in household debt does not predict subsequently

stronger growth, but a large increase in household debt predicts subsequently weaker growth (Mian

et al. (2017b)). Both of these results suggest that the inability of prices to fall after a debt expansion

is one reason the recession is severe.

                                                   18
4.3      Labor market frictions

The aggregate decline in demand quickly spills over into the labor market. Downward nominal

wage rigidity is an important reason. For example, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) examine the

nominal labor cost index for peripheral European countries from 2000 to 2011. Nominal labor costs

rise dramatically from 2000 to 2008, but then stay high from 2008 to 2011 as the unemployment

rate jumps from six percent to 14 percent.

       There is also evidence of significant downward wage rigidity at the state level in the aftermath

of the 1980s credit supply expansion in the United States. As mentioned in Section 3, states that

deregulated their banking sector earlier witnessed substantial relative nominal wage growth during

the credit supply expansion from 1982 to 1989. However, when these same states experienced a

relative rise in unemployment from 1989 to 1992, nominal wages adjusted downward only slowly.

Even by 1995, nominal wages remained relatively higher in early deregulation states (Mian et al.

(2017a)). The nominal wage pattern within the United States during the 1980s and early 1990s

mimics the pattern shown by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) among peripheral European countries

from 2000 to 2011.

       County-level analysis within the United States after the Great Recession also shows the impor-

tance of such rigidities. In counties with the largest decline in housing net worth and consumer

demand, job losses in the non-tradable sector (e.g., retail and restaurant jobs) were severe. How-

ever, there was no relative expansion in employment in the tradable sector in these same counties.

At least some of the lack of expansion in tradable employment in these counties appears to be

related to wage rigidity (Mian and Sufi (2014)).10 Verner and Gyongyosi (2017) find similar ev-

idence in Hungary after the depreciation of the local currency in 2008. Areas that experienced

a sudden rise in debt burdens see a sharp decline in employment catering to local demand. But

wages decline only modestly, and there is no increase in employment among firms operating in the

tradable sector.

       More generally, recent research suggests that any shock that leads to a large rise in unemploy-

ment in the short-term may have large and persistent effects on the labor force and large spillovers

onto local economic activity (e.g., Acemoglu et al. (2016); Yagan (2017); Acemoglu and Restrepo
  10
   Beraja et al. (2017) show that wages declined more in states where employment fell by the most during the Great
Recession, and they argue the data are consistent with only a “modest degree of wage stickiness.”



                                                       19
(2017)). The most comprehensive research by Yagan (2017) suggests that long-term consequences

for labor market participation among those laid off in recessions is due to human capital decay and

persistently low labor demand. If a large drop in household demand generates a substantial rise in

unemployment, we should expect the consequences to be large and long-lived.


4.4   A collapse in asset prices

Debt also depresses economic activity during the bust because of forced asset sales such as residential

foreclosures. The negative consequences of foreclosures on house prices and economic activity is

well established in the empirical literature. For example, Mian et al. (2015) use variation across

states in judicial requirements for foreclosures, which they show has a strong effect on foreclosure

propensity. They show that this variation is uncorrelated with the propensity of households to

default on their mortgages, and uncorrelated with a number of other observable variables. They

then show that higher foreclosure propensity in non-judicial foreclosure states is associated with a

decline in house prices, residential investment, and durable goods spending.

   Anenberg and Kung (2014) use an identification strategy based on the precise timing of a listing

of a foreclosed property. They show that nearby sellers lower their prices in the exact week that

the foreclosed property is listed, thereby causing lower house prices for transactions. Gupta (2016)

isolates exogenous variation in foreclosures using shocks to interest rates resulting from details in

adjustable rate mortgage contracts. He finds that a foreclosure leads to further foreclosures and

lower house prices in the surrounding area. Further, a foreclosure leads to difficulty in refinancing

mortgages into lower rates for those living close to the foreclosed property, as banks tend to use the

depressed foreclosure price as a comparison. Guren and McQuade (2015) construct a quantitative

model of the housing market to assess the impact of foreclosures on house prices. They find that

foreclosures during the Great Recession in the United States exacerbated aggregate price declines

by 62% and non-foreclosure price declines by 28%. Verner and Gyongyosi (2017) find similar effects

in Hungary.


4.5   Banking crises

Another reason for the severity of the recessions following an expansion in credit supply is the

presence of a banking crisis. Such a crisis leads to a severe tightening of credit supply which

                                                  20
may affect all households and businesses. This important factor follows more closely the financial

accelerator view of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).

   Evidence from the United States during the Great Recession shows that households living in zip

codes with high housing leverage and a decline in house prices faced a particularly acute contraction

in credit supply. Home equity limits and credit card limits fell significantly more in these zip codes

relative to the rest of the country (Mian et al. (2013)). First-time home buying contracted more

severely for low credit score versus high credit score individuals after the Great Recession even

controlling for standard factors such as age and income, which also suggests a tightening of credit

supply (Bhutta (2015)).

   In addition, the banking crisis in the United States led to a decline in employment and con-

sumption that spread beyond leveraged households. For example, Chodorow-Reich (2014) shows

that firms borrowing from banks that were most exposed to the banking crisis witnessed a larger

decline in employment during the Great Recession. Giroud and Mueller (2017) confirm that em-

ployment losses in the non-tradable sector were particularly large in counties with a large drop

in demand. However, they show that these employment losses were concentrated among firms

with weak balance sheets who were likely most exposed to the adverse credit conditions during the

Great Recession. On the consumption side, Benmelech et al. (2017) show that the collapse in the

asset-backed commercial paper market led to a collapse in the availability of non-bank auto loan

financing. As a result, counties that traditionally relied on non-bank auto loan financing witnessed

a substantial decline in auto purchases.

   A banking crisis disrupts economic activity for a variety of reasons, as pointed out in Bernanke

(1983). However, banking crises should not be viewed independently from the expansion in house-

hold debt that often precedes them. As mentioned above, Jordà et al. (2016) show that a rise

in mortgage credit to GDP ratios predicts banking crises. Further, they show that recessions

associated with high mortgage debt growth and a banking crisis are the most severe.


4.6   Longer-term distortions

Recent research suggests that recessions after large expansions in credit supply are likely severe

and protracted because of distortions in the real economy during the boom. One such distortion is

the large increase in employment in the retail and construction sectors that typically occurs during

                                                 21
credit supply expansions. Charles et al. (2015) show evidence that areas of the United States with

substantial housing booms experienced substantial improvement in labor market opportunities for

young men and women. As a result, these areas witnessed lower college enrollment, especially at

two-year colleges. After the bust, many of these individuals did not return to college, “suggesting

that reduced educational attainment is an enduring effect of the recent housing cycle.”

    Borio et al. (2016) examine across-sector labor reallocation during periods of rapid private

credit growth, and they find that workers systematically move into low productivity growth sectors.

Further, the movement of workers into lower productivity sectors during the credit expansion lowers

productivity growth after the recession, and this is especially prevalent in recessions associated with

financial crises. Gopinath et al. (2016) show how credit supply expansion lowered productivity

growth among Spanish manufacturing firms between 1999 and 2012 by directing funds toward

higher net worth firms that were not necessarily more productive.



5     Theoretical Foundations

What existing models help us to understand the credit-driven household demand channel? In this

section, we first discuss how existing theoretical research models a credit supply expansion, and then

we turn to theoretical models that can explain how credit supply expansion leads to predictable

boom-bust cycles.


5.1   Modeling a credit supply expansion

Much of the existing theoretical research treats credit supply expansion as an exogenous shock.

For example, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) examine the case of a small open economy with a

pegged exchange rate. In one of the exercises in their study, they assume an exogenous decline

in the country interest rate, which then reverses subsequently. In the model of Justiniano et al.

(2015), total lending by savers is limited exogenously. A credit supply expansion in their model is

a relaxation of this lending constraint. This leads to higher levels of household debt, lower interest

rates, and an increase in house prices.

    Favilukis et al. (2017) consider two shocks which together produce a rise in household debt and

a housing boom. One is a financial market liberalization, which consists of a loosening of a loan-


                                                  22
to-value (LTV) constraint on mortgages and lower transactions costs associated with obtaining a

mortgage. The other is an influx of foreign funds into the domestic risk-free bond market. The

authors argue that the combination of both shocks is necessary to generate an increase in household

debt, an increase in house prices, and a steady or declining risk-free rate. Greenwald (2016) models

a credit supply expansion as a simultaneous loosening of a payment-to-income (PTI) constraint

on mortgages and a decline in the real interest rate. He argues that both forces are necessary to

generate the observed patterns in housing markets during the 2000 to 2007 period in the United

States. Garriga et al. (2017) build a model where there are exogenous changes in both LTV ratios

and mortgage interest rates. They conclude that a decline in mortgage interest rates is the more

important quantitative force leading to house price appreciation, but that the interaction of the

two forces can amplify the effect of mortgage rates on home values.

    While a relaxation of LTV or PTI constraints is an important component of debt booms, there

are a few drawbacks in treating these as the main force driving credit supply expansions. As

Justiniano et al. (2015) point out, a relaxation of an LTV constraint by itself actually leads to an

increase in mortgage interest rates which is counter-factual for most episodes. Further, Kiyotaki et

al. (2011) and Kaplan et al. (2017) argue that a relaxation of LTV constraints alone cannot explain

the rise in house prices that is typical of these credit booms. This explains why models that rely

on relaxation of these constraints typically also contain a second force which is necessary to fit the

facts.

    Another important point is that credit supply expansions manifest themselves far beyond a

higher allowed LTV or PTI ratio. We concur with Favilukis et al. (2012) who write: “the behavior

of combined loan-to-value ratios in the boom and bust does not do full justice to several aspects

of increased availability of mortgage credit.” As they point out, the 2000 to 2007 mortgage credit

expansion in the United States was associated with previously rationed borrowers receiving credit,

new mortgage contracts, and reduced asset and income verification by lenders. A narrow focus on

LTV and PTI ratios misses many dimensions of credit supply expansion episodes.


5.2      Rational expectations and credit-driven externalities

What models can help us explain the predictable boom-bust episode generated by an expansion

in credit supply? One class of models relies on credit-driven externalities where households are

                                                 23
rational with common beliefs. There is a temporary positive shock to credit supply that everyone

understands will revert at some time in the future. However, despite rational expectations and the

transient nature of credit expansion, there is “over borrowing” from a macro-prudential perspective

that results in a boom-bust cycle in both credit and the real economy. The key reason for this

outcome is the presence of aggregate demand and pecuniary externalities.

   Consider a small open economy that faces a temporary positive credit supply shock in period t

that reverses at t + 1. Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) model the credit shock as a reduction in the

interest rate that lasts only one period. Following Korinek and Simsek (2016), we model the credit

supply shock by assuming that households become completely unconstrained in their borrowing at

t, but can only borrow up to an exogenous amount φ at t + 1.

   The economy features an underlying friction that makes it susceptible to the t+1 negative credit

supply shock if households borrow too much at time t and are subsequently forced to delever. The

friction could be downward wage rigidity as in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016), a monetary policy

constraint such as the zero lower bound as in Korinek and Simsek (2016) and Eggertsson and

Krugman (2012), or difficulty in reallocating production from consumption (non-tradable sector)

to net exports (tradable sector) as in Huo and Rı́os-Rull (2016). A key result in these models is

that a higher amount of debt carried over from t is harmful for GDP at t + 1 when the negative

expected credit supply shock hits. The negative credit shock forces households to delever by cutting

back on spending which in turn reduces GDP due to the underlying friction. This result can be

summarized by writing output in t + 1 as a function of total debt Dt accumulated at t,


                                       yt+1 = ȳ − f (Dt , Φ)                                    (1)


where ȳ is potential output. The function f (.) is non-linear, zero if debt is below some threshold

D̄, and increases after this point with fD > 0. The non-linearity results from constraints that

only bind in one direction, such as the zero lower bound or downward wage rigidity. The condition

fD > 0 reflects depressed aggregate demand after a tightening of financial conditions due to macro

frictions such as nominal rigidity or a monetary policy constraint. These frictions are captured by

Φ, with fDΦ > 0; more binding frictions, such as fixed versus floating exchange rate regime, will




                                                24
lead to a greater reduction in aggregate demand when financial conditions tighten.11

    What is the intuition for the fall in aggregate demand with higher household leverage (i.e.

fD > 0)? Households with high leverage are forced to cut consumption when financial conditions

tighten; this cut in consumption leads to depressed aggregate demand. The economy tries to

adjust by reducing interest rates to boost local demand and by reducing nominal wages to increase

production of tradable goods catering to external demand. However, a combination of downward

wage rigidity and restricted monetary policy prevents real wages and interest rates from falling

sufficiently. The lack of full adjustment results in increased unemployment and decline in total

output summarized in (1).

    Given that a high level of household debt is costly for the economy at t + 1, will households

prudently choose a safe debt level in period t? To answer this question, let us assume that there

is a measure one of households with each household earning full potential output ȳ in period

t and expecting to earn yt+1 according to (1) next period, i.e., household income next period

depends partly on the total level of debt accumulated by households. There are no borrowing

constraints in period t and with rational expectations everyone is fully aware of the tightening

credit conditions next period. Households choose consumption ct , ct+1 , and debt dt to maximize
                                                                          dt
utility u(ct ) + βu(ct+1 ), subject to budget constraints ȳ = ct −      1+rt   and yt+1 (Dt ) = ct+1 + dt − φ.

The term (dt − φ) reflects the extent to which the economy has to delever next period. Given

identical households, dt = Dt in equilibrium, but each individual takes expected Dt as given when

setting their own choice of dt .

    The private Euler equation for each household can be written as,

                                              u0 (ct )
                                                        = β(1 + rt )                                         (2)
                                             u0 (ct+1 )

    The key point to notice is that households do not take into account the impact of their choice

dt on the economy next year as each household is infinitesimally small relative to the population.

This gives rise to an “aggregate demand externality” which can be seen by comparing the private

Euler equation (2) with the social planner’s Euler equation that internalizes the impact of dt on

output next period,
  11
     A further increase in precautionary savings when financial conditions tighten, as in Guerrieri and Lorenzoni
(2017), make such frictions more binding as well.


                                                       25
                                      u0 (ct )
                                                = β(1 + rt )(1 + fD )                               (3)
                                     u0 (ct+1 )

   Since fD > 0, it follows that the household’s period t consumption in (2) is too high relative

to the constrained-best level of consumption in (3). The aggregate demand externality leads to

over-borrowing and a subsequent recession. Farhi and Werning (2015) show that the aggregate

demand externality exists in a more general setting with complete markets whenever there are

nominal rigidities and monetary policy constraints.

   A second reason for over-borrowing is the presence of pecuniary externalities due to fire sales

as discussed in papers including Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001), Lorenzoni (2008), Bianchi

(2011), Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Dávila (2015). Suppose that

there is an asset, such as a house, that is used as collateral for borrowing, and the t + 1 borrowing

constraint depends on the price of this asset. A lower collateral price will tighten the borrowing

constraint further, pushing the economy further into contraction. The squeeze on the collateral

price in t + 1 is itself a function of how much households borrowed in the preceding period. If

households borrowed too much, they will be forced to delever by fire-selling the collateral which

reduces the price of collateral and hence further tightens the borrowing constraint. In the context

of our example, we can illustrate this asset price feedback with a higher Φ. Given that fDΦ > 0,

the collateral price channel adds to the gap between the household’s and social planner’s Euler

equation.


5.3   Heterogeneous beliefs and behavioral biases

The rational expectations framework with a temporary, self-reverting credit shock is successful in

explaining why an expansion in credit supply leads to a boom-bust cycle. However, an expla-

nation based on rational expectations and externalities has one major problem: it predicts that

households during the credit boom in period t anticipate a slowdown in the economy. As already

shown in section 2.5, this prediction is counterfactual. During credit booms, economic forecasters

systematically over-predict future GDP growth. Further, there is substantial evidence that market

participants fail to see the correction in asset prices that typically occurs in the aftermath of credit


                                                   26
booms.

   For these reasons, the rational expectations model with common beliefs is unlikely to explain

the predictable boom-bust cycles we witness in the data. One direction is to move away from the

assumption of common beliefs. Geanakoplos (2010) builds a theory of endogenous leverage cycles

based on heterogeneous beliefs where households agree to disagree. Households differ in their view

about the economy, with some having more optimistic views relative to others. Greater availabil-

ity of credit in such an environment enables optimists to leverage, buy more of the collateralized

asset, and therefore raise asset prices. A positive credit supply shock results in giving the opti-

mists’ expectations greater weight in market prices. As a result, credit, asset prices, and market

expectations rise collectively.

   However, the economy with heterogeneous beliefs is fragile in the sense that a small negative

shock can lead to a much larger negative swing in credit and asset prices. Even a small negative

shock bankrupts the optimists who are highly leveraged because of their exuberant beliefs. Conse-

quently optimists are forced to dump the asset in the market and the only households with positive

net worth who can buy these assets are the pessimists. Asset prices fall which further reinforces the

original wave of fire sales and credit contraction. This endogenous boom-bust leverage cycle may

interact with frictions in the macroeconomy such as those behind equation (1), thereby generating

a boom-bust cycle in the real economy.

   Another approach is reliance on behavioral biases. Such an approach has the advantage of being

consistent with empirically-observed errors in expectations and being able to endogenously generate

credit cycles. Such behavioral biases have been emphasized at least since Minsky (2008) and

Kindleberger (1978), and they are formally modeled in a number of recent studies. For example, in

Gennaioli et al. (2012), investors neglect tail risks which leads to aggressive lending by the financial

sector via debt contracts. In Landvoigt (2016), the lending boom is instigated when creditors

underestimate the true default risk of mortgages. In Greenwood et al. (2016), exuberant credit

market sentiment boosts lending because lenders mistakenly extrapolate previously low defaults

when granting new loans. Bordalo et al. (2017) provide micro-foundations for such mistakes by

lenders, which they refer to as “diagnostic expectations.”

   These behavioral biases can be viewed as the cause of the reduced form credit supply expansions

in the models discussed above. For example, perhaps lenders begin lending to lower credit quality

                                                  27
borrowers because they mistakenly believe that the probability of default for such borrowers is

lower. Or perhaps mortgage credit spreads fall because lenders become more optimistic about

house price growth, as in Kaplan et al. (2017).

    A further advantage of the behavioral models is that they may be able to generate endogenously

a reversal in credit supply after an expansion driven by behavioral biases. For example, Bordalo et

al. (2017) generate predictable reversals in credit supply given the biased expectations formed by

investors. As they note, “following this period of narrow credit spreads, these spreads predictably

rise on average ... while investment and output decline ...”. While the exact timing of the reversal

is not known, a rise in credit supply driven by lender optimism eventually reverts as lenders become

pessimistic.



6    What Drives Credit Supply Expansion?

Much of the theoretical and empirical work on the credit-driven household demand channel takes

the credit supply expansion as given. But what is the shock that leads to an expansion in credit

supply? We should admit up front that we have now entered the more speculative part of this

essay. The evidence currently available is less conclusive on this question.

    In our view, credit supply expansion is likely due to an initial shock that creates an excess of

savings relative to investment demand in some part of the global financial system, what we call a

financial excess. Such a financial excess is the initial shock, and then behavioral biases, financial

innovation, and malfeasance within the financial sector act as crucial amplification mechanisms.

    Perhaps the most popular version of such a financial excess is the “global savings glut” hypoth-

esis articulated in Bernanke (2005), who focuses on the “metamorphosis of the developing world

from a net user to a net supplier of funds to international capital markets.” In response to financial

crises in the late 1990s and early 2000s, governments in emerging markets began to accumulate

foreign reserves, which in turn led to declining global interest rates, the rise of dollar-denominated

assets, and current account deficits in many advanced economies. Alpert (2013) and Wolf (2014)

both place high importance on the global savings glut as a reason for the boom and bust in economic

activity from 2000 to 2010 in many advanced economies.

    We can look back further in history for another example: the Latin American debt crisis of the


                                                  28
early 1980s. Bernal (1982) focuses on external debt of non-oil developing countries from 1973 to

1982, which increased from $97 billion to $505 billion. He shows that syndicated bank loan interest

spreads over LIBOR on loans to these countries fell from 1.6% to 0.7% during the credit expansion.

This evidence is confirmed in Devlin (1989), who focuses on bank loans to Latin American countries

during the late 1970s. As he writes, “by 1977 not only did loan volume continue to rise but the terms

of lending softened as the situation moved back into a so-called borrowers’ market ... beginning in

1977 spreads came down sharply and maturities were commonly awarded in excess of five years.

The trend toward lower spreads and longer maturities became sharply accentuated in 1978 to 1980.”

   What was the source of this expansion in credit supply? Pettis (2017) points to financial

excesses created by OPEC countries: “in the early 1970s, for example, as a newly assertive OPEC

drove up oil prices and deposited their massive surplus earnings in international banks, these banks

were forced to find borrowers to whom they could recycle these flows. They turned to a group of

middle-income developing countries, including much of Latin America.” Devlin (1989) also points

to the dramatic increase in oil prices in 1973 and 1974 as a source of credit supply expansion. As

he points out, a large fraction of the surplus dollars earned by oil-producing countries entered the

international private banking system. In response, “banks become much more active lenders, and

the scope of their operations expanded enormously.” Similarly, Folkerts-Landau (1985) writes that

“the international payments imbalances generated by the oil price increase of 1973 provided an

unprecedented opportunity for the international credit markets to expand.”

   In both of the examples above, a set of countries experiences an expansion in credit supply

because of financial excesses created in the international financial system. The reasons that these

excesses make it into any given country may be due to the level of financial development, the

regulation of the banking system, or even cultural attitudes toward borrowing. However, examples

of a shock leading to financial excesses in a closed-economy setting are less common.

   One such example proposed by Kumhof et al. (2015) is a rise in income inequality. They are

motivated by the large increases in income inequality that took place prior to both the Great

Depression and Great Recession. In both episodes, there was a simultaneous large increase in debt

to income ratios among lower- and middle-income households. In their model, a rise in income

inequality leads to more funds entering the financial system as high income households have a

preference for wealth accumulation and therefore a high marginal propensity to save. As they put

                                                 29
it, “... top earners ... use a larger share of [their income] to accumulate financial wealth in the form

of loans to bottom earners.” A rise in income equality acts as a credit supply expansion to middle

and lower income households, and the main channel is a “push” factor coming from the financial

sector. The model also predicts a decline in the interest rate on household borrowing, which is

consistent with the empirical evidence.

   Scholars have also pointed to financial liberalization and financial deregulation as a source of

credit supply expansions, especially for smaller open economies. For example, Kindelberger and

Aliber (2005) write that “a particular recent form of displacement that shocks the system has been

financial liberalization or deregulation in Japan, the Scandinavian countries, some of the Asian

countries, Mexico, and Russia. Deregulation has led to monetary expansion, foreign borrowing,

and speculative investment.” Two studies mentioned above exploit variation across the United

States in banking deregulation: Di Maggio and Kermani (2017) and Mian et al. (2017a). Both

show that states that experience more deregulation see a bigger increase in credit supply during

aggregate credit expansion episodes.

   The Latin American debt crisis of the early 1980s was preceded by a round of deregulation that

many scholars point to as a source of the rapid expansion in debt (e.g., Diaz-Alejandro (1985)). As

Ronald McKinnon noted in 1985, “... the case of the Southern Cone in the 1970s and early 1980s is

hardly very pure; in this period virtually all less developed countries over-borrowed, and then got

themselves into a debt crisis. This era was complicated by a recycling from the oil shock on the

one hand, and then what I consider to be a major breakdown in the public regulation of risk-taking

Western banks on the other. The result was gross overlending by banks in the world economy at

large and to the Third World in particular.”

   Scholars focused on the Scandinavian banking crises of the late 1980s and early 1990s come to a

similar conclusion. In his overview of the banking crises in Norway, Finland, and Sweden, Englund

(1999) concludes that “newly deregulated credit markets after 1985 stimulated a competitive process

between financial institutions where expansion was given priority.” Jonung et al. (2008) focus on

the banking crises in Sweden and Finland. As they write, “the boom-bust process starts with a

deregulation of financial markets leading to a rapid inflow of capital to finance domestic investments

and consumption.”

   From the perspective of a given country or state, deregulation of the financial sector may lead

                                                  30
to capital inflows and a credit supply expansion. In this sense, deregulation is the shock that leads

to an expansion in credit supply from the perspective of the country or state. This tells us where

credit lands, but it still leaves open the question of why so much credit is looking for a place to land

in the first place. It is for this reason we give the financial excesses view more importance as the

initial shock starting the expansion process. But the level of regulation or efforts at deregulation

will help determine where credit is directed during credit supply expansions.



7    Directions for Future Research

The credit-driven household demand channel is the idea that credit supply expansions, operating

through household demand, are an important source of business cycles. The Great Recession is the

most prominent example, but this phenomenon is present in many episodes the world has witnessed

over the past 50 years.

    In this article, we have shown evidence supporting the three main pillars of the credit-driven

household demand channel. First, credit supply expansions lead to a boom-bust cycle in household

debt and real economic activity. Second, expansions tend to affect the real economy through a boost

to household demand as opposed to an increase in productive capacity of firms. And third, the

downturn is driven initially by a decline in aggregate demand which is further amplified by nominal

rigidities, constraints on monetary policy, banking sector disruptions, and legacy distortions from

the boom. Perhaps most importantly, financial crises should not be viewed as exogenous shocks

affecting an otherwise stable economy. Instead, they are a product of excesses that take place

before the crash.

    There are a number of open questions requiring more research. Perhaps the most important

open question is the fundamental source of credit supply expansions. What causes lenders to

suddenly increase credit availability? How should we model such a force? Another important

question surrounds the turning point of the cycle. Why do some credit booms end in a crash while

others may not? What is the precise shock that initiates the crisis stage?

    And what about policy implications? Should regulators impose macro-prudential limits on

household debt? Should monetary policy-makers “lean against the wind” during credit supply

expansions? Should the government encourage the use of debt contracts? During the bust, what


                                                  31
is the most effective policy at limiting the damage coming from the collapse in aggregate demand?

We have addressed these questions elsewhere (Mian and Sufi (2015), Mian and Sufi (2017c)), but

definitive answers require more investigation on both the theoretical and empirical fronts.

   Finally, while we have emphasized the business cycle implications of the credit-driven household

demand channel, we believe the analysis presented here is relevant for longer-run growth consid-

erations. Since 1980, advanced economies of the world have experienced four key trends. Most

advanced economies have seen a substantial rise in wealth and income inequality. Borrowing costs

have fallen dramatically, especially on risk-free debt. Household debt to GDP ratios have increased

substantially, and most of bank lending is now done via mortgages (Jordà et al. (2016)). Finally,

the financial sector has grown as a fraction of GDP.

   Are these four patterns linked? Can they help explain why global growth for advanced economies

has been so weak since the onset of the Great Recession in 2007 (e.g., Summers (2014))? One

preliminary idea is that there is a global excess supply of savings coming from both the rise in

income inequality in advanced economies and the tendency of some emerging economies to export

capital to advanced economies. This excess savings leads to growth in the financial sector, a decline

in interest rates, and a rise in household debt burdens of households in advanced economies outside

the very top of the income distribution. The connection to growth is still an open question, and

we look forward to future research addressing it.




                                                 32
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo, “Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets,”
 2017.

  , David Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H Hanson, “Import Competition and the Great
  US Employment Sag of the 2000s,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (1), 141–98.

Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, “Credit supply and house prices:
 Evidence from mortgage market segmentation,” Available at SSRN 1787252, 2014.

  , , and , “Dynamics of Housing Debt in the Recent Boom and Bust,” in “NBER Macroe-
  conomics Annual 2017, volume 32,” University of Chicago Press, 2017.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet,
 Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru, “Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence
 from the Home Affordable Modification Program,” Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (3).

  , Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel, “Do Banks Pass
  Through Credit Expansions to Consumers Who Want To Borrow? Evidence from Credit Cards,”
  forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017.

Alpert, Daniel, The Age of Oversupply: Overcoming the Greatest Challenge to the Global Econ-
 omy, Portfolio, 2013.

Andersen, Asger L., Charlotte Duus, and Thais L. Jensen, “Household Debt and Consump-
 tion During the Financial Crisis: Evidence from Danish Micro Data,” 2014. Working Paper.

Anenberg, Elliot and Edward Kung, “Estimates of the Size and Source of Price Declines Due
 to Nearby Foreclosures,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (8), 2527–51.

  , Aurel Hizmo, Edward Kung, and Raven Molloy, “Measuring Mortgage Credit Avail-
  ability: A Frontier Estimation Approach,” 2017. Working Paper.

Bahadir, Berrak and Inci Gumus, “Credit decomposition and business cycles in emerging
 market economies,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 103, 250–262.

Baker, Scott R, “Debt and the Response to Household Income Shocks: Validation and Application
 of Linked Financial Account Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 2018.

Baron, Matthew and Wei Xiong, “Credit expansion and neglected crash risk,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2017, pp. 713–64.

Benmelech, Efraim, Ralf Meisenzahl, and Rodney Ramcharan, “The Real Effects of Liq-
 uidity During the Financial Crisis: Evidence from Automobiles,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 2017, 132 (1), 317–65.

Beraja, Martin, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra, “Regional Heterogeneity
 and Monetary Policy,” Working Paper 23270, National Bureau of Economic Research August
 2017.

Bernal, Richard, “Transnational Banks, the International Monetary Fund and External Debt of
 Developing Countries,” Social and Economic Studies, 1982, 31 (4), 71–101.


                                             33
Bernanke, Ben, “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
 Depression,” American Economic Review, June 1983, 73 (3), 257–76.

  , “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” March 2005. Speech at the
  Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia.

   and Mark Gertler, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 1989, 79 (1), 14–31.

Bernanke, Ben S, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, “The financial accelerator in a
 quantitative business cycle framework,” Handbook of macroeconomics, 1999, 1, 1341–1393.

Bhutta, Neil, “The ins and outs of mortgage debt during the housing boom and bust,” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 2015, 76, 284–98.

Bianchi, Javier, “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,” American
  Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3400–3426.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, “Diagnostic Expectations and
 Credit Cycles,” Journal of Finance, 2017.

Borio, Claudio, “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?,” Journal of
 Banking & Finance, 2014, 45, 182–198.

  , Enisse Kharroubi, Christian Upper, and Fabrizio Zampolli, “Labour reallocation and
  productivity dynamics: financial causes, real consequences,” 2016. BIS Working Paper.

Bunn, Philip and May Rostom, “Household Debt and Spending in the United Kingdom,” 2015.
 Bank of England Working Paper.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, “International and domestic collateral
 constraints in a model of emerging market crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2001, 48 (3)
 (2), 513–548.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J Notowidigdo, “Housing booms and
 busts, labor market opportunities, and college attendance,” National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search, 2015.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, “The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level
 evidence from the 2008–9 financial crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (1),
 1–59.

Chomsisengphet, Souphala and Anthony Pennington-Cross, “Subprime Refinancing: Eq-
 uity Extraction and Mortgage Termination,” Real Estate Economics, 2007, 35, 233–63.

Dávila, Eduardo, “Dissecting Fire Sales Externalities,” 2015. Working Paper.

Demyanyk, Yuliya and Otto Van Hemert, “Understanding the subprime mortgage crisis,”
 Review of financial Studies, 2011, 24 (6), 1848–1880.

Devlin, Robert, Debt and Crisis in Latina America: The Supply Side of the Story, Princeton
 University Press: Princeton, 1989.



                                              34
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos, “Good-Bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash,” Journal of
 Development Economics, 1985, 19 (1-2), 1–24.

Drehmann, Mathias, Mikael Juselius, and Anton Korinek, “Accounting for debt service:
 the painful legacy of credit booms,” BIS Working Papers No 645 June 2017.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
 Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1469–1513.

Englund, Peter, “The Swedish banking crisis: roots and consequences,” Oxford review of eco-
 nomic policy, 1999, 15 (3), 80–97.

Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, Robert Prilmeier, and René M Stulz, “Why Does Fast Loan Growth
  Predict Poor Performance for Banks?,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming, 2017.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, “A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence
  of Nominal Rigidities,” 2015. Working Paper.

Favara, Giovanni and Jean Imbs, “Credit supply and the price of housing,” The American
  Economic Review, 2015, 105 (3), 958–992.

Favilukis, Jack, David Kohn, Sydney C Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “In-
  ternational capital flows and house prices: Theory and evidence,” in “Housing and the Financial
  Crisis,” University of Chicago Press, 2012, pp. 235–299.

  , Sydney C. Ludvigsson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “The Macroeconomic Effects
  of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General Equilibrium,” The
  Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (1), 140–223.

Folkerts-Landau, David, “The Changing Role of International Bank Lending in Development
  Finance,” IMF Staff Papers, 1985, 32 (2), 317–63.

Foote, Christopher L, Kristopher S Gerardi, and Paul S Willen, “Why did so many people
  make so many ex post bad decisions? The causes of the foreclosure crisis,” Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2012.

Garriga, Carlos, Rodolfo Manuelli, and Adrian Peralta-Alva, “A macroeconomic model of
 price swings in the housing market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Working Paper, 2017.

Geanakoplos, John, “The Leverage Cycle,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 24,
 April 2010, pp. 1–65.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Neglected risks, financial innova-
 tion, and financial fragility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 104 (3), 452–468.

Giroud, Xavier and Holger M. Mueller, “Firm Leverage, Consumer Demand, and Unemploy-
 ment during the Great Recession,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming, 2017.

Glick, Reuven and Kevin J. Lansing, “Global household leverage, house prices, and consump-
 tion,” FRBSF Economic Letter, 2010, (11).

Gopinath, Gita, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina
 Villegas-Sanchez, “Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe,” Working Paper
 21453, National Bureau of Economic Research August 2016.

                                               35
Greenwald, Daniel L, “The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission,” Avail-
 able at SSRN 2735491, 2016.

Greenwood, Robin and Samuel G. Hanson, “Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns,”
 Review of Financial Studies, 2013, 26 (6), 1483–1525.

  , Samuel G Hanson, and Lawrence J Jin, “A Model of Credit Market Sentiment,” 2016.

Griffin, John M. and Gonzalo Maturana, “Did Dubious Mortgage Origination Practices
 Distort House Prices?,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2016, 29, 1671–1708.

   and , “Who Facilitated Misreporting in Securitized Loans?,” The Review of Financial Studies,
  2016, 29, 384–419.

Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, “Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the
 liquidity trap,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (3), 1427–1467.

Gupta, Arpit, “Foreclosure contagion and the neighborhood spillover effects of mortgage de-
 faults,” 2016.

Guren, Adam and Tim McQuade, How do foreclosures exacerbate housing downturns?, Joint
 Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University, 2015.

Hall, Robert E, “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101, 431–469.

Huo, Zhen and Josè-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, “Financial Frictions, Asset Prices, and the Great
 Recession,” 2016. Working Paper.

IMF, “Dealing with Household Debt,” in “World Economic Outlook, April” April 2012.

  , “Household Debt and Financial Stability,” in “Global Financial Stability Report, October”
  October 2017.

Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E Strahan, “The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank branch
  deregulation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, pp. 639–670.

Jonung, Lars, Jaakko Kiander, and Vartia Pentti, “How costly was the crisis of the 1990s?
  A comparative analysis of the deepest crises in Finland and Sweden over the last 130 years,”
  Technical Report 367, European Economy: Economic Papers 2008.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Taylor, “Betting the house,” Journal of
  International Economics, 2015, 96, S2–S18.

  , , and , “The great mortgaging: housing finance, crises and business cycles,” Economic
  Policy, 2016, 31 (85), 107–152.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, “Credit Supply
  and the Housing Boom,” Working Paper 20874, National Bureau of Economic Research January
  2015.

  ,   , and   , “The Mortgage Rate Conundrum,” 2017. Working Paper.

Kalantzis, Yannick, “Financial fragility in small open economies: firm balance sheets and the
 sectoral structure,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (3), 1194–1222.

                                              36
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L Violante, “The Housing Boom and Bust:
 Model Meets Evidence,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Keys, Benjamin J, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, “Did securitization
 lead to lax screening? Evidence from subprime loans,” The Quarterly journal of economics, 2010,
 125 (1), 307–362.

Kindelberger, Charles P and Robert Z Aliber, Manias, panics and crashes: A history of
 financial crises, Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.

Kindleberger, Charles, Manias, Panics and Crashes: A history of financial crises, New York,
 Basic Books, 1978.

King, Mervyn, “Debt deflation: Theory and evidence,” European Economic Review, 1994, 38,
 419–445.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, Alexander Michaelides, and Kalin Nikolov, “Winners and losers in
 housing markets,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2011, 43 (2-3), 255–296.

  and John Moore, “Credit Cycles,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105 (2), 211–248.

Korinek, Anton and Alp Simsek, “Liquidity trap and excessive leverage,” The American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2016, 106 (3), 699–738.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Tyler Muir, “How credit cycles across a financial crisis,” Working
 paper, 2017.

Kroszner, Randall S. and Philip E. Strahan, Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Banking
 Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future, University of Chicago Press,
 2014.

Kumhof, Michael, Romain Ranciere, and Pablo Winant, “Inequality, Leverage, and Crises,”
 American Economic Review, 2015, 105, 1217–1245.

Laibson, David and Johanna Mollerstrom, “Capital flows, consumption booms and asset
  bubbles: A behavioural alternative to the savings glut hypothesis,” The Economic Journal,
  2010, 120 (544), 354–374.

Landvoigt, Tim, “Financial Intermediation, Credit Risk, and Credit Supply during the Housing
  Boom,” Unpublished Paper, UT Austin, McCombs School of Business, 2016.

  , Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider, “The housing market(s) of San Diego,” The
  American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (4), 1371–1407.

Levitin, Adam J. and Susan M. Wachter, “Explaining the Housing Bubble,” 2012. Working
  Paper.

López-Salido, David, Jeremy C Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek, “Credit-market sentiment and
  the business cycle,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, p. qjx014.

Lorenzoni, Guido, “Inefficient Credit Booms,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (3),
  809–833.



                                              37
Maggio, Marco Di, Amir Kermani, Benjamin J. Keys, Tomasz Piskorski, Ramcha-
 ran Rodney, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao, “Interest Rate Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates,
 Household Consumption, and Voluntary Deleveraging,” American Economic Review, forthcom-
 ing, 2017.

   and , “Credit-induced boom and bust,” The Review of Financial Studies, November 2017,
  30 (11), 3711–58.

Martin, Philippe and Thomas Philippon, “Inspecting the Mechanism: Leverage and the
 Great Recession in the Eurozone,” American Economic Review, July 2017, 107 (7), 1904–37.
 Working Paper.

Mayer, Christopher, “Housing Bubbles: A Survey,” Annual Review of Economics, 2011, 3,
 559–77.

Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn, “The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate Income
 Tax Changes in the United States,” American Economic Review, June 2013, 103 (4), 1212–47.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi, “Foreclosures, house prices, and the real
 economy,” The Journal of Finance, 2015, 70 (6), 2587–2634.

   and , “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage
  Default Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), pp. 1449–1496.

   and , “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007-09,” IMF Economic Review, 2010, 58
  (1), 74–117.

   and , “House prices, home equity–based borrowing, and the us household leverage crisis,”
  The American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 2132–2156.

   and , “What Explains the 2007–2009 Drop in Employment?,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6),
  2197–2223.

   and , House of debt: How they (and you) caused the Great Recession, and how we can prevent
  it from happening again, University of Chicago Press, 2015.

   and , “Fraudulent income overstatement on mortgage applications during the credit expansion
  of 2002 to 2005,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (6), 1832–1864.

  , Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Eco-
  nomic Slump,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (4), 1687–1726.

Mian, Atif R, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner, “Credit Supply and Business Cycle Ampli cation:
 Evidence from Banking Deregulation in the 1980s,” 2017.

  , , and , “Household debt and business cycles worldwide,” forthcoming, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2017.

   and , “Household Debt and Defaults from 2000 to 2010: The Credit Supply View,” Evidence
  and Innovation in Housing Law and Policy, 2017.

   and    , “The Macroeconomic Advantages of Softening Debt Contracts,” Harvard Law and
  Policy Review, 2017.


                                             38
Minsky, Hyman P, Stabilizing an unstable economy, Vol. 1, McGraw-Hill New York, 2008.

Pettis, Michael, “Is Peter Navarro Wrong on Trade?,” February 2017.

Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and James Witkin, “Asset quality misrepresentation by
  financial intermediaries: evidence from the RMBS market,” The Journal of Finance, 2015, 70
  (6), 2635–2678.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martı́n Uribe, “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency
  Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
  Equilibrium Approach,” The Journal of Finance, 1992, 47 (4), 1343–1366.

Sufi, Amir, “Out of many, one? Household debt, redistribution and monetary policy during the
  economic slump,” Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture, BIS, 2015.

Summers, Lawrence H, “US economic prospects: Secular stagnation, hysteresis, and the zero
  lower bound,” Business Economics, 2014, 49 (2), 65–73.

Verner, Emil and Gyozo Gyongyosi, “Household Debt Revaluation and the Real Economy:
 Evidence from a Foreign Currency Debt Crisis,” 2017.

Wolf, Martin, The Shifts and the Shocks: What We’ve Learned–and Have Still to Learn–from the
 Financial Crisis, Penguin Books, 2014.

Yagan, Danny, “Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession,” Technical Report, National
 Bureau of Economic Research 2017.




                                            39
                                                                                        Figure 2 Household Credit Cycle and Business Cycle


                                                                    2                                                                                     .5
                 Household debt response to household debt shock




                                                                                                                  GDP response to household debt shock
                                                                   1.5



                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                    1




                                                                    .5
40




                                                                                                                                                         −.5
                                                                    0
                                                                         0   2     4          6      8       10                                                0   2     4          6      8   10
                                                                                 Years after shock                                                                     Years after shock



     Notes: This figure plots the impulse response function of the household debt to lagged GDP ratio (left panel) and log real GDP (right panel) to a shock to the
     household debt to lagged GDP ratio from a vector auto-regression. Please see Mian et al. (2017b) for more details.
                                                               Figure 3 Rise in Household Debt Predicts Lower GDP Growth


                                                    40
                                                                                                              KOR1967
                        Log change GDP, t to t+3                                                        KOR1966      KOR1985
                                                                                                                 KOR1968
                                                                                                            KOR1975
                                                                                                                   KOR1986KOR1984

                                                                                                        KOR1974           KOR1987
                                                                                                                          KOR1981             KOR1983
                                                                                                              KOR1976       KOR1988
                                                                                                                              SGP2003   KOR1982
                                                                                                     TUR2003               KOR1972
                                                                                                                                KOR1989 KOR1993 SGP2004
                                                                                                                                       KOR1970
                                                                                                                   HKG2003KOR1971
                                                                                                                KOR1980
                                                                                                          KOR1973
                                                                                                      TUR2002
                                                                                                                                                       KOR1992
                                                                                                                 TUR1994
                                                                                                                          KOR1998
                                                    20               THA2001
                                                                   THA2002 SGP2008
                                                                                                PRT1986
                                                                                                 TUR2004
                                                                                                                     JPN1970
                                                                                                               HKG2004
                                                                                               SGP2009TUR2001 TUR2009
                                                                                                          KOR1999CZE2004
                                                                                                        IDN2009 SGP2005
                                                                                                       PRT1987
                                                                                                            ITA1967
                                                                                                       PRT1985JPN1987
                                                                                                                SGP2001
                                                                                                                                    SGP2002 KOR1990
                                                                                                                               KOR1969
                                                                                                                               KOR1994
                                                                                                                            ITA1966
                                                                                                                              ITA1965
                                                                                                                           HKG2002
                                                                                                                        CZE2003
                                                                                                                           POL2005
                                                                                                                              IDN2005
                                                                                                                                                       KOR1991

                                                                                                          IDN2008
                                                                                                          TUR1995 IDN2007         POL2004
                                                                                                                            IDN2006
                                                                                                     USA1982   ITA1971 JPN1986   ITA1964
                                                                                 THA2003  HKG2005
                                                                                          ESP1986           USA1975      JPN1968CZE2005
                                                                                                                            USA1964         FIN1977
                                                                      FIN1996
                                                                         SGP2007
                                                                             FIN1995                NOR1982
                                                                                               USA1983      CZE2002
                                                                                                        NOR1983    THA2004 JPN1976    POL2003
                                                                        FIN1997
                                                                           NOR1993
                                                                     NOR1994                 KOR2001   THA2000
                                                                                                   USA1970    JPN1971
                                                                                                          CAN1997
                                                                                                         KOR1977
                                                                                                          AUS1983
                                                                                                    THA2009
                                                                                                          ESP1997 PRT1988
                                                                                                             DEU1988 USA1997             JPN1988
                                                                                                                                   JPN1985                          KOR2004
                                                                             SWE1997         KOR2000
                                                                                              ESP1985
                                                                                             ESP1987
                                                                                               FIN1978
                                                                                                   FIN1994
                                                                                                     TUR1990  HUN2001    GRC2000
                                                                                                                    USA1996
                                                                                                                 POL2006
                                                                                                                       JPN1977
                                                                                                                          USA1965
                                                                                                                      ESP1998     GRC2001
                                                                                                                                  JPN1982
                                                                                                                            JPN1983
                                                                                                                               JPN1975
                                                                                                                          FIN1986     SGP1995
                                                                                                                                     SGP1998         GBR1985
                                                                                                                                               PRT1995                       KOR2003
                                                                           CAN1983
                                                                           NOR1995CAN1982
                                                                                       HKG2009CAN1996  USA1976
                                                                                                   GBR1970
                                                                                                       ESP1996
                                                                                                        ITA1975          AUS1987
                                                                                                                     PRT1984
                                                                                                               ITA1968
                                                                                                                   POL2002
                                                                                                                DEU1987            JPN1984 AUS1996
                                                                                                                                       HKG2001AUS1997
                                                                                                                                             NLD1996  PRT1997
                                                                                                                                                       PRT1996
                                                                                 ITA1977 HUN1999
                                                                                NOR1992          DEU1989   USA1995
                                                                                                        AUS1985   ITA1970
                                                                                                                CAN1998CAN1975
                                                                                                                  MEX2009
                                                                                                                AUS1992
                                                                                                          AUS1984
                                                                                                          AUS1993         HUN2002
                                                                                                                     TUR2005
                                                                                                                                       HUN2003
                                                                                                                                       FIN2004
                                                                                                                                       KOR2005
                                                                                                                                      PRT1994
                                                                                                                                      THA2005
                                                                                                                                   AUS1995
                                                                                                                              JPN1978
                                                                                                                             AUS1986       THA1999
                                                                                                                                     TUR2008         NLD1997
                                                                                                                                                   SGP1997
                                                                                                                                                GRC2002
                                                                                                                                             GBR1984
                                                                                                                                                 SGP1996 GRC2003
                                                                           SWE1996
                                                                             CAN1984
                                                                             FIN1998HUN1997
                                                                                       CAN1985USA1969
                                                                                               GBR1995  MEX2003
                                                                                                       KOR1979
                                                                                                     CAN1986
                                                                                                       ITA1976
                                                                                                      HUN2000
                                                                                                  BEL1987     MEX2004
                                                                                                           NOR1991   JPN1969
                                                                                                                      GRC1999
                                                                                                                       GBR1993
                                                                                                                      AUS1994
                                                                                                                     GRC1998
                                                                                                                        FIN1985
                                                                                                                    FRA1987          GBR1992
                                                                                                                               HKG1994  NLD1995
                                                                                                                                   SWE2003
                                                                                                                                       ESP1999  GBR1986
                                                                                                                                                KOR2009
                                                                                                USA1984
                                                                                           GBR1996
                                                                                      HUN1998           GBR1994
                                                                                                   KOR1978       FIN1993
                                                                                                                   DEU1975
                                                                                                             USA1985
                                                                                                         USA1967    CAN1976
                                                                                                               ESP1984     FIN1987
                                                                                                                            SGP1999
                                                                                                                       FIN2003
                                                                                                                     ESP1988    USA1986
                                                                                                                          FRA1986       JPN1981JPN1974
                                                                                                                                           KOR2002
                                                                                                                                              GBR2002
                                                                                                                                                 ESP2003 AUS2001
                                                                                                                                                             GRC2004
                                                                                                                                                           THA1998
                                                                                                                                                          HKG1998
                                                                                                                                                        ESP2004
                                                                                   USA1971 FRA1997
                                                                                          GBR1997
                                                                                          SWE1998
                                                                                           BEL1986     ESP1995
                                                                                                           DEU1976
                                                                                                      CZE2001
                                                                                                      ITA1985USA1994
                                                                                                       NOR1981      ITA1969
                                                                                                                    POL2001
                                                                                                                 USA1993    NLD1994
                                                                                                                        NOR1984
                                                                                                                      USA1991
                                                                                                                 ITA1986       JPN1979
                                                                                                                             CAN1973
                                                                                                                         KOR1997       SWE2004
                                                                                                                                 CAN1974
                                                                                                                                      JPN1980
                                                                                                                                POL2007          POL2008
                                                                                                                                                   FIN2005
                                                                                                                                             AUS1998      AUS2002
                                                                                                                                                            NLD1998 POL2009
                                                                                                                                                                 AUS2003            AUS2005
                                                                         NOR1996 FIN1999   ITA1978
                                                                                        HUN1996        TUR1992
                                                                                                       TUR1993  ITA1972
                                                                                                              AUT2004
                                                                                                               USA1998
                                                                                                          SGP2006
                                                                                                             CAN1995
                                                                                                             USA1974   ITA1973
                                                                                                                             GBR1983
                                                                                                                        USA1966
                                                                                                                           CAN1999
                                                                                                                       PRT1989
                                                                                                                         ITA1987
                                                                                                                   CAN1977
                                                                                                                     GBR1982
                                                                                                                         FIN1979
                                                                                                                          JPN1972            SWE2009
                                                                                                                                           CHE2004
                                                                                                                                           FIN1976
                                                                                                                                             CAN1992
                                                                                                                                           USA1987
                                                                                                                                       USA2002        KOR2008
                                                                                                                                                  ESP2002
                                                                                                                                                   GBR1991 PRT1998 HKG1999    AUS2004
                                                                               HKG2008CZE1999
                                                                              SWE1993           MEX2002
                                                                                                 FRA1998USA1968
                                                                                                     GBR1998   MEX2005USA1981
                                                                                                                         FRA1985
                                                                                                                      USA1992
                                                                                                                PRT1993
                                                                                                                      FIN1982
                                                                                                                        FIN1981   SWE2002
                                                                                                                                   CAN1978
                                                                                                                                GBR2001    CHE2005
                                                                                                                                          CAN1993    JPN1989
                                                                                                                                               NOR1990
                                                                                                                                                  AUS1999 AUS2000
                                                                                                                                                      USA2003
                                                                                                                                                    ESP2000          NLD2004
                                                                                                                                                                    GBR2004
                                                                                                                                                                          NLD2005
                                                                                   SWE1995BEL1985GBR1971
                                                                                              ITA1984
                                                                                              SWE1986     ESP1994
                                                                                                     CZE2000
                                                                                                           BEL1997
                                                                                                      BEL1996
                                                                                                ITA1983    CAN2003
                                                                                                     FRA1996
                                                                                                        CHE2003
                                                                                                          DEU1977
                                                                                                     SWE1985           FIN1983
                                                                                                                          FIN1984
                                                                                                                      AUT2005GBR2000
                                                                                                                           CAN1994
                                                                                                                           DEU1986
                                                                                                                      FIN2002
                                                                                                                 AUT2003SWE2001                         ESP2001
                                                                                                                                                   DNK2003 GBR2003               AUS2006
                                                                          DEU2009  SWE1994
                                                                                NOR1997
                                                                                      GBR1976  DEU2005USA1977AUS1991
                                                                                                          SWE1984
                                                                                                             SWE1999
                                                                                                             GBR1981 GBR1975
                                                                                                                BEL1988
                                                                                                               FIN2001
                                                                                                              GBR1999    USA2001
                                                                                                                   BEL1998          NOR2003
                                                                                                                                   KOR2007
                                                                                                                                 CAN2004             GBR1987      GRC2005
                                                                                                                                                                      ESP2005
                                                                                                                                                                            NOR1989
                                                                                                     CAN2001
                                                                                                 BEL2003
                                                                                                CAN2002
                                                                                           HUN1995        KOR2006
                                                                                                    TUR1991
                                                                                                     ESP1993
                                                                                                          BEL2004
                                                                                                     NOR2002
                                                                                                  DEU2004           FRA1988
                                                                                                                   THA2007
                                                                                                                    CAN1987
                                                                                                                        SGP2000   AUS2009
                                                                                                                             DEU1983         CAN1991   HUN2004
                                                                                                                                                         NLD2003
                                                                                                                                                      CAN2009         AUS2007
                                                                                                                                                                   USA2004
                                                                                                                                                                  NOR2004
                                                                                   NOR1998      ITA1982
                                                                                                   MEX1998
                                                                                               ITA1997        USA1999
                                                                                                          NOR1999     BEL1994
                                                                                                                           FIN1980
                                                                                                                      AUS1982
                                                                                                                         DEU1974
                                                                                                                        BEL1993
                                                                                                                      AUS1988     ITA1974
                                                                                                                                 ESP1989
                                                                                                                            DEU1985
                                                                                                                                DEU1982
                                                                                                                          POL1999        SWE2005            DNK2004  PRT1999
                                                                                                   ITA1998
                                                                                                 NOR2001
                                                                                                       FRA1999
                                                                                                     FIN2000   BEL1995
                                                                                                               BEL2005
                                                                                                           TUR1999
                                                                                                                ITA1993
                                                                                                            FRA1995      BEL1989
                                                                                                                        FIN1992
                                                                                                                   KOR1996
                                                                                                               FRA2003
                                                                                                                   POL2000
                                                                                                                     CAN2000
                                                                                                                     FRA2004USA2009       DEU1997 DNK1998
                                                                           HKG2007
                                                                        CHE2009   HKG2006 JPN2009DEU1990
                                                                                            MEX2001  DEU2003
                                                                                                 BEL2002      FRA1984
                                                                                                           TUR1996
                                                                                                         JPN1994
                                                                                                             ITA1999
                                                                                                              AUT1999  USA1990
                                                                                                                     NOR1979
                                                                                                                    SWE2000 ITA1988
                                                                                                                        AUT2002
                                                                                                                        NOR1980
                                                                                                                     DEU1978   NOR1985
                                                                                                                         BEL1999
                                                                                                                       SWE1987  DEU1984 DEU1998
                                                                                                                                            DEU1996           AUS2008 NLD1999
                                                                              SWE1992         BEL1984
                                                                                        JPN2004
                                                                                        JPN2003   GBR1972
                                                                                                         AUT2009
                                                                                                    TUR1997 ITA1994
                                                                                                             USA1978
                                                                                                        THA2008
                                                                                                  JPN2002      FRA1983
                                                                                                              FRA2002
                                                                                                             CAN1981
                                                                                                           JPN1993
                                                                                                         TUR2000
                                                                                                          BEL2001        FRA1981
                                                                                                                     FRA1993
                                                                                                               USA2000
                                                                                                                     NOR2009
                                                                                                                             AUS1981
                                                                                                                       FRA1989    JPN1973
                                                                                                                                 USA1989
                                                                                                                                DNK2002
                                                                                                                            USA1980
                                                                                                                      FRA1994   THA2006
                                                                                                                                   PRT1983
                                                                                                                             ITA2003
                                                                                                                                          CAN2005
                                                                                                                                      FIN2009
                                                                                                                                     TUR2007
                                                                                                                               ITA2004
                                                                                                                                             USA1988     NOR2005
                                                                                                                                                          HUN2005
                                                                                                                                                      DNK1999            GBR2005 NOR1988
                                                                   HUN1993
                                                                      HUN1994            USA1972
                                                                                     ITA1979 USA1973
                                                                                          MEX1999   ITA1981
                                                                                              ITA1996  ITA1995
                                                                                                 DEU1993           AUT2001
                                                                                                                       BEL1992
                                                                                                                 NOR2000
                                                                                                             GBR1980
                                                                                                         FRA2001        GBR1974
                                                                                                                           FRA2005
                                                                                                                            ITA1989  DEU1995                   HKG2000
                                                                                                                                                              NLD2002
                                                                                                                                                               PRT2004
                                                                                                                                                              JPN1990
                                                                                      GBR1977
                                                                                           DEU1991   ITA1992 JPN2001
                                                                                                                ESP1992
                                                                                                          FRA2000      DEU1994
                                                                                                                 AUS1990MEX2008KOR1995
                                                                                                                                DEU1981
                                                                                                                               CZE2006
                                                                                                                           HKG1997
                                                                                                                          BEL1991
                                                                                                                       FRA1982
                                                                                                                       FRA1992           DEU1999
                                                                                                                                             SWE2008
                                                                                                                                       CHE2006
                                                                                                                                        FRA2009
                                                                                                                                      BEL2009                       PRT2003
                                                                                                                                                              PRT2005
                                                                                                                                                                DNK2005
                                                                                                                                                                USA2005
                                                                                              DEU1992 AUS1989         BEL2000 FIN1975 DNK2001
                                                                                                                                   CAN1980  GBR2009 CAN2008
                                                                                                                                                         GBR1990
                                                                                                                                                   CZE2009
                                                                                       CHE2008
                                                                                       JPN2005         CHE2007
                                                                                                        JPN1999
                                                                                                  HKG1995JPN1998
                                                                                                           PRT1992
                                                                                                          ITA1991    AUT2000
                                                                                                                          FRA1991
                                                                                                                    PRT1990     JPN1992
                                                                                                                                ITA2002
                                                                                                                                    ITA2005
                                                                                                                                       CAN1979   NOR1986                 NLD2001
                                                                                    FIN1974 ITA1980 JPN2000     JPN1995    ESP1991
                                                                                                                             BEL1990
                                                                                                                         ITA2000
                                                                                                                              ITA2001    ESP1990
                                                                                                                                      SWE1988                           NOR1987
                                                                                                                                                                             NLD2000
                                                                                                                                                                               PRT2000
                                                                                                                                                                           DNK2009
                                                                            DEU2008                                HKG1996
                                                                                                                   MEX2007 FRA1990
                                                                                                                          DEU1979
                                                                                                                       DEU2002  DEU1980      JPN1991
                                                                                                                                                   GBR1988HUN2009
                                                                                                                                                  USA2008
                                                                                                                                             CAN2007
                                                                                                                                             DNK2000                           NLD2006
                                                                                                                                                                                   PRT2001
                                                                                                                              NLD2009 BEL2008
                                                                                                                                  AUT2006                                      PRT2002        IRL2009
                                                     0
                                                                                          MEX2000 ITA1990                 BEL2006
                                                                                                                      AUT2008       NOR2006
                                                                                                                                   DEU2001      CAN1990
                                                                                                                                           DEU2000
                                                                                                                                        CZE2007
41




                                                                                                                 SWE1991 GBR1973
                                                                                                                       USA1979         CAN1988
                                                                                                                                 BEL2007
                                                                                                                                 TUR2006   FRA2008SWE2007 GBR1989              ESP2006
                                                                                   DEU2007               PRT1991MEX2006
                                                                                                                  JPN1997                  CAN2006
                                                                                                                                     ITA2009
                                                                                                                                  NOR2008                                GRC2006
                                                                                                                                                                     NLD2007
                                                                                        GBR1978                        JPN1996    AUT2007
                                                                                                                                       FIN1988
                                                                                                                                 FIN1991           CZE2008
                                                                                                                                                      USA2007  PRT2007
                                                                                                                                                                 PRT2006
                                                                                                                                                            USA2006
                                                                                            DEU2006   GBR1979         NOR2007      FRA2006   CAN1989   NLD2008
                                                                                                                                                           SWE1989
                                                                                            JPN2008                                      FRA2007         ESP2009
                                                                                                                                                            PRT2008
                                                                                                                                                              THA1997
                                                                                          JPN2007             TUR1998                            SWE2006 GBR2006
                                                                                                                                                    PRT2009
                                                                                                                                        GBR2008  FIN2008
                                                                                                                                               ITA2008      FIN2006               DNK2008
                                                                                                                                                                                   ESP2007
                                                                                           JPN2006                                       SWE1990    HUN2008
                                                                                                                                                       GBR2007               ESP2008              IRL2006
                                                                                                                                               ITA2007
                                                                                                                                                 HUN2007 FIN2007        DNK2006 DNK2007
                                                                                                                                          ITA2006                                               IRL2008
                                                                                                                                                          HUN2006  THA1995
                                                                                                                                                   THA1996              GRC2007
                                                                                                                                         FIN1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IRL2007
                                                                                                                                      FIN1990


                                                                                                                                                                          GRC2008


                                                                                                                                                              GRC2009
                                                   −20
                                                         −20      −10     0      10       20      30                                                                                                                  40
                                                                Change Household Debt to GDP, t−4 to t−1

     Notes: This figure plots real GDP growth from year t to t + 3 against the rise in the household debt to GDP ratio from year t − 4 to year t − 1. Please see Mian
     et al. (2017b) for more details.
                                                                                                                                    Figure 4 Eurozone Experiment


                                                           HH Credit Boom                                                                         GDP Boom                                                                          GDP Bust
                                              50                                                                               24               IRL                                                                 2
                                                              IRL
       Change HH Debt to GDP, 2002 to 2007




                                                                                                                                         GRC                                                                                                       BEL




                                                                                                Log change GDP, 2002 to 2007




                                                                                                                                                                                   Log change GDP, 2007 to 2010
                                              40                                                                                                                                                                    0                             DEU
                                                                                                                               20                                                                                                  PRTNLD             AUT
                                                                                                                                          FIN                                                                                                           FRA
                                              30        GRC         ESP                                                                                                                                           −2
                                                        DNK                                                                                           ESP
                                                                                                                               16
                                                                  NLD                                                                                                                                                                ESP
                                                                PRT
                                              20                                                                                                                                                                  −4
                                                        FIN                                                                                                             AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DNK            ITA
                                                                          ITA                                                  12                     NLD         BEL                                                        FIN
                                              10                                      FRA                                                                                                                         −6
                                                                                BEL                                                       DNK                            FRA
                                                                                   AUT
                                                                                                                               8                                  DEU
                                               0                                                                                                                                                                  −8
                                                                                                                                                            ITA                                                              GRC
                                                                                                                                                  PRT
                                             −10                                DEU                                            4                                                                                  −10           IRL
                                                   −3    −2        −1           0           1                                       −3     −2        −1           0            1                                        −3    −2        −1           0        1
                                                        Change Spread, 1996 to 1999                                                       Change Spread, 1996 to 1999                                                        Change Spread, 1996 to 1999
42




     Notes: This figure plots various outcomes agains the change in the sovereign interest spread from 1996 to 1999 in countries that joined the euro currency zone.
     The sovereign interest spread is the interest rate on the 10-year government bond of the given country relative to the interest rate on the 10-year government
     bond of the United States. Please see Mian et al. (2017b) for more details.
                                                                                                                                      Figure 5 Lending Standards


                                                   Loosening standards, Europe                                                             Loosening standards, U.S.                                                         Less demand, U.S.
                                             20
                                                                                                                                 15                                                                             40
       Net reporting tightening standards




                                                                                           Net reporting tightening standards




                                                                                                                                                                               Net reporting stronger demand
                                                                                                                                 10                                                                             20
                                             10

                                                                                                                                  5                                                                              0


                                                                                                                                  0                                                                            −20
                                              0

                                                                                                                                 −5                                                                            −40


                                            −10                                                                                 −10                                                                            −60
                                              2003q1   2004q1   2005q1   2006q1   2007q1                                          2003q1   2004q1   2005q1   2006q1   2007q1                                     2003q1   2004q1   2005q1   2006q1   2007q1
43




     Notes: The left and middle panels of this figure plot lending standards according to loan officers in Europe and the United States, respectively. The right panel
     plots demand strength for mortgages as reported by loan officers in the United States. For more information, see Favilukis et al. (2012).
                                                                Figure 6 U.S. Deregulation Experiment


                            Total Bank Credit                                  Unemployment Rate                                               House Price
           250
                                                                  100                                                       180


                                                                   90                                                       160
           200

                                                                   80
                                                                                                                            140

           150                                                     70
                                                                                                                            120

                                                                   60
           100                                                                                                              100
                                                                   50
              1980   1982    1984   1986   1988   1990   1992        1980   1982   1984      1986   1988   1990   1992          1980   1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992

                                                                 Early Deregulation States           Late Deregulation States
44




     Notes: This figure plots outcomes for states in the United States that deregulated restrictions on inter- and intra-state branching early versus late in the 1970s
     and 1980s. For more information, see Mian et al. (2017a).
                                                       Figure 7 U.S. Deregulation Experiment: Demand


                                            Non−tradable                                                           Construction
                      140                                                                  160



                      130                                                                  140



                      120                                                                  120


                      110
                                                                                           100
45




                      100
                                                                                             80
                         1980     1982     1984     1986     1988     1990     1992            1980     1982     1984     1986     1988     1990     1992

                                                       Early Deregulation States                  Late Deregulation States



     Notes: This figure plots outcomes for states in the United States that deregulated restrictions on inter- and intra-state branching early versus late in the 1970s
     and 1980s. For more information, see Mian et al. (2017a).
                                                     Figure 8 U.S. Deregulation Experiment: CPI/Wages


                                                    CPI                                                                 Wages
                     160
                                                                                           105


                     140

                                                                                           100

                     120


                                                                                             95
                     100
46




                      80                                                                     90
                        1980      1982     1984     1986     1988     1990     1992            1980     1982     1984     1986     1988     1990     1992

                                                       Early Deregulation States                  Late Deregulation States



     Notes: This figure plots outcomes for states in the United States that deregulated restrictions on inter- and intra-state branching early versus late in the 1970s
     and 1980s. For more information, see Mian et al. (2017a).
