                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  EXPLAINING THE DECLINE IN THE U.S. EMPLOYMENT-TO-POPULATION RATIO:
                      A REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE

                                         Katharine G. Abraham
                                          Melissa S. Kearney

                                         Working Paper 24333
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24333


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2018




The paper has benefitted from comments from David Autor, Will Carrington, Steve Durlauf, Alex
Gelber, Jason Furman, Judy Hellerstein, Chinhui Juhn, Gray Kimbrough, David Lindauer, Lawrence
Mishel, Robert Moffitt, Matthew Notowidigdo, David Neumark, Michael Reich, Christopher Smith,
and Aaron Sojourner, as well as five anonymous reviewers. We also received helpful comments from
participants in seminars at the Brookings Institution, the Social Security Administration, the Congressional
Budget Office and the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank. The authors are grateful to Elisa Jacome, Terry
Pack, Colin Wick and George Zuo for excellent research assistance and to Sarah Flood for help with
the IPUMS-CPS data. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Smith Richardson Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Katharine G. Abraham and Melissa S. Kearney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Explaining the Decline in the U.S. Employment-to-Population Ratio: a Review of the Evidence
Katharine G. Abraham and Melissa S. Kearney
NBER Working Paper No. 24333
February 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. J01,J21

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper first documents trends in employment rates and then reviews what is known about the various
factors that have been proposed to explain the decline in the overall employment-to-population ratio
between 1999 and 2018. Population aging has had a large effect on the overall employment rate over
this period, but within-age-group declines in employment among young and prime age adults also
have played a central role. Among the factors whose effects the evidence allows us to quantify, labor
demand factors, in particular increased import competition from China and the penetration of robots
into the labor market, are the most important drivers of observed within-group declines in employment.
Labor supply factors, most notably increased participation in disability insurance programs, have played
a less important but not inconsequential role. Increases in the real value of state minimum wages and
in the share of individuals with prison records also have contributed modestly to the decline in the
aggregate employment rate. In addition to the factors whose effects we roughly quantify, we identify
a set of potentially important factors about which the evidence does not yet allow us to draw clear
conclusions. These include the challenges associated with arranging child care, improvements in leisure
technology, changing social norms, increased use of opioids, the growth in occupational licensing,
and declining labor market fluidity. Our evidence-driven ranking of factors should be useful for guiding
future discussions about the sources of decline in the aggregate employment-to-population ratio and
consequently the likely efficacy of alternative policy approaches to increasing employment rates.


Katharine G. Abraham
Department of Economics and
Joint Program in Survey Methodology
University of Maryland
1218 LeFrak Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kabraham@umd.edu

Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
                          Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 1


    I.      INTRODUCTION

For several decades now, the employment rate among prime-age U.S adults has been falling.
Less-educated males have experienced the largest drop in employment, but the troubling trends
in participation are not limited to this group. Employment rates among women had been rising
since the late 1960s, but beginning about two decades ago stagnated and then fell. Although the
Great Recession exacerbated these worrisome developments, their roots preceded its onset.
Understanding the reasons behind these long-term trends remains a priority for labor economists
and policy makers alike.

In this paper, we review the evidence regarding the role of various potential factors in driving the
structural decline in employment-to-population ratios over the period 1999 to 2018, with an
emphasis on the experiences of prime-age individuals. 1 Our review is guided by two questions.
First, what is the evidence on the causal relationship between a particular factor or set of factors
and employment rates? Second, can changes in these underlying factors explain the trend in
employment? Throughout our discussion of existing evidence, we highlight open questions on
which more research is needed.

Based on our survey of the existing literature, we produce a ranking of the likely contribution of
various factors to the ongoing declines in the employment rate. In instances where the literature
has produced a credible causal estimate of the effect of a particular factor on employment, we
apply that estimated effect to data on actual changes in that factor and thereby produce a
plausible guess as to how much that factor has contributed to the decline in the employment-to-
population ratio from 1999 to 2018. 2 One note of caution concerning these estimates is that the
different factors we discuss are in fact unlikely to be separable. None of the various factors we
will consider operates in isolation and all of the estimates are context specific. For example, if
the outside option of disability insurance benefits had not existed, the number of workers
displaced by trade who dropped out of the labor force likely would have been lower.
Alternatively, if the labor market for low-wage workers had been stronger over the period we
examine, then the elasticity of work with respect to disability insurance benefits might well have
been smaller. This important caveat notwithstanding, our evidence-driven ranking of factors and
the relative magnitudes assigned to them should be useful for guiding discussions about the main


1
  Some papers on trends in workforce attachment focus on the labor force participation rate rather than the
employment-to-population ratio as the outcome of interest (e.g., Juhn and Potter 2006). Although the two
measures behave differently and convey different information at a cyclical frequency, over the longer run,
they generally have moved together.
2
  This approach is very different from that the approach taken by some other recent papers that have used
a cohort-based modeling approach to explaining changing labor force participation over time (see, for
example, Aaronson, Davis and Hu 2012 and Aaronson et al 2014). Cohort models have considerable
appeal for analyses undertaken in the context of developing macroeconomic or budget forecasts, but they
are less well suited to drawing conclusions about the relative importance of the various labor demand,
labor supply and institutional explanations that have been suggested for falling participation.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 2

drivers of the reduction in the aggregate employment-to-population ratio and consequently the
likely efficacy of alternative policy approaches to increasing employment rates going forward.


    II.    DESCRIBING THE TRENDS

We begin our discussion with an examination of some basic facts about the trends in the
employment-to-population ratio in the U.S. labor market. Tables 1A, 1B and 1C display simple
tabulations for the overall, male, and female population age 16 and older, showing annual
average employment-to-population ratios and population shares by age and education. The
reported numbers are based on monthly Current Population Survey data for 1999 (the year at the
end of the long 1990s expansion just before the dot-com recession of the early 2000s) and 2018
(nine years into the post-Great-Recession economic recovery). Although the employment rate for
men age 25-54 began to fall as early as 1970, the employment rate for women age 25-54 rose
through the 1990s, as did the overall employment rates for men age 16 plus and women 16 plus.
It is the declines in employment rates starting in the early 2000s that we seek to understand.

Over the period from 1999 to 2018, the overall annual employment-to-population ratio fell from
64.3 percent to 60.4 percent, a decline of 3.8 percentage points. 3 Employment rates fell for both
sexes, though the decline was steeper for men (5.3 percentage points) than for women (2.5
percentage points). As shown in Figure 1, the finding of a decline in the overall employment-to-
population ratio is not specific to our choice of a particular starting year or ending year. Had we
been conducting our examination a few years earlier, however, the cumulative decline requiring
an explanation would have been considerably larger. This is because the overall employment-to-
population ratio dropped sharply during the 2007-2009 recession and, as can be seen in Figure 1,
has subsequently recovered, though not to its pre-recession level.

The marked declines in employment rates among prime age workers that are apparent in Figure 1
have prompted growing discussion and concern. The employment rate for each of the reported
10-year age groups within the 25 to 54 year old age band dropped by about 2 percentage points
between 1999 and 2018. Men age 25 to 34 experienced a substantial decline (4.2 percentage
points), whereas the employment rate for women in that age range was little changed. Among
those age 35 to 44 and those age 45 to 54, men and women experienced similar declines.

Among 16 to 24 year olds, the overall employment rate fell by 8.5 percentage points between
1999 and 2018, from 59.0 percent in 1999 to 50.5 percent in 2018. The employment rate for
young men fell by 10.4 percentage points and that for young women by 6.6 percentage points.
The decline for teenagers and young adults enrolled in school (11.4 percentage points) has been



3
 The discrepancy between the change obtained by subtracting the two reported levels and the reported
change is due to rounding.
                              Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 3

much larger than the decline for those in the same age range who are not enrolled in school (2.1
percentage points).

In contrast to the declines within the prime-age and young groups between 1999 and 2018, there
was an increase in the employment-to-population ratio of 5.4 percentage points for those age 55
to 64, from 57.7 percent to 63.1 percent. This was largely attributable to increasing employment
among women; the corresponding employment rate for men changed much less. The overall
employment rate among those age 65 and older rose even more—from 11.9 percent to 18.9
percent, an increase of 7.0 percentage points—with similar increases recorded for both men and
women.

Despite the rise in employment at older ages, those age 55 to 64 and, especially, those 65 and
older remain much less likely to be employed than those in their prime working years. As shown
in the tables, the share of the population age 55 and older increased substantially between 1999
and 2018. Taken together, these facts imply that population aging has contributed to the
reduction in the overall employment-to-population ratio.

To quantify the contributions of changing within-group employment rates and changing
population shares to the overall decline in the employment-to-population ratio, we perform a
simple decomposition exercise. For any disaggregation into mutually exclusive groups, the
overall change in the employment-to-population ratio can be written as:

   (1) ∆( E / P)t0 ,t=
                     1   ∑s
                          i
                                  i ,t0       ∆ ( E / P)i ,t0 ,t1 + ∑ ( E / P)i , t0 ∆ s i ,t ,t + ∑ ∆ si ,t0 ,t1 ∆ ( E / P)i ,t0 ,t1
                                                                       i
                                                                                             0 1
                                                                                                     i



where E is employment, P is population, s is share of the overall population, i indexes groups,
and t0 and t1 are the start and end of the time period over which the change is measured. This can
be written equivalently as:

         ∆( E / P)t0 ,t1 =∑ si,t0 ∆ ( E / P)i,t0 ,t1 + ∑[( E / P)i,t0 − ( E / P)t0 ] ∆ si ,t ,t
                              i                                            i
                                                                                                                 0 1

   (2)
                              + ∑ ∆ si ,t0 ,t1 ∆ ( E / P)i ,t0 ,t1
                                          i



The first set of terms in equation (2) captures the contribution of within-group employment rate
changes to the change in the overall employment rate; the second set of terms, the contribution
of changes in group population shares; and the third set of terms, the contribution of interactions
between employment rate changes and population share changes.

Table 2A reports the results of this decomposition for the period from 1999 through 2018 using
data disaggregated into 26 age-sex groups for the overall column and 13 age groups for the male
                          Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 4

and female columns. 4 A common narrative regarding the recent decline in the employment-to-
population ratio is that it has been driven by the aging of the population. The numbers in the
second panel of Table 2A imply that, had within-group employment rates remained at their 1999
levels, changes in the distribution of the population across age-sex categories between 1999 and
2016 would indeed have produced a decline in the overall employment-to-population ratio of
roughly the magnitude actually observed.

Because the net change in the overall employment-to-population ratio reflects both negative and
positive influences, however, this does not mean that factors other than population aging have
been unimportant. In fact, as shown by the numbers in the first two rows of Table 2A, the
within-group employment rate declines among young and prime age adults have had a sizable
effect on the overall employment-to-population ratio. Had the distribution of the population
across age-sex groups stayed the same as in 1999, within-group declines in employment rates
among those in the 16 to 54 year age range between 1999 and 2018 would have caused the
overall employment-to-population ratio to fall by 69.4 percent of the net observed overall decline
(or about 2.7 percentage points).

Partially offsetting these large negative effects are two factors that worked to raise the overall
employment rate between 1999 and 2018. First, increases in employment rates among those age
55 and older raised the overall employment rate by 41.5 percent of the net overall decline (about
1.6 percentage points). Second, shifts in population away from groups with falling employment
rates and towards groups with rising employment rates—the interaction effects captured by the
third set of terms in equation (2)—raised the overall employment rate by 26.5 percent of the net
overall decline (about 1.0 percentage point). The effects of rising employment rates among those
age 55 and older are shown in the third and fourth rows of Table 2A; the interaction effects are
shown in the table’s bottom panel.

The text table below summarizes all of these various effects on the overall employment to
population ratio as captured by the Table 2A estimates. Population aging and falling within-
group employment rates among those age 16-54 together are responsible for a 6.5 percentage
point decline in the employment rate. Rising employment rates among adults age 55 and older,
together with the interaction effects attributable to population share increases among groups
whose employment rates have been rising, have partially offset this decline.




4
 Note that the age groups used in the calculations are more disaggregated than the age groups for which
estimates are reported in the table; the numbers reported were derived by aggregating across the more
disaggregated cells used in the calculations.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 5



                                                                Percentage point effect

 Changes in population shares                                   3.8 pp decline
 Employment declines among those age 16-54                      2.7 pp decline
 Employment increases among those age 55 plus                   1.6 pp increase
 Interaction terms                                              1.0 pp increase

      Total                                                     3.8 pp decline

Table 2B reports the results of a decomposition similar to that displayed in Table 2A, but for
groups that are further disaggregated by educational status in addition to age and (if applicable)
sex. Absent other changes, the declines we observe in employment among in-school 16 to 24
year olds would have produced a decline in the overall employment rate equal to 25.8 percent of
the observed net decline (1.0 percentage point); declines in employment among out-of-school 16
to 24 year olds have played a smaller role. Declines in employment among 25 to 54 year olds
who are high school graduates or have some college together would have produced a decline in
the overall employment rate equal to 40.5 percent of the observed net decline (1.5 percentage
points); declines among high school dropouts and college graduates in this age group have been
less important. In other words, changes in employment rates within just three groups—in-school
16 to 24 year olds plus those age 25 to 54 who are high school graduates or have some college—
can account for more than 65 percent of the net overall decline in the employment-to-population
ratio (about 2.5 percentage points). Similar statements can be made about the changes observed
for men and for women.

As in the Table 2A decompositions, increasing employment rates in the disaggregated cells for
adults age 55 and older boost overall employment in the Table 2B decompositions, but the effect
is more modest. At older ages, more educated people have higher employment rates than less
educated people. A substantial portion of the increase in employment among those age 55 and
older shown in Table 2A can be tied to rising education levels at these older ages. When
educational attainment is used to define the calculation cells, as is done in Table 2B, within-
group employment rate changes at older ages have a smaller positive effect on the overall
employment rate.

Changes in the distribution of the population across the groups used in the decomposition
analysis also matter for the overall decline in the employment-to-population ratio in the Table 2B
decomposition, but the effects of composition changes are smaller than in the Table 2A
calculations. This is because the population not only is becoming older, which works to lower
the overall employment rate, but also is becoming more educated, which works to raise the
overall employment rate. Similar to the Table 2A decompositions, the interaction terms in the
Table 2B calculations also work to raise the employment rate, reflecting shifts in the distribution
of employment towards cells in which the employment-to-population ratio has risen.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 6



We again have summarized all of these various effects on the overall employment to population
ratio, this time as captured by the Table 2B estimates, in a text table (see below). Changes in the
composition of the population and falling within-group employment rates among those age 16-
54 together are responsible for a 5.7 percentage point decline in the employment rate. As before,
this has been partially offset by rising employment rates among those age 55 and older together
with the interaction effects attributable to population share increases among groups whose
employment rates have been rising.


                                                                 Percentage point effect

 Changes in population shares                                    2.6 pp decline
 Employment declines among those age 16-54                       3.1 pp decline
    16-24 year olds in school                                       1.0 pp decline
    25-54 year olds with high school or some college                1.5 pp decline
 Employment increases among those age 55 plus                    0.9 pp increase
 Interaction terms                                               1.0 pp increase

      Total                                                      3.8 pp decline

In sum, our examination of the data on changes in the employment-to-population ratio leads to
several conclusions:

   1. In a decomposition by age and sex, decreases in within-age-group employment rates
      among those age 16 to 54 can account for 69.4 percent of the net overall decline in the
      employment-to-population ratio between 1999 and 2018, or approximately a 2.7
      percentage point drop.

   2. Declines in employment among school enrollees account for the majority of the
      contribution of those age 16 to 24 to the overall employment rate decline.

   3. Declines in employment rates for those with a high school degree and some college
      account for the largest shares of the contribution of those age 25 to 54 to the overall
      decline in the employment-to-population ratio. Declines among high school dropouts and
      college graduates in this age range have made more modest contributions.

   4. Increases in employment rates among those age 55 and older have worked to raise
      employment, making the net decline in the aggregate employment-to-population ratio
      smaller than it otherwise would have been.

   5. While our analysis will focus on the role of within-group employment rate changes, the
      changing composition of the population has been an important driver of the overall
                          Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 7

          employment-to-population ratio. Accounting only for changes in the population’s age-
          sex mix may overstate the importance of changes in population composition, however,
          since the population also has become more educated and those with higher educational
          attainment are more likely to be employed.

Our central goal for the remainder of the paper lies with understanding the factors that have been
responsible for the within-group employment rate declines observed for young and prime-age
adults over the 1999 to 2018 period. Although employment rates have been rising for those age
55 and older, some of the same factors that have caused employment at younger ages to fall also
could have dampened the growth in employment among this older population, leading to that
growth being smaller than it otherwise might have been.


   III.      FACTORS BEHIND THE TRENDS

We turn next to a review of available evidence on the factors that might be have contributed to
falling employment rates. These declines could have been driven by shifts in labor demand; by
shifts in labor supply; or by changes in institutional factors or in the severity of labor market
frictions. We consider in turn specific explanations for falling employment rates in each of these
categories.

The obvious potential sources of adverse shifts in labor demand that could have contributed to
falling employment rates are increased exposure to import competition and the development of
labor-saving technology. To the extent that these factors were responsible for inward shifts in the
labor demand curve, we would expect them to have produced reductions in both wages and
employment.

Alternatively, some of the observed decline in employment rates could be the result of inward
shifts in the labor supply curve, resulting from improvements in the options available to non-
workers, increases in the costs of participating in the labor force that deter some people from
seeking employment or changing attitudes towards work. Supply-side explanations for low or
falling U.S. employment rates that postulate increases in the attractiveness of the options
available to non-workers have included growth in the availability and/or generosity of social
insurance programs including disability insurance, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) and publicly provided or subsidized health insurance. Others have argued that
the lack of workplace and childcare support for working parents makes it costly for them to hold
a job, depressing their supply of labor to the market. For young adult and prime age men,
changes in social norms such that not working has become more acceptable also could have
played a role. In addition, increases in the number of immigrants in the workforce could have
contributed to declines in employment among groups of workers for whom immigrants are a
close substitute.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 8

Institutional factors such as increases in the effective minimum wage and increases in the
prevalence of occupational licensing requirements also have been cited as contributors to falling
employment rates. Finally, some have suggested that increasing mismatch between available
jobs and available workers, across both skill type and geographic space, could have played a role
in driving down rates of employment. Much of the remainder of the paper considers the likely
roles of a variety of labor demand, labor supply, institutional and labor market mismatch
explanations for falling employment rates.

An additional possible factor is that, in the years following the Great Recession, employment
rates could have been affected by negative hysteresis. This possibility is explored by Yagan
(2018). He estimates that an area exposed to a one percentage point larger unemployment shock
in 2007-2009 had an employment rate that was 0.3 percentage point lower six years later in
2015. This is an interesting finding, but it is unclear whether it reflects a sustained response to
the initial unemployment shock (what some might term true hysteresis) or the persistence of
whatever factor caused the initial decline in employment. Yagan grapples in his paper with
trying to identify the mechanisms behind his results and concludes that persistently low local
labor demand, combined with mobility frictions that keep local residents of hard-hit areas from
moving to other areas, is a leading candidate. We note the possibility of hysteresis subsequent to
the Great Recession as another contributor to falling employment, but absent good evidence that
would allow us to assess its importance, do not have more to say on the subject.

For each of the potential explanatory factors we consider, our goal is to assess whether the
available evidence supports a causal relationship between it and employment rates and, if so,
whether the factor has changed over the 1999-2018 period in such a way as to have contributed
to falling employment. Some of the same factors also could have been important for
understanding the evolution of employment during earlier periods. Even for prime age men,
whose employment has been falling for decades, however, the factors that mattered from the
1970s through the 1990s could differ from the factors that have mattered subsequently. We have
not attempted an in-depth exploration of the drivers of employment trends in earlier eras, though
doing so might be a useful extension of the present analysis. Instead, we have focused on
identifying the factors that might explain the fall in employment rates since 1999 documented in
the previous section of the paper.


A.    Labor Demand Factors

To the extent that adverse shifts in labor demand have driven declines in employment, we would
expect falling employment rates to have been accompanied by falling wages. Moffitt (2012)
examines the role of wages as a proximate cause of the falling employment rates observed over
the period from 1999 to 2007. He concludes that falling wages can explain much of the decrease
in employment rates observed for men and for both married women and unmarried women
without children, though not the decline in employment rates for unmarried women with
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 9

children, whose wages actually rose over the period he studied. While clearly partial equilibrium
in nature, Moffitt’s findings suggest that shifts in labor demand were likely to have been an
important contributor to the observed declines in the employment rates for many groups over the
period he studied. The outstanding question is what might have caused these adverse shifts in
labor demand, especially for less educated workers.

Two labor demand factors that have received extensive attention in the literature are import
competition and technology. Both are widely agreed to have adversely affected the demand for
moderate- and low-skilled labor – shifting the demand curve for these workers to the left –
though there is considerably less agreement about the magnitude and relative importance of
these effects.

Increased Import Competition from China

One of the major economic questions of recent years has been the extent to which the increase in
imported goods from China has negatively affected American workers, specifically, those
working in the manufacturing sector. U.S. manufacturing employment declined from about 17.3
million in 1999 to about 12.7 million in 2018, a loss of about 4.6 million manufacturing jobs.
Interestingly, Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2016) document that the decline in
manufacturing jobs during the period 2000-2007 was almost entirely offset by increases in
employment in the housing sector that masked the effects of the loss of manufacturing jobs.
Between 2007 and 2011, the housing boom abated, but the decline in manufacturing jobs
continued. Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2016) estimate that roughly 40 percent of the
decline in employment over the period 2007 to 2011 is attributable to losses in manufacturing.
Charles, Hurst, and Schwartz (2018) point out that the spatial concentration of manufacturing
activity is one reason why shocks to manufacturing might have especially large aggregate labor
market effects.

A number of recent papers have linked the decline in manufacturing sector employment to
increased import competition from China. Growth in Chinese imports led to a reduction in
demand for domestic manufacturing workers who might have otherwise produced these goods.
Given the large representation of less-educated prime-age men in the U.S. manufacturing sector,
some of this research was motivated by an interest in understanding the decline in the wages of
less educated men. For the purposes of this review, we focus primarily on the employment
effects documented in the literature.
In an analysis that looks at the period from 1990 through 2007, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013)
find that growth in imports from China led to higher unemployment, lower labor force
participation, and reduced wages in local labor markets that had a larger share of their initial
employment in import-competing manufacturing industries and thus were more exposed to
import competition. An earlier paper by Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006) similarly found that
imports from low-income countries (including China) led to reductions in U.S. employment rates
during the period 1977 to 1997. Autor et al. (2014) build on the work of Autor, Dorn, and
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 10

Hanson (2013) by looking at individual level data. They define exposure to trade as the growth
in U.S. imports from China from 1991 to 2007 that occurred in a worker’s initial industry. Over
the 1992 to 2007 period, individuals who worked in 1991 in manufacturing industries where the
exposure to growth in imports from China was larger experienced lower cumulative earnings,
were more likely to obtain disability benefits, and were more likely to work outside their
narrowly-defined manufacturing industry and outside manufacturing altogether. Earnings losses
were larger for those with low initial wages, low initial tenure, and low attachment to the labor
force.
More recent work by Pierce and Schott (2016) links the large decline in U.S. manufacturing
employment after 2000 to the change in U.S. trade policy that granted Permanent Normal Trade
Relations (PNTR) to China, thereby eliminating potential tariff increases on Chinese imports,
effective in 2001 with China’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO). The fact
motivating their paper is the large decline in U.S. manufacturing employment after 2000,
following decades of relative stability. Using a difference-in-differences strategy, the authors
find that employment fell by more in industries that were more exposed to the change in policy.
The authors capture exposure as the difference between the NTR tariff (applied after WTO
accession) and the non-NTR tariff (potentially applied before WTO accession). In practice,
China was granted the NTR tariff rates annually between 1980 and 2001, so exposure to the
policy change is not about a change in tariff rates per se, but rather about a reduction in the threat
of higher tariffs. 5 These findings imply substantial employment losses owing to the policy
change, but as Pierce and Schott acknowledge, their difference-in-differences identification
strategy precludes an estimate of the effect of the policy change on overall U.S. employment.
This is because the estimated effects are all about relative job losses and there is not an obvious
way to translate their findings into an estimate of overall absolute job losses.
The papers just described are focused primarily on manufacturing and how import competition
has affected the manufacturing sector. Even if the direct effects of increases in global
competition fall primarily on manufacturing, however, there may be broader employment effects
that could either amplify or offset the direct effects. Contraction of U.S. manufacturing in

5
  Drawing on the literature on investment under uncertainty, the authors consider a number of potential
channels through which this policy change could have negatively affected U.S. manufacturing
employment. In brief, they argue, the removal of this uncertainty did three things: (1) it increased the
incentive for U.S. firms to incur the sunk costs associated with shifting operations to China or
establishing a relationship with a Chinese producer; (2) it provided greater incentives for Chinese firms to
invest in entering the U.S. market; and (3) it increased the attractiveness of investments in capital- or
skill-intensive technologies at home that are more consistent with the U.S. comparative advantage. Using
U.S. trade data, they find that PNTR is associated with relative increases in the value of Chinese imports
as well as in the relative number of U.S. importers. Using U.S. microdata, they confirm that PNTR is
associated with a relative increase in the number of pairs of U.S. and Chinese firms in trading agreements
(per mechanism (1)). Using microdata from China, they confirm that PNTR is associated with relatively
more Chinese exports from foreign-owned firms (per mechanism (2)). And using plant-level U.S. data,
the authors document that the associated decline in U.S. manufacturing is heightened by input-output
linkages and shifts toward less labor-intensive production (per mechanism (3)).
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 11

response to exposure to Chinese import competition could lead to a reduction in demand for
intermediate inputs produced in the United States (upstream effects). It also could affect the
industries that purchase manufactured goods (downstream effects). The upstream effects on
suppliers to U.S. manufacturing are unambiguously negative, but the downstream impact on
manufacturing customers will depend on how those firms interact with the imports from China.
Work by Acemoglu et al. (2016) described below makes an attempt to measure broader effects,
but it is harder to identify the causal impact of increased imports from China on aggregate U.S.
employment, as opposed to employment in the specific industries or localities that are directly
affected and, accordingly, we view the aggregate employment estimates more cautiously.

Building on some of the research described above, Acemoglu et al. (2016) quantify how much of
the reduction in manufacturing employment between 1999 and 2011 is attributable to rising
import competition from China and also attempt to trace out that competition’s broader effects.
They find that the surge in import competition from China after the year 2000 was a driving
force behind reductions in U.S. manufacturing employment and that, after accounting for input-
output linkages, it also had a negative effect on overall job growth. As already indicated, this
latter conclusion is necessarily more tentative than the finding of a causal reduction in
manufacturing employment.

The first part of the Acemoglu et al. (2016) paper estimates employment across four-digit
manufacturing industries from 1991 to 2011 as a function of industry exposure to Chinese import
competition. The authors use an IV estimation strategy, instrumenting for industry exposure with
industry exposure to Chinese import competition in eight other high-income countries. 6 Their
results imply that greater Chinese import penetration accounts for approximately 10 percent of
the decline in U.S. manufacturing employment after 1999. The authors then consider
employment losses associated with a contraction of U.S. manufacturing through both upstream
and downstream industry effects. Using data from the 1992 U.S. input-output tables to measure
linkages across industries, the authors confirm empirically negative employment effects on
“upstream” industries and find no discernible employment effects on “downstream” industries.

The second part of the Acemoglu et al. (2016) paper provides a general equilibrium treatment of
potential employment losses coming through reallocation effects (which would offset the losses
captured with their industry exposure analysis) or aggregate demand effects (which would
amplify the losses). They find no empirical support for a reallocation effect. At the commuting
zone (CZ) level, they estimate no discernible effect of import exposure in a CZ on employment
in non-exposed industries. There is, however, evidence of negative aggregate demand effects.
Inclusive of direct industry exposure effects, linked industry exposure effects, and local level
reallocation and aggregate demand effects, the authors estimate that import competition with
China caused a reduction in employment of 2.37 million workers from 1999 to 2011. They

6
  The suitability of this instrument requires that country-specific import demand shocks are uncorrelated
across high-income economies and that U.S. imports from China do not lead to higher levels of exports
from China to other countries, such as through an economy of scale effect.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 12

characterize this as a conservative lower bound estimate, since their local-area-based analysis
does not capture some components of the industry interlinkage effects and national-level
aggregate demand effects. 7

New work underway by Bloom et al. (2019) builds on this literature with an investigation of firm
and job dynamics in response to the China shock, looking at variation across sectors and regions.
This new work offers a more nuanced view of the overall economic impacts of the China shock
on U.S. economic activity. These authors use administrative microdata on U.S. establishments
from the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). They apply the same
estimation strategy as Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013), exploiting regional variation in exposure
to Chinese import competition as instrumented for by Chinese exports to other countries. They
find that increased imports from China had heterogeneous effects across regions and firms.
Manufacturing firms in high human-capital areas, such as the U.S. coastal areas, restructured
their domestic activity toward service work, including to research and marketing functions. This
led to a decrease in manufacturing jobs and an increase in non-manufacturing jobs in these areas.
Manufacturing workers were harmed, but manufacturing firms in these areas were generally fine.
In contrast, manufacturing firms in lower human-capital areas, such as the Midwest, experienced
a loss of manufacturing jobs but did not add jobs in other sectors. This harmed manufacturing
workers and surviving manufacturing firms in these areas. The earlier papers described above
estimate an average employment effect of the China shock and thus do not reveal these
interesting patterns in firm dynamics.

The effects reported by Bloom et al. (2019) give more nuance to the economic dynamics, but do
not contradict the conclusions of earlier work on the employment consequences of growing
imports from China, driven by a reduction in employment and wages for lower-wage workers.
Specifically, Bloom et al. show that the decrease in manufacturing jobs in low human capital
areas was not offset by an increase in non-manufacturing jobs, so that there was a net effect on
employment. Bloom et al. (2019) do find, however, that the impacts of imports from China have
weakened over time. They find sizable net negative employment effects from 2000 to 2007, but
consistent with firm and labor market adaptation, no net effects over the period from 2007 to
2015. For this reason, in trying to calculate the overall effect of increased Chinese imports on
aggregate employment, it seems most appropriate to use the effects estimated by Acemoglu et al.
(2016) but not to extrapolate those effects upwards in line with the subsequent growth in the
volume of Chinese imports.

In addition to the already-noted difficulties of translating a local-area estimate of job losses due
to growth in Chinese imports into an aggregate estimate, it also is important to remember that

7
 There is a potential offsetting effect that could lead to this estimate overstating aggregate job loss.
Lower prices for consumer goods that are subject to import competition could increase the amount that
consumers spend on other domestically-produced goods and services (because of a positive income
effect), thereby raising employment levels in the industries that produce them. A general equilibrium
effect along these lines would not be captured by Acemoglu et al.’s local-area-based empirical analysis.
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 13

the employment effects of interest have been generated within a specific context and in
interaction with other features of the existing economic landscape. If the China shock had
occurred against a backdrop of more robust growth in another sector that employed workers
similar to those displaced from manufacturing, for example, the resulting job losses likely would
have been smaller. Charles et al. (2019) report some evidence that the decline in manufacturing
demand has been associated with increased take-up of disability benefits. They also report that,
compared to earlier periods, workers in recent decades are less likely to move across regions in
response to a local manufacturing shock. These findings suggest that if disability insurance were
harder to access and/or workers had been more mobile, the impact of demand shocks to
manufacturing employment, such as the China import shock, might have translated into less of a
reduction in aggregate employment.

With all of these cautions in mind, we attempt to quantify the contribution of increased import
competition from China to the decline in employment over the 1999 to 2018 period. The
Acemoglu et al (2016) analysis covered the period from 1999 through 2011. If the growth in the
volume of imports from China since 2011 had affected employment in the same way as the
earlier growth, extrapolation of the Acemoglu et al. (2016) estimates would imply that more than
3.10 million workers had been displaced by 2018. Given the Bloom et al. (2019) findings that the
negative employment response was limited to an earlier period, however, this extrapolation does
not seem appropriate. We thus take the 2.37 million jobs number reported by Acemoglu et al.
(2016) and use that as our estimate of jobs lost due to increased imports from China. Adding
these jobs to the 2018 employment count would raise the employment-to-population ratio by
0.92 percentage point. As with all of our estimates of how different factors have affected the
employment to population ratio, these numbers should be interpreted as a rough gauge, not a
precise or definitive count.

Technology

There has been widespread academic and public interest in the question of how technology,
including computerization and robots, has affected and will continue to affect employment. One
can readily find a wide range of viewpoints in the public discourse, ranging from alarmist
predictions of massive unemployment caused by robots to sanguine predictions about net new
job creation. The academic evidence about the role of technology on net employment rates, as
opposed to the impact of technological advances on wages and inequality, is actually somewhat
thin and suggests modest negative employment effects, at least to date.

Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2015) consider the extent to which trade pressures and technological
advancements have worked in tandem, looking at local-level exposure to trade competition and
local-level susceptibility to computerization side by side from 1980 to 2007. Like a number of
the papers described above, they use local area data to estimate the effect of exposure to
employment threats – in this case trade and computerization – on local labor market outcomes.
They estimate employment outcomes at the commuting-zone (CZ) level as a function of CZ
exposure to trade competition from China (measured and instrumented for in the same way as in
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 14

Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013) and CZ exposure to computerization, as measured by industry
specialization in routine-task-intensive production and clerical occupations. The authors
demonstrate that the effects of exposure to competition from trade and technology can be
separately identified because the two are largely uncorrelated at the local level.

The Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2015) findings reveal distinct employment effects of exposure to
trade and technology competition. Trade competition leads to sharp declines in local
manufacturing employment, resulting in net increases in local area unemployment and non-
employment. Furthermore, the associated employment losses are much larger for non-college
educated workers. During the period from 1980 to 2007, a $1,000 increase in per-worker import
exposure is estimated to have reduced the employment rate by 0.53 percentage point among
college-educated workers and by 1.21 percentage points among non-college workers.

In contrast, CZ exposure to routine task specialization is associated with no overall change in
employment rates. A more detailed look at employment effects by gender reveals that, although
the data do not show a statistically significant negative effect of commuting-zone exposure to
routine task replacement on the aggregate employment rate, there is a significant negative effect
on the employment rate of women. Moving from a commuting zone at the 25th to the 75th
percentile of exposure to routine tasks, the more exposed commuting zone would see a relative
decline in the female employment-to-population ratio of 1.8 percentage points per decade.

As outlined by Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2015), results from a task-based analysis help to
explain the divergent aggregate employment effects found for trade versus technology exposure.
The task-based analysis reveals that exposure to trade competition has negative effects across all
occupations. In contrast, exposure to competition from computing technology affects only
routine-task-intensive occupations, and employment losses in those occupations tend to be offset
by employment gains in abstract and manual-task-intensive occupations.

In a more recent paper, Acemoglou and Restrepo (2017) attempt to quantify the impact of
industrial robots on U.S. employment and wages between 1990 and 2007. Industrial robots are
defined as being “automatically controlled, reprogrammable, and multipurpose.” They are fully
autonomous machines that do not need a human operator (the way a coffee machine does, for
example) and they can be programmed to perform several manual tasks (unlike an elevator, for
example). Note that industrial robots constitute a different technological threat to employment
than computerization, which is the focus of the Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2015) paper described
immediately above.

Previous research on the employment effects of automation typically has emphasized the
potential for automation to replace jobs. For example, a widely-cited paper by Frey and Osborne
(2013) estimates that over the coming decades, 47 percent of U.S. workers are at risk of having
their jobs automated. Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2011) argue that these sorts of numbers wildly
overstate the likely actual impact of automation on employment. They believe that automation
will have important effects on the kinds of work that people do in the future, but find it
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 15

implausible that the long-run effects of automation will be to leave a large fraction of the
population without work. Taking a more empirical perspective, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017)
point to two specific factors that will affect the equilibrium impact of automation on aggregate
employment rates. First, the relative costs of automation versus labor will determine the extent to
which firms choose to automate. Second, the equilibrium labor market impacts of automation
will depend on adjustments in other sectors. Their empirical analysis moves beyond the existing
research to provide an estimate of the net effect of industrial robots on U.S. employment.

Acemoglu and Restrepo’s (2017) empirical analysis is motivated by a conceptual task-based
model in which robots and workers compete in the performance of a range of tasks, the share of
tasks performed by robots varies across industries and there is trade between labor markets
specializing in different industries. The simple model developed in the paper reveals that a
greater penetration of robots into an economy affects wages and employment negatively through
a displacement effect, but also positively through a productivity effect. The authors demonstrate
that, in this class of models, the local labor market effects of robots can be estimated by
regressing the local area change in employment and wages on the exposure to robots in the local
labor market. Local labor market exposure to robots is measured for this purpose by the sum
over industries of the fraction of workers in that local labor market in an industry times the
national penetration of robots into the industry.

The local labor market approach taken in this paper is similar to the approach taken in the
previously described trade and technology papers by Autor and/or Acemoglu and their
coauthors. The data on robot penetration come from the International Federation of Robotics
(IFR), which provides counts of the stock of robots by industry, country, and year for 50
countries starting in 1993. The data show that, between 1993 and 2007, the stock of robots in the
United State and Western Europe increased fourfold, amounting to one new industrial robot for
every thousand workers in the United States and 1.6 new industrial robots for every thousand
workers in Western Europe. The authors use data from the 1970 and 1990 U.S. Censuses to
calculate baseline industry employment shares for 722 CZs. Labor market outcomes are
constructed from the 1970, 1990, and 2000 Censuses and the 2007 American Community
Survey.

The critical source of identifying variation underlying the empirical analysis is the variation
across CZs in the baseline distribution of employment across industries, which makes a local
area more or less exposed to robots given the uneven adoption of robots across industries in
subsequent decades. For the resulting estimate to reflect a causal relationship between robot
exposure and labor market outcomes, it must be the case that the adoption of robots in a given
industry is not related to other economic trends in CZs that specialize in that industry. To
surmount this threat to causal identification, the authors implement an instrumental variables
approach using the industry-level adoption of robots in a set of advanced countries to instrument
for the national-level industry adoption of robots in the United States. In addition, the regression
analyses control for a host of potential CZ-level confounding factors, including trade exposure,
the decline of routine jobs, offshoring, the adoption of other types of information technology
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 16

capital, and the total capital stock. Interestingly, exposure to robots at the CZ level is not highly
correlated with these other variables.

The analysis yields the following key estimate: Assuming no trade between CZs, each additional
robot per thousand workers between 1993 and 2007 reduced the employment-to-population ratio
in a commuting zone by 0.37 percentage point, as compared to a CZ with no exposure to robots.
The authors view this estimate as “large but not implausible,” noting that it implies a reduction
of 6.2 workers for each new robot, which they say is consistent with case study evidence on the
relative productivity of robots. The authors also offer an adjusted estimate that allows for trade
between CZs. To make this adjustment, the authors have to rely on assumptions about the
elasticity of substitution between goods produced in different CZs, on the amount of cost savings
from robots, and on the elasticity of labor supply. Based on parameter values supported by
existing studies, the adjusted estimates are somewhat less negative, though still sizable, implying
that one more robot per thousand workers reduces the aggregate employment-to-population ratio
by about 0.34 percentage point, or 5.6 workers per new robot. The authors caution that this is a
rough gauge, and note that under more conservative assumptions, the reduction in employment
could be as low as 0.18 percentage point.

Based on the data used by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017), in 1999, there were 79,959 robots
installed in the United States. By 2018, the estimated stock had grown to 279,683 robots, an
increase of 199,724 robots. 8 Acemoglu and Restrepo’s preferred estimate is that each robot
displaces about 5.6 workers. We use this number to generate an approximate estimate of the
decline in employment attributable to the growing penetration of industrial robots between 1999
and 2018. In so doing, we emphasize the tentative nature of this estimate, owing among other
things to the difficulty of identifying causal impacts on aggregate employment (as opposed to
highly localized employment) and to the fact that the data on robot adoption is relatively crude.
With the appropriate caveats in mind, our estimate is that robot adoption between 1999 and 2018
reduced employment by about 1.1 million jobs. Adding this estimated count of robot-displaced
workers to the 2018 workforce would raise the employment-to-population ratio by 0.43
percentage points.


B.    Labor Supply Factors

Another important class of explanations for the decline in the employment-to-population ratio
posits inward shifts in the labor supply curve, resulting from improvements in the options
available to non-workers, increases in the costs of entering the labor force that lead fewer people
to seek employment or changes in preferences. One potential explanation involving

8
  The authors thank Pascual Restrepo for sharing the robot data used in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017)
with us. We updated their data series (which runs through 2014) to 2018 using information from more
recent IFR reports. The IFR collects data on new robot installations and then calculates the stock of robots
by taking last year's stock plus new installations minus installations from 12 years ago (assuming that
robots remain in service for 12 years).
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 17

improvements to the options afforded to non-workers is increases in the availability and/or
generosity of safety net assistance, be it through federal disability insurance, or expansions in the
SNAP food assistance program, or the expansion of publicly provided or subsidized health
insurance. Eberstadt (2016), for instance, cites data from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation indicating that in 2013, 63.0 percent of households with non-working prime-age
men received means-tested assistance from programs including Medicaid, Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF), SNAP, or the Women, Infants and Children (WIC) food assistance
program. He further observes that this reflects a marked jump from 43.6 percent of such
households receiving similar means-tested assistance in 1985.

Lack of support for working parents is another potentially important supply-side influence on
employment rates. While insufficient support may deter some parents from entering the labor
force, the difficulty of combining work with caring for children would need to have risen over
time in order for this to explain falling employment rates. Other explanations focus on changes
in the attractiveness of leisure activities or changes in social norms that may have affected
preferences for work, together with the possibility that increasing rates of opioid addiction have
made substantial numbers of people less able to work. A final supply-side story sometimes told
about falling employment rates is that immigrants have crowded out certain groups of domestic
workers, though the available evidence again seems inconsistent with this as an explanation for
the overall decline in employment rates.

Federal Disability Insurance Programs

Disability insurance benefits provide an alternative source of income for some qualifying
individuals who might have a high disutility of work (or an especially high utility of leisure) and
are on the margin of working or collecting a disability insurance benefit. The rise in Social
Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) receipt among working-age adults in recent decades
coincides with a period of falling employment rates, naturally raising the question of the role that
SSDI has played in driving down employment rates. 9 In fact, the SSDI caseload peaked in 2014;
SSDI applications have been steadily declining since 2011, which observers attribute at least in
part to the continuing cyclical recovery. Two other large federal disability insurance programs,
the federal Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Program and the Veterans Affairs Disability
Compensation (DC) program, also have grown during the long time period we consider.

Eberstadt (2016) emphasizes the increased reliance on disability payments from these programs
among working age men (the focus of his book) in recent decades. He reports tabulations from
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) showing that in 2013, 6.3 percent of
men age 25-54 reported receiving any disability benefits, as compared to 4.2 percent in 1985.
9
 Looking at an earlier period, Autor and Duggan (2003) document that, from the 1970s through the
1990s, the combination of declining labor market demand for less educated workers, increased SSDI
benefit replacement rates and expanded SSDI program eligibility criteria led to falling employment rates
and SSDI caseload growth.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 18

Among men age 25-54 not in the labor force, those shares were 56.5 percent and 38.3 percent. In
other words, between 1985 and 2013, there was an 18 percentage point increase in disability
benefit receipt among prime-age men out of the labor force. 10 Given that there is a tendency for
household survey respondents to under-report participation in welfare and social insurance
programs, all of these numbers may be underestimates.

The SSDI program is administered by the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA). Program
eligibility is restricted to individuals who have worked in a job covered by Social Security in at
least five of the ten most recent years. To be eligible, an individual also must have a medically
determinable physical or mental impairment that is expected to result in death or to last at least a
year that limits his or her ability to engage in “substantial gainful activity” (i.e., more than a very
modest amount of labor market work).

The share of working-age adults receiving SSDI benefits rose from 2.2 percent in the late 1970s
to 3.6 percent in the years preceding the 2007-2009 recession to 4.6 percent in 2013 (Liebman
2015). In addition to the increase in the size of the caseload, there has been a change in the
composition of SSDI recipients over the past few decades, with more recipients now qualifying
for benefits with hard-to-verify impairments and with the program playing an increasingly
important role in providing income for less educated workers negatively impacted by economic
factors (Liebman 2015). Disaggregating by age group, calculations based on the numbers of
SSDI recipients released by SSA show that the share of the population on the program increased
between 1999 and 2018 for every five-year age category from age 40-44 through age 55-59, as
well as for those between age 60 and the applicable full retirement age. For example, the share of
individuals age 40-44 on the SSDI program increased from 2.5 percent to 2.6 percent over the
1999 to 2018 period; the share for those age 50 to 54 increased from 5.1 percent to 5.9 percent;
and the share for those from age 60 to the full retirement age increased from 8.9 percent to 11.7
percent.

Rigorous research provides robust evidence that the availability of benefits under the SSDI
program has caused individuals who are at the margin of SSDI eligibility to work at lower rates
than would have been the case had those benefits not been available. The seminal work of Bound
(1989) used denied applicants to approximate the counterfactual employment rates of accepted
applicants. Using an OLS approach, he estimates that receipt of a SSDI award reduced the
likelihood of work by 34 percentage points. Von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011) apply
Bound’s approach to observational data from the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s and find a larger
impact on labor force participation, which they attribute to more recent cohorts of SSDI
beneficiaries having higher work potential, owing to the fact that they are younger and more
likely to have nonterminal qualifying conditions.



10
  Krueger (2017) reports that among 571 not-in-the-labor-force men age 25-54 who participated in an
online survey, 50.5 percent reported receiving some type of disability payment.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 19

Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013) use administrative data to match SSDI applications to
disability examiners and exploit variation in examiners’ allowance rates as an instrument for
benefit receipt. This is an advance over previous papers that exploited differences in award
receipt without an exogenous determining factor. The IV approach of Maestas, Mullen and
Strand (2013) yields the finding that, among the nearly 23 percent of applicants on the margin of
program entry (meaning that their award determination depends on the leniency of the
examiner), subsequent employment would have been 28 percentage points higher two years after
initial award had they not received benefits. 11 The estimated effect ranges from no effect for
applicants with the most severe conditions to 50 percentage points for applicants with the least
severe conditions.

A similar finding emerges from the work of French and Song (2014), who use variation in the
propensity of administrative law judges (ALJs) in the second stage of the appeals process to
estimate the labor supply effect of SSDI receipt. They find that the employment rate of
applicants granted benefits at this stage would have been 26 percentage points higher three years
after a decision had they not been granted DI benefits. An earlier paper by Chen and van der
Klaauw (2008) applied regression-discontinuity methods to linked SIPP and administrative data
to estimate the impact of SSDI award receipt on subsequent labor supply. They find that the
labor force participation rate of marginal SSDI beneficiaries whose conditions were right around
the cutoff level for qualification would have been about 20 percentage points higher had they
been denied benefits.

The consistent finding that emerges from these papers reporting well-identified estimates is that
a sizable subset of SSDI beneficiaries would have worked in the years immediately following
their initial SSDI application had they not been awarded benefits. 12 Another recent paper using
an entirely different approach finds dis-employment effects of DI benefits of a very similar
magnitude. Gelber, Moore, and Strand (2017) exploit discontinuous changes in the DI benefit
formula and a regression kink design to estimate the effect of payment size on earnings among
beneficiaries. Using administrative data on all new DI beneficiaries from 2001 to 2007, they find
that an increase in DI payments of $100 causes an average decrease in beneficiaries’ earnings of
$22, consistent with a large negative income effect of unearned benefits on labor supply. They
emphasize that the confirmation of a labor-reducing income effect, as opposed to a distortionary
substitution effect, is important to thinking about how access to increased benefits over time
might have led to reduced employment more broadly.

11
   To put this estimated effect into perspective, in terms of unadjusted differences, among applicants who
are allowed benefits either initially or on appeal, four years after the decision, only 10 percent are
working and earning more than $1,000 a year. Among those initially denied who did not appeal, four
years after the decision about 50 percent are working and earning more than $1,000 a year; the rate is
about 35 percent for those denied both initially and after an appeals process.
12
   This notion is also supported by the work of Moore (2015), who studies the experience of SSDI
recipients who were removed from the rolls following the 1996 reform that eliminated drug and alcohol
addiction as a qualifying condition. He finds that approximately 22 percent of terminated beneficiaries
started working at levels above the substantial gainful activity thresholds used by SSA to judge
eligibility.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 20



In terms of an extensive margin response, the Gelber, Moore and Strand (2017) analysis implies
that $1,000 in SSDI benefits corresponds to a 1.29 percentage point reduction in employment.
They use the fact that, on average, SSDI beneficiaries receive combined annual cash and medical
benefits of $20,950 ($13,750 in cash benefits plus $7,200 in medical benefits), to translate the
Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013) and French and Song (2014) estimates into comparable
elasticities. By their calculations, the estimates in those papers imply that $1,000 in SSDI
benefits reduces the probability of employment by 1.22 or 1.11 percentage points respectively. 13

To gauge how much of the reduction in employment-to-population ratios can be explained by
expanded SSDI access during the period under review, we conduct a back-of-the-envelope
calculation using age-specific caseload data from SSA. 14 These data indicate that the SSDI
caseload grew by 3.66 million recipients between 1999 and 2018, from 4.88 million to 8.54
million recipients, with most of the growth in beneficiary counts occurring at older ages. We
would like to know how much of the growth in caseload has occurred as a result of increasing
within-age-group receipt rates, rather than as a result simply of population growth and aging. To
that end, within each age bin for which published data are available, we compare the actual
caseload change to the hypothetical change that would have occurred had the SSDI receipt rate
in that age bin remained constant. 15 Summing over age groups, we estimate that there were 1.32
million more people on SSDI at the end of 2018 than we would have expected had age-group-
specific receipt rates not changed; this represents about 15 percent of the caseload.

To benchmark the effect this growth might have had on the number of people employed, we
apply the age-specific employment elasticities from Table 6 of Maestas, Mullen and Strand
(2013) to the excess caseload within each five-year age bin. This calculation suggests that,
without the growth in SSDI caseloads in excess of the growth expected based simply on
population growth and aging, there would have been 244,742 more workers. 16 Adding those
13
   Gelber, Moore and Strand (2017) also confirm that the earnings reductions they estimate are
statistically no different than the crowd-out estimates of Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2013) and French
and Song (2014). The latter find that SSDI receipt causes annual earnings losses (including both intensive
and extensive margin effects) of $3,781 and $4,059, respectively, corresponding to earnings crowd-out of
18 and 19 cents per dollar of SSDI benefits, respectively.
14
   The SSA caseload data were downloaded from
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2019/.
15
   The age bins are 18-29, 30-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59 and 60 to the full retirement age. Receipt
rates among those 18-29 and 30-39 are very low in both 1999 and 2018, but fell slightly over that period,
meaning that the excess caseload for these age groups is actually negative.
16
   Council of Economic Advisers (2016) reports on a similar back of the envelope calculation of how
much of the reduction in the labor force participation rate among prime-age men between 1967 and 2014
can be explained by increased receipt of SSDI benefits,. They take the estimate from French and Song
(2014) that employment among accepted marginal applicants would have been 26 percentage points
higher had they been denied. The authors apply this estimate to non-working prime-age male SSDI
beneficiaries and find that adding these men to the 2014 workforce would have reduced the 7.5
percentage point decline in labor force participation among prime age men between 1967 and 2014 by
about 0.5 percentage point.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 21

workers to the 2018 workforce would increase the employment-to-population ratio by 0.09
percentage points. 17

We turn next to the federal Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program. The SSI program
provides cash income to low-income elderly individuals, as well as to disabled children and
disabled non-elderly adults with limited earnings histories. 18 The program is administered by the
SSA and eligibility is determined by an identical set of medical eligibility criteria as are used for
SSDI. The number of non-elderly adults receiving SSI benefits rose from 3.69 million in 1999,
representing about 2.1 percent of the non-elderly adult population, to 4.71 million in 2018,
representing 2.3 percent of the non-elderly adult population, down slightly from a few years
earlier. 19 Increases in the number of SSI recipients have been attributed to both demographic and
policy factors (Duggan, Kearney, and Rennane 2016). We are aware of no direct evidence that
allows us to quantify the extent to which the modest increase in program participation between
1999 and 2018 has pulled people who otherwise would have been working out of the workforce.
As the program is structured, SSI recipients are people who did not have a sufficient attachment
to the labor market to qualify for SSDI or, if they did qualify, had very low earnings and thus
very low SSDI benefits. This leads us to believe that any such employment effects cannot be
large, but growth in SSI participation could perhaps have contributed some very small amount to
the decline in employment among the non-elderly. We note that some SSI participants (the so-
called “dual eligibles”) also participate in SSDI, so the estimated effect of SSDI on employment
might include some combined effect with SSI.

A third federal disability insurance program is the Disability Compensation (DC) program
administered by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. This program pays benefits to
individuals with medical conditions resulting from U.S. military service. In contrast to SSDI
benefits, DC benefits are based solely on a determination of the severity of the impairment a
veteran has suffered. Benefits are paid for life and generally are not subject to being reduced if a
veteran is working. After 2001, the DC program experienced rapid growth, due in part to
liberalization of the medical eligibility criteria (Duggan, Rosenheck and Singleton 2010). Coile,
Duggan and Guo (2015) estimate that between 2000 and 2013, the relative labor force
participation rate of veterans (as compared to demographically similar non-veterans) fell by five
percentage points. They note that over this time, the share of veterans receiving DC grew by 9
percentage points, from 9 to 18 percent, after having been generally stable for decades.
Assuming that the increase in DC participation and benefit amounts is entirely responsible for
the decline in relative labor force participation, they tentatively estimate that 55 percent of new
DC recipients would be working in the absence of the program. Autor et al. (2016) also estimate
a sizable, albeit much smaller, causal reduction in labor force participation associated with DC
benefit recipient. These authors exploit the 2001 Agent Orange policy change that expanded DC

17
   This estimate is consistent with the conclusion of Charles, Hurst, and Schwartz (2018) that increased
enrollment in SSDI/SSI could explain at most 15 to 20 percent of the decline in employment during the
2000s.
18
   Duggan, Kearney, and Rennane (2016) provides a thorough review of the SSI program.
19
   Data on the number of SSI recipients by age group are available at
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2019/index.html.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 22

eligibility for Vietnam War veterans who had served “in theater,” but not for Vietnam War
veterans who did not serve “in theater.” They estimate that 18 percent of veterans who became
eligible for the program and received DC benefits subsequently dropped out of the labor force. 20
Because the DC benefit amount is not dependent on work status but only on service-related
health condition, this estimated effect is a pure income effect.

Using the causal estimate from Autor et al. (2016), we carry out a back-of-the-envelope
calculation of the additional number of veteran workers there would have been in 2018 had DC
benefit receipt not increased. The Department of Veterans Affairs reports 4.7 million DC benefit
recipients in 2018, as compared to around 2.3 million in 1999. 21 We make use of program
caseload numbers by broad age category to approximate the number of “excess” DC recipients
over this period. To do this, we calculate a projected 2018 caseload by applying 1999 age-
category specific program population shares to the 2018 population and define the additional
recipients to be the number of “excess” program participants; the implicit assumption is that this
growth is due to policy changes over this time. We then apply the 18 percent estimate from
Autor et al. (2016) to the excess caseload age 35 to 54 (since this overlaps with the ages of their
analysis sample). We expect the elasticity of work to program participation to be smaller outside
this age range, and hence make the somewhat arbitrary assumption that the employment effect is
half as large for those in adjacent age categories (age 34 and under and age 55 to 74) and zero for
those 75 and older. This leads us to estimate a loss of 182,619 workers over this period, which is
an admittedly very rough calculation, but nonetheless useful as a ballpark estimate. Adding these
workers to the 2018 employed population would raise the employment-to-population ratio by
0.07 percentage points.

Our summary read of the evidence is that the rise in participation in disability insurance
programs has made a notable, albeit secondary, contribution to the decline in employment over
this period. The existing literature has produced credible causal estimates of the effect of the
SSDI and Veterans Affairs DC program on labor supply. We use those estimates to gauge how
much higher the employment-to-population ratio would have been in 2018 without the growth in
these programs, coming up with a combined estimate of 0.17 percentage points. This does not
account for any independent effect of growth in participation in the SSI program, but because the
growth in the number of people receiving SSI has been modest and SSI-only recipients are
people who, by definition, had a weaker prior attachment to the labor force than those receiving
SSDI, we do not expect any such effect to have been large.




20
   The authors report that the implied labor supply elasticity is comparable to that found by Boyle and
Lahey (2010) in their study of the labor supply of older nondisabled veterans ages 55 to 64 who were
granted access to VA health insurance in the mid-1990s.
21
   The 2018 Benefits Report from the Department of Veterans Affairs is available here:
https://benefits.va.gov/REPORTS/abr/docs/2018-compensation.pdf; the 1999 Benefits Report is available
here: https://www.benefits.va.gov/REPORTS/abr/fy99-abr.pdf
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 23

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly the “food stamp” program,
provides vouchers for food purchases to eligible individuals and families. In 2018, the program
provided benefits to 39.7 million Americans (adults and children), at a cost of $64.9 billion.
Unlike most U.S. transfer programs, SNAP eligibility is not restricted to a particular group of
people (such as the aged or disabled), though as discussed further below, prime-age adults
without dependents who are not working or in a training program have more limited access to
benefits. The vouchers can be used to purchase most foods at grocery stores or other authorized
retailers. Average monthly benefits in 2018 amounted to $253 per household or $126 per person
per month, which translates to benefits worth about $1.40 per meal. 22

Given the relatively low level of income support the program provides, it seems unlikely that the
provision of these food vouchers has caused a substantial number of people to choose non-work
over work. That said, it is worth considering whether the existence of the program might raise
the reservation wage, and hence reduce the labor supply, of potential workers. We begin by
discussing the labor supply incentives inherent in this transfer program. We then consider
whether there were notable expansions in the generosity of the program during the 1999 to 2018
period that might have contributed to declining employment rates and highlight the most
rigorous available evidence about the program’s effects on labor supply.

SNAP is designed as a classic income transfer program. Standard labor supply theory implies
that an eligible individual would choose less work and more leisure in the presence of the SNAP
program than if no such income support were availability. The standard SNAP eligibility rules
specify that a household’s gross monthly income not exceed 130 percent of the federal poverty
line, that net income after deductions not exceed the poverty line, and that countable household
assets be less than $2,250 (higher for households with an elderly or disabled member). States
also may designate households eligible for certain other means-tested programs as automatically
eligible for SNAP benefits. Households’ eligibility for benefits must be recertified every 6 to 24
months. The benefit amount is highest for households with zero income and falls as household
income rises. The statutory benefit reduction rate is 0.30, meaning that a household loses $30 in
benefits for every additional $100 in income. Note that this is lower than the benefit reduction
rate in other transfer programs such as TANF and SSI, making the labor supply disincentives
inherent in the SNAP benefit formula weaker than the disincentives in those other programs.

Most able-bodied adults, whether or not they have children, are subject to an additional
requirement that they must be working or looking for work in order to qualify for SNAP
benefits. The work requirements for prime-age (18 to 49 years old) able-bodied adults without
dependents, referred to by the U.S. government as ABAWDs, are especially restrictive. Except
during periods of high unemployment, most prime-age ABAWDs are restricted to three months


22
  Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (2018) provides a description of the SNAP program; program
participation statistics are available from the Food and Nutrition Service at https://fns-
prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/resource-files/SNAPsummary-5.pdf.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 24

of benefits within a three-year period if they are not working or in a training program at least 20
hours per week.

The number of SNAP program beneficiaries expanded considerably during the Great Recession
and, as of 2018, had not yet fallen back to pre-recession levels. The reasons for this are not
entirely clear. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) suspended the
normal three-month time limit imposed on non-working ABAWDs through September 2010. By
statute, during periods of high unemployment, states may request a waiver from the ABAWD
rule. From 2011 through 2014, more than 40 states had statewide waivers of this rule in place.
As economic conditions have improved, all but a handful of these statewide waivers have lapsed,
though some states have retained waivers limited to economically depressed areas within their
jurisdictions. The increase in the number of ABAWDs on the rolls, however, can account for
only a portion of the increase in the number of beneficiaries. 23 The 2009 ARRA legislation
increased the monthly SNAP benefit amount by 13.6 percent, but that provision expired in 2013.

The only research we know of that studies the relationship between SNAP expansions in recent
years and labor supply is a paper by East (2018) that focuses on relaxed restrictions to program
eligibility for immigrants in the post-welfare-reform era. Her analysis suggests that single
immigrant women reduce their employment when they gain SNAP eligibility and married
immigrant men reduce their hours of work. Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2012) exploit the county
variation in the rollout of the food stamp program in the 1960s and early 1970s to investigate
how labor supply responded to access to program benefits. They find no evidence of a reduction
in employment or hours in the full sample, but do find a statistically significant reduction in
hours and, in some specifications, also employment among female heads of household.

Did the SNAP expansions during and following the Great Recession lead to lower rates of
employment or longer spells of unemployment? While it is difficult to say definitively, a key
lesson from studies of SNAP caseloads is that macroeconomic conditions, as opposed to program
parameters, are generally the key determinants of caseloads (see review by Hoynes and
Schanzenbach 2016). That said, the increasing numbers of people receiving SNAP benefits
during and following the Great Recession could have contributed, at least to some extent, to
employment not recovering as rapidly as it otherwise might have done. Although the literature
does not suggest that the program has sizable dis-employment effects and it seems implausible
that the SNAP program was an important driver of the exits from employment observed before
or during the recession, the expanded availability of SNAP benefits could have allowed some
individuals to remain out of work longer than might otherwise have been the case.




23
 The most recent currently available data on the characteristics of benefit recipients can be found at
https://fns-prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/resource-files/Characteristics2017.pdf.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 25

Expanded Access to Publicly-Provided or Subsidized Health Insurance

The 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA) expanded access to health insurance in a number of
different ways. Effective in the fall of 2010, employer-provided health plans offering dependent
coverage were required to extend that coverage to employees’ young adult children through age
26. Beginning in 2014, in states that chose to participate, Medicaid coverage was extended to
include low-income childless individuals. At the same time, income-based subsidies for
individuals to purchase health insurance began to be offered on newly created exchanges.
Starting in 2015, employers with more than 100 employees have been required to offer health
insurance to their full-time employees or pay a fine; in 2016, that requirement was extended to
employers with 50-99 employees. The timing of these changes is such that the ACA cannot
account for the longer-term secular decline in employment rates. Still, it is worth considering
what is known about the possible effects of these changes on employment, and especially about
the relationship between access to public health insurance and labor supply, in order to gauge
whether the ACA might have contributed to a slower recovery of employment rates following
the Great Recession than otherwise would have been observed. Looking to the future, we also
would like to know how the maintenance (or reversal) of the ACA provisions might affect
employment rates going forward.

There are multiple channels through which the ACA could have lowered employment. First, the
fact that many individuals now can obtain health insurance outside of an employment
arrangement at a lower price than previously should make employment relatively less attractive.
Second, for individuals who are eligible for subsidies, the phase-out of those subsidies as income
increases should make additional work hours less attractive. Third, by raising the consumption
level associated with non-work, the expansion of Medicaid to childless individuals should lead
to lower levels of employment. Fourth, the increase in labor costs associated with the employer
penalty for not offering employer-provided health insurance could have negatively affected
employers’ demand for workers, though the extent to which this is so will depend on whether
and to what extent increases in health insurance costs can be offset by wage reductions. 24

Research on earlier expansions in access to public health insurance expansions suggests that the
labor supply effects of such expansions may vary depending on the specific context within
which they occur. 25 Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo (2013) find a large labor supply
response to the large 2005 disenrollment in Tennessee’s public insurance program. They
estimate that coverage among childless adults fell by 7.3 percentage points and that this decline

24
   In a 2014 report based on a simulation model, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) predicted that,
on net, the various provisions of the ACA would reduce the total number of hours worked by about 1.5
percent to 2.0 percent during the period 2017 to 2024, driven almost entirely by a reduction in labor
supply (CBO 2014a).
25
   There are a set of papers that examined the effect of Medicaid expansions during the 1980s and 1990s
on the labor supply of single mothers, the group that was targeted by those earlier expansions. These
generally find no discernible labor supply responses; see for example, Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001).
This literature is summarized in Buchmueller, Ham, and Shore-Sheppard (2016).
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 26

led to a 4.6 percentage point increase in employment, implying that nearly two-thirds of
childless adults who lost coverage entered employment. Dague, DeLeire, and Leininger (2017)
find a smaller, but still notable, labor supply response to the 2009 enrollment freeze in
Wisconsin’s public health insurance program. They estimate that program coverage leads to an
employment reduction of between 2 and 10 percentage points. Baicker et al. (2014) find smaller
effects in the context of the Oregon Medicaid Health Insurance experiment in 2008 that extended
program coverage to a randomly selected group of eligible individuals not previously covered by
health insurance. Their point estimate of the local average treatment effect is a decrease in
employment of 1.6 percentage points, or 3 percent; their confidence intervals allow them to
reject employment declines of more than 4.4 percentage points.

There are various potential explanations for the differences in findings across these studies. One
possible reason for the especially large estimates in the Garthwaite, Gross and Notowidigdo
(2013) study is that Tennessee’s program covered relatively higher income individuals, a group
that is more likely to be able to find jobs with health insurance benefits. The lower estimated
effects for Wisconsin and Oregon may be due to the policy changes having taken place during a
period when labor markets were weaker, which might have affected individuals’ ability to adjust
to changes in health insurance access by changing their employment status.

In a paper that analyzes the effects of the 2006 Massachusetts health care reform, Kolstad and
Kowalski (2016) provide evidence relevant to assessing the potential labor market impact of the
ACA’s employer mandate. They find that implementation of the employer mandate in
Massachusetts led to a reduction in wages paid to covered workers, but only a small reduction in
labor hours, which is consistent with a high valuation of the mandated benefit on the part of
workers and a corresponding outward shift in the curve relating labor supply to the wage rate. 26

Several recent studies have looked directly at the employment effects of various ACA
provisions. Heim, Lurie, and Simon (2018) use a data set of U.S. tax records spanning 2008-
2013 to study how the ACA provision requiring employers to allow young adults to remain on
their parents’ health insurance plans has affected labor market-related outcomes. They find no
evidence of changes in labor market outcomes for young adults in response to this provision.
Leung and Mas (2018) investigate whether states that expanded Medicaid as part of the ACA
experienced differential trends in employment among childless adults as compared to states that
did not adopt Medicaid expansions. They find that, although an expansion policy increased
Medicaid coverage by 3.0 percentage points among childless adults, there was no statistically
discernible change in their employment rate associated with the policy change. A recent paper by

26
  Dillender, Heinrich, and Houseman (2016a, 2016b) also provide evidence relevant to the effects of the
employer mandate, specifically the effect that it may have had on the prevalence of part time work.
Dillender, Heinrich and Houseman (2016a) examines the effects of the Massachusetts health care reform,
finding that it increased the prevalence of part-time work among lower-wage workers. Dillender,
Heinrich and Houseman (2016b) compares the post-ACA experience of other states to that of Hawaii,
which has had a more stringent employer mandate for decades, and provides evidence that the employer
mandate led to an increase in involuntary part-time employment. These papers do not address the effects
of employer mandates on overall employment or hours.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 27

Duggan, Goda, and Jackson (2019) exploits variation across geographic areas in the potential
impact of the ACA based on preexisting population shares of uninsured individuals within
income groups that would have been affected by the Medicaid expansions (i.e., lower income
individuals) and separately the federal subsidies for private health insurance (i.e., middle income
individuals). They find that the aggregate employment effects of these ACA provisions were
close to zero.

As already stated, implementation of the ACA is sufficiently recent that it cannot explain the fall
in employment rates that has been underway since 1999. Our summary read is that, although
there were reasons to fear that implementation of the ACA in recent years could have had a
negative effect on employment rates, there is little evidence of such effects in practice.

Earned Income Tax Credit

The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is a refundable tax credit for low-income tax filers with
positive annual earnings. According to the IRS, more than 25 million tax filing units received the
EITC in 2018, with the value of claimed credits totaling $63 billion. The EITC was introduced
into the federal income tax code in 1975 and became permanent in 1978. Widely viewed as an
effective means of incentivizing labor force participation and reducing poverty, the program has
been expanded several times since 1990, most dramatically in 1993 and 1996 and also again in
2001 and 2009. 27 As described below, the EITC offers only minimal benefits to childless tax
filers, so any effect of changes in the EITC on observed employment rates over recent decades
would have been concentrated on workers with qualifying children under age 18. For a non-
worker whose household is in the part of the EITC schedule along which additional earnings
raise the amount of the credit received, the EITC creates an unambiguous incentive to enter
employment. For someone whose household is already receiving the maximum credit or is in the
range where the credit is being phased out, however, the EITC may make going to work less
attractive. Because the changes to the EITC since 1999 should have worked to encourage labor
force participation rather than the reverse, however, we do not believe the EITC is a candidate to
explain falling employment rates.

The amount of the EITC credit depends on annual earnings and number of children in the
household. There is a phase-in range of income, over which the credit subsidizes earnings at a
rate of up to 45 percent (for those with more than two children), followed by a plateau range of
income where the family receives the maximum credit, followed by a phase-out range where the
amount of the credit is reduced down to zero. The maximum credit amount in 2018 was $3,461
for eligible tax filers with one child; $5,716 for those with two children; and $6,431 for those
with three or more qualifying children. The income cutoffs at which the EITC falls to zero for
single filers were $40,320 for one-child families; $45,802 for two-child families; and $49,194 for
families with more than two children. Legislation in 2001 introduced a separate schedule for
married filers with a longer phase out range. That legislation also increased the maximum EITC
credit amount available for workers with at least three children. The income eligibility thresholds

27
 For a comprehensive history of the program and review of institutional features, we refer the reader to
Nichols and Rothstein (2015).
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 28

for married filers were expanded again in 2009 to reduce the negative incentives for work among
spouses with an employed partner. In 2018, the income cutoffs were about $5,700 higher for
married filers with children than for single filers with the same number of children. In 2018, the
maximum credit available to childless single filers was just $519 and no credit was available for
those in this group with $15,270 or more in annual earnings.

The empirical literature on the labor supply effects of the EITC yields a consensus finding that
EITC expansions during the 1990s increased the labor force participation rates of single mothers
with children (e.g., Eissa and Liebman 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001). This implies that, all
else equal, expansions in the EITC should have increased the employment rates of low-wage
single mothers. In contrast, for married couples with two earners, the EITC has ambiguous
effects. This is because the U.S. tax code treats married couples as a single tax unit, and the
EITC credit phases out as combined household earnings increase. For EITC households already
receiving the maximum credit or in the phase-out range, the EITC can be expected to make it
less attractive for a non-working spouse to enter the labor market. Eissa and Hoynes (2004) find
that EITC expansions between 1984 and 1996 reduced married women's labor force participation
by more than a full percentage point. The changes in the EITC in 2001 and in 2009 lessened the
negative disincentive for spousal employment by extending the phase-out range of income.
Absent other changes this might have been expected to increase spousal labor supply relative to
the earlier period.

If one were to net out potential EITC-induced increases in employment over the 1999 to 2018
period – owing to the 2001 and 2009 changes in the program – then the overall decline in
employment to be explained would be somewhat larger than the net decline actually observed.
We do not attempt a calculation of the potential aggregate magnitude of the effects of EITC
changes over this period. Such a calculation would be highly speculative and the EITC is
unlikely to have been a significant driver of overall employment rates, and certainly not of
employment rate declines, during this period.

Family-Friendly Policies: Child Care and Paid Parental Leave

One observation frequently made in discussions of labor force participation is that the United
States lacks the public support for child care and paid parental leave that is common in much of
the rest of the developed world. For instance, Kleven (2014) points out that despite very high tax
rates on workers, Scandinavian countries boast higher employment rates than the United States
or United Kingdom, both of which impose much lower tax rates on workers. He speculates that
this is because Scandinavian countries effectively subsidize labor supply by lowering the prices
of goods that are “complementary” to working, namely, child care, preschool, and elder care.
The child care costs borne by American families can be significant. Ziliak (2014) reports that, as
of 2012, the costs of full-day center-based child care represented from a quarter to a third of the
average annual earnings of single mothers of young children, depending on the state, though
non-center can be significantly less expensive. In order for a lack of support for working parents
to help with explaining observed declines in U.S. employment rates, however, something must
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 29

have changed—either family policy must have become less accommodating or the difficulties
faced by working parents must have grown.

Standard labor supply models imply that higher child care costs should be associated with lower
parental labor force participation rates. For a single parent or a married parent whose spouse is
already employed, the cost of child care is almost certain to be an important factor in the
decision about whether to work; this seems especially to have been the case for mothers, though
changing gender roles may lead to it becoming more of a factor for fathers over time. The early
empirical literature on this topic dates from the 1980s (e.g., Blau and Robins 1988, Ribar 1992,
Connelly 1992, Kimmel 1998, Anderson and Levine 1999, Connelly and Kimmel 2003) and
consistently found higher child care costs to be associated with lower employment rates for
women with children. Anderson and Levine (1999) report that the employment decisions of
lower-skill workers are especially sensitive to child care costs.

An important limitation of the early studies was the lack of an exogenous source of variation in
child care costs. Some more recent research has used the introduction of universal kindergarten
and, later, pre-kindergarten to investigate the effect of care that is essentially free during school
hours for eligible children on mothers’ employment (Cascio 2009, Fitzpatrick 2010, Cascio and
Schanzenbach 2013). In a related study, Gelbach (2002) used information on children’s quarter
of birth to examine the effect on mothers’ employment rates of having a child who had reached
the age cutoff for kindergarten attendance. These studies suggest that public kindergarten
programs lead to significant increases in mothers’ employment; it is less clear that this is the
case for public pre-kindergarten programs.

Additional evidence on the effects of publicly provided childcare comes from the province of
Quebec in Canada, where a comprehensive reform adopted in 1997 called for regulated childcare
spaces to be provided to all children from birth to age 5 at a price of $5 per day. Studies of that
reform conclude that it had significant and long-lasting effects on mothers’ labor force
participation (Baker, Gruer and Milligan 2008, Lefebvre and Merrigan 2008, Haeck, Lefebvre
and Merrigan 2015). An important feature of the Quebec reform was its universal nature; once
fully implemented, it made very low-cost childcare available for all children in the province.
Nollenberger and Rodriguez-Planas (2015) find similarly positive effects on mothers’
employment associated with the introduction of universal preschool for 3 year olds in Spain. In
contrast, policy reforms in Norway (Havnes and Mogstad 2011) and Sweden (Lundin, Mork and
Ockert 2008) that lowered the cost of child care in a context where there was already a
significant amount of publicly provided care had very limited incremental effects on mothers’
employment.

All of the preceding relate to mothers’ labor supply, but with falling fertility, the share of women
who are mothers has been shrinking. In 1999, about 18.6 percent of women age 16 to 54 lived
with an own child under the age of five; by 2018, that share had fallen to about 16.6 percent.
Whatever the cause, the fact that fewer women have young children at home could perhaps have
modestly ameliorated any negative effects that a lack of support for families has had on the
overall employment rate.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 30



Public spending on child care and child care subsidies in the United States is very low relative to
the level of support provided in other countries. That said, back-of-the-envelope calculations
based on data compiled by the OECD suggest that per-child public spending on child care and
early childhood education in the United States has risen, not fallen, over the period we are
studying. 28 Furthermore, much of this spending has targeted children from lower-income
households. This fact does not support the notion that low or falling levels of public support for
child care expenses have driven the decline in employment over this period.

A related piece of evidence comes from an assessment of the price of child care over recent
decades conducted by Herbst (2015). He uses data from a number of sources, including
household survey data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and
establishment level data that he uses to estimate child care costs. He finds that low-income
families were not spending more on child care in 2011 than they were in 1990. He further fails to
find evidence that the cost of providing child care has increased. Though not dispositive, his
analysis of various sources of data argues against the idea that child care services have become
more expensive over this time period.

A somewhat different hypothesis is that just-in-time scheduling practices have created new child
care problems for working parents (Boushey and Ansel 2016). Workers with unpredictable
schedules are apt to find it considerably more difficult to arrange for child care and, if they do
not have a regular child care arrangement, may not qualify for available child care subsidies.
Data on the prevalence of just-in-time scheduling practices are scarce, but anecdotal evidence
suggests they may have become more common. If so, this could have contributed to declining
employment rates.

Lack of paid leave for new parents is another factor sometimes cited as a barrier to employment
in the United States. While the United States lacks the generous entitlements to paid parental
leave that are common in many other developed countries, the relevant question for our purposes
is again whether these entitlements have become less generous over time. The modest changes
that have occurred in fact would appear to have been in the opposite direction. Since 1993, the
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) has required employers with 50 or more workers to
offer job-protected but unpaid family or medical leave of up to 12 weeks to qualifying
employees. In 2004, California introduced a program that provides an entitlement to up to six
weeks of paid parental leave through its pre-existing temporary disability insurance program.
New Jersey introduced a similar program in 2009, also providing up to six weeks of benefits; a
program in Rhode Island providing up to four weeks of paid benefits took effect in 2014; and
New York enacted a paid leave programs providing for up to 8 weeks of benefits that took effect

28
  We base this statement on data on public spending reported in the OECD Family Database for 1999
and 2016 (the latest year available). The data are available at
http://www.oecd.org/els/family/database.htm. A caveat is the OECD’s acknowledgement that the data for
countries with federal systems, such as the United States, may not be complete, due to the difficulty of
obtaining information regarding state and local spending.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 31

at the beginning of 2018. The District of Columbia, Washington and Massachusetts also have
enacted laws to create paid leave programs, though none of these had yet taken effect as of the
end of 2018. 29

The effect of introducing or extending an entitlement to paid parental leave on employment rates
could be either positive or negative. On the one hand, the availability of paid parental leave may
encourage women who do not yet have children to work and, by preserving the relationship with
her employer, also may ease a woman’s transition back to work following the birth of a child.
On the other hand, paid parental leave may encourage some women who otherwise would have
returned to work more quickly to remain at home for a longer period of time and discourage
some employers from hiring women of child-bearing age.

Rossin-Slater (2016) provides a careful review of the empirical evidence pertaining to the effects
of paid parental leave entitlements. Her assessment is that paid leaves of up to a year in length
may have modest positive effects on women’s medium- and long-run employment, though she
also concludes that longer periods of paid leave do not raise subsequent employment rates and
can have negative impacts on wages. If anything, then, the introduction of modest paid leave
entitlements in California and New Jersey during the 2000s could perhaps have had a (small)
positive effect on female participation, an effect that would go in the wrong direction to have
any part in explaining the trend decline in participation.

To sum up, the available evidence shows clearly that the cost of child care can be an important
impediment to mothers’ employment. There is no strong evidence, however, that child care costs
have risen over time in such a way as to have contributed significantly to falling employment
rates. Indeed, the available data suggest that, among the less-educated and lower-income
families for whom child care expenditures might pose the greatest barrier to employment, costs
per hour of care were little higher in 2011 than in 1990, though more current data would of
course be welcome. To the extent that workers’ schedules have become less predictable,
however, arranging for child care may have become more difficult and this could have
contributed to falling employment. While paid leave for new parents may be desirable for other
reasons, there is little evidence that its absence has had much effect on employment rates.
Further, because the lack of paid parental leave is a long-standing feature of the U.S. labor
market, it logically cannot be responsible for falling labor market participation.

Labor/Leisure Choice and Social Norms

The decision to work reflects not only the monetary tradeoffs associated with working, but also
preferences for work versus other activities. If leisure has become relatively more attractive,
either because leisure technology has improved or because there is less of a stigma attached to
not working, then for a given wage, people will supply less labor. Some observers, such as

29
  Details on the state leave programs mentioned in the text can be found at
http://www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/workplace/paid-leave/state-paid-family-leave-
laws.pdf.
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 32

Aguiar et al (2017) claim that leisure has become more attractive to young men because of
improvements in video game technology. Others, including Eberstadt (2016), argue that men are
now more willing to sit out of work, essentially because of changing social norms. In a previous
era, these observers argue, men of working age would have been ashamed not to be working, and
their family members would not have been willing to support them if they did. Today, that is not
necessarily the case. In other words, preferences and social expectations could have changed in
such a way that, facing similar circumstances, individuals today may be less likely to choose to
work than would have been the case in the past. It is very hard to disentangle these competing
explanations.

Aguiar et al. (2017) point to a specific factor that has potentially made leisure time more
attractive to young men—improved video gaming technology. Time use data reveal that young
men are filling their non-work hours by consuming more leisure, in particular, that they are
spending more time in recreational computing and gaming. Aguiar et al. (2017) document that
between 2004-07 and 2012-15, the drop in market hours for young men was matched by a
roughly equivalent increase in leisure hours. The picture these authors paint using data from the
American Time Use Survey is a bleak one. They report that, over this period, men between the
ages of 21 and 30 increased their recorded leisure time by about 2.5 hours per week, and that
roughly three quarters of that (1.9 hours) was spent in recreational computing time, including
video gaming. Non-employed young men in the later period are spending 5.9 hours per week on
video gaming.

The authors try to establish a causal link between improved video gaming technology and a
reduction in hours worked among young men. Lacking exogenous variation in the supply of
improved gaming technology, either across time or place, they instead develop a method based
on Engle Curve estimation from which they infer innovations to leisure technology over time.
They then estimate a system of leisure demand equations and use structural modeling
assumptions about labor and leisure elasticity parameters to estimate the role that improved
leisure technology could have played in reducing labor supply. The authors’ provocative
conclusion is that 23 to 46 percent of the decline in the market hours of men aged 21 to 30
between 2004 and 2015 could be explained by innovations in video gaming technology. The
paper is intriguing, and the mechanism and direction of the effect warrant consideration, but the
point estimates reported unavoidably rest on a good many unverifiable modeling assumptions.

A somewhat different explanation is that the driving factor behind increased time on video
games is changing social norms that have made it more socially acceptable for young men to be
out of work and financially supported to various degrees by their parents or other relatives. If
today’s video gaming technology had been available during the 1990s, would young men then
have worked less then than they did? Perhaps, but this is far from clear. In the story told by
Aguiar et al. (2017), important motivating facts are that the drop in labor demand experienced by
young men (as captured by wages) has been similar to that for older men, but young men’s
employment has fallen by more. They speculate that the large amount of time young men spend
playing video games is an important part of the explanation for their falling employment rate.
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 33

But these facts also could be viewed as posing a challenge to their story: Video games are
available to all men, so why are they not affecting the behavior of both young men and older
men? One possible explanation is that, for younger men, the perceived stigma of being out of
work playing on a computer or console in their parents’ or other relative’s home is lower than
for their older peers. In other words, the explanation may lie with the young men themselves,
rather than with the availability of video gaming technology. We cannot readily rule out this
cohort-based explanation.

As a factual matter, as noted by Aguiar et al. (2017), there has been a significant increase in the
share of young adults who are living with a parent or relative other than a spouse. Citing data
from the American Community Survey, Aguiar et al. (2017) note that 67 percent of non-
employed young men age 21 to 30 lived with a parent or close relative in 2012-2015, as
compared to 46 percent in 2000-2003. Aguiar and his coauthors read this to suggest that parents
may be playing a safety net role for young men, not unlike the role of the Social Security
Disability Insurance program for older men. Living with their parents is one way these men are
able to support themselves if they choose not to work or to work less. Interestingly, although
young women do not seem to have been as attracted to video gaming as young men and their
employment rates have not fallen as sharply, they also became significantly more likely to live
with a parent or close relative between 2000-2003 and 2012-2015, suggesting that support from
parents also may be playing a safety net role for them.

One observation that is consistent with a change in social norms and preferences for work among
prime-age men is an increase in temporary spells of non-work among men who have a long-term
attachment to the labor force. Coglianese (2018) documents a rise between 1984 and 2011 in “in-
and-outs,” who he defines as men who take short (less than two years at a time), infrequent
breaks out of the labor force in between jobs. He shows that this phenomenon is distinct from a
more permanent exit from the labor force, with different consequences and causes. In particular,
he provides evidence suggesting that the rise of in-and-outs has occurred across all industries and
does not result from a decline in labor demand for prime age men, nor from the availability of
disability insurance, but is more consistent with a change in the desired amount of labor supply
among prime-age men in the United States.

Another labor supply factor to consider, at least with reference to married men, is spousal
employment. If men today are more likely to be married to working women than in previous
decades, or if it has become more socially acceptable for a married man to be supported by his
wife, married men today might choose to supply relatively less labor. In a standard labor supply
model, an increase in one spouse’s income could have a negative income effect on the amount of
labor supplied by the other spouse. In addition, if spousal labor supply is substitutable, rather
than complementary, one would expect an increase in women’s wages to lead to relatively more
labor supply from wives and relatively less from husbands. As pointed out by the Council of
Economic Advisers (CEA) in a recent report (2016), however, the raw data do not suggest that
this is what is going on. As the CEA report documents, the share of prime-age men out of the
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 34

labor force who have a working spouse actually fell somewhat between the late 1990s and 2015,
and the share who do is relatively small (only about 20 percent in 2015). We cannot rule out the
possibility that non-working married men today are simply more comfortable relying on the
earnings of their wives than in the past. On balance, however, there is not good evidence for
thinking that spousal employment is a key factor behind falling employment rates.

Opioid Use

Another provocative hypothesis is that the increase in opioid prescriptions is in part responsible
for the decrease in labor force participation rates among prime-age men. Krueger (2017)
observes that labor force participation has fallen more in areas where relatively more opioid pain
medication has been prescribed. He bases this conclusion on an analysis of county-level data
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on the per capita volume of opioid
prescriptions for 2015, combined with Current Population Survey data on labor force
participation for 1999-2001 and 2014-2016. He estimates an OLS regression of individual-level
male labor force participation on 2015 county-level per-capita opioid prescriptions, a dummy
variable for 2014-2016, the interaction of those two terms and other controls. Under the strong
assumption that county-level opioid prescription rates are exogenous to county-level labor
market trends, this regression yields a causal estimate of the effect of opioid prescriptions.
Making that assumption, the results imply that the increase in opioid prescriptions, which grew
by a factor of 3.5 nationwide between 1999 and 2015, could account for 20 percent of the
observed decline in labor force participation among prime-age men over this period.

Aliprantis and Schweitzer (2018) fit models similar to those of Krueger (2017) using the same
county-level CDC data on opioid prescriptions together with American Community Survey
(ACS) data on labor market outcomes. Their analysis makes use of annual observations covering
the period from 2007 to 2016; they regress dummy variables for current period labor force,
employment, and unemployment status on the lagged county-level opioid prescription rate and
other controls. Using ACS data rather than CPS data allows them to include more disaggregated
geographic areas and more periods in their analysis, but their results are generally consistent
with those of Krueger (2017).

An important question, however, is whether the causal arrow that underlies the correlations
captured in the analyses just described in fact runs from opioid prescribing to employment rates
or in the opposite direction. Harris et al. (2017) attempt to overcome this identification challenge
and isolate exogenous variation in opioid supply by using the concentration of high-prescribing
physicians in the county as an instrument for per-capita opioid prescriptions. They analyze the
link between county-level opioid use (driven by the supply of physicians willing to write
prescriptions) and employment using data from 10 states covering the period from 2010 through
2015. In their baseline models, high-prescribing physicians are defined as the share of doctors in
the county in the top 5 percent nationally of opioid prescriptions written or top 1 percent
nationally of opioid doses prescribed, both based on Medicare Part D data, but they obtain
similar results when high-prescribing doctors are defined based on prescriptions written for
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 35

controlled non-opioid drugs. Their findings support Krueger’s assertion; they conclude that
increased opioid prescribing causes employment rates to fall.

Currie, Jin and Schnell (2018) carry out an analysis similar to that of Harris et al. (2017) using
national data for the 2006-2014 period, with county-level prescription information purchased
from QuantilesIMS and employment obtained from the Census Bureau’s Quarterly Workforce
Indicators program. They look separately at employment for men and women ages 18-44 and
ages 45-64. Their models use the prescribing rate in the county for adults age 65 and older to
instrument the prescribing rate for younger adults. In contrast to Harris et al. (2017), Currie, Jin
and Schnell (2018) find a small positive effect of opioid prescribing on women’s employment
and no effect no men’s employment.

Charles et al. (2019) provide some evidence pointing to a causal effect of weak labor market
conditions driving increased drug use. Their paper shows that a decline in a state’s share of
employment in manufacturing between 2000-2016 (predicted using a shift-share instrument) is
associated with an increase in per capita opioid prescriptions. Opioid use rose the most in places
that experienced the largest exogenous adverse shocks to manufacturing.

Our read of the evidence is that, although it seems clear that the problems of depressed labor
force participation and opioid use are interrelated, the arrows of causality run in both directions
and there is not yet rigorous evidence to quantify the magnitudes of the relevant effects. It is
quite plausible that some people who have gotten an opioid prescription have become addicted
and consequentially stopped working, as is suggested by Krueger (2017). It is also quite
plausible that weak labor market prospects, and a corresponding sense of economic despair, has
led some people to opioid use (see Case and Deaton 2017). It remains an open empirical
question as to how much each has driven the other.

Immigration

A final labor-supply-related factor sometimes mentioned in connection with the decline in the
employment-to-population ratio, especially for younger and less-skilled native workers, is
increased immigration. According to estimates produced by the Census Bureau cited in Blau and
Mackie (2016), net immigration contributed an average of 0.48 percentage point to annual
population growth between 1990 and 2000. After 2000, the pace of immigration dropped off
somewhat, but it continued to add roughly 0.3 percentage point to annual population growth,
accounting for roughly 30 to 40 percent of total population growth, depending on the year.

The idea that immigrants take jobs away from native workers undoubtedly has popular appeal,
but in its simplest form it rests on a fallacy—the mistaken notion that there are a fixed number of
jobs in the economy, so that more employed immigrants must mean fewer employed natives. As
discussed in the thorough review of the immigration literature offered by Blau and Mackie
(2016), the real world is complex and there are many channels through which immigration may
affect the employment of native workers.
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 36

In a model with a single type of labor, an upward-sloping labor supply curve and a fixed stock of
capital, immigration can be modeled as an outward shift in the aggregate labor supply curve that
causes native wages and employment to fall. If immigrants and native workers specialize in
different tasks, however, they may be complements rather than substitutes (Peri and Sparber
2009, Ottaviano and Peri 2012). In that case, immigration could raise the marginal productivity
and potentially the employment of native workers. Immigrant workers also are consumers, and
their spending may increase the demand for labor. Further, investment may increase in response
to the higher marginal product of capital associated with an influx of immigrants. Depending on
how the capital stock evolves, in the long run the economy could simply be larger, with no
permanent adverse effect on the wages and employment of native workers. Further, highly-
skilled immigrants such as scientists and engineers may create positive externalities through
innovation and resulting increases in productivity (Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle 2010, Kerr and
Lincoln 2010). This too could lead to positive effects of immigration on native employment. All
of this implies that the effect of immigration on native employment is very much an empirical
question.

One frequently-used approach to identifying the effects of immigration on the wages and
employment of natives takes advantage of differences across areas in the number of immigrants.
Because stronger economic conditions can be expected both to attract more immigrants and to
raise the native employment rate, any simple cross-area correlation between the number of
immigrants and employment rates for native workers could be misleading. A common approach
to addressing this problem is to construct an instrument for the number of immigrants in a
locality by applying growth factors based on national changes in the number of immigrants of a
particular nationality to the number of immigrants of the same nationality who were living in the
local area in an earlier base period. The rationale for this instrument is that immigrants tend to
settle in areas where others of the same nationality already live. A concern about the spatial
methodology is that outflows of domestic workers could offset the effects of immigration, so
that cross-area comparisons understate immigration’s effects. Borjas (2006) identifies this as an
important consideration, but other studies such as Card and DiNardo (2000), Card (2001) and
Peri (2007) conclude that outflows of natives have little effect on estimates of the effects of
immigration based on cross-area data.

Another common approach to estimating the effects of immigration on natives is to categorize
workers based on their skills or qualifications, and then to use variation in immigration by skill
level to estimate the effects of immigration on wages and employment. A challenge in these
studies is how to group workers by skill level in the data; immigrants with a given level of
education, for example, may not be viewed by employers as good substitutes for natives with the
same level of education (Peri 2007). An additional concern is that immigrant flows may be
endogenous with respect to the demand for different types of labor. Further, estimates produced
by this type of study encompass the direct effects of immigration but not the indirect effects
(e.g., increases in wages of a group attributable to increases in immigration in another part of the
skill distribution).
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 37

We do not attempt a comprehensive review of the voluminous literature on the contentious topic
of how immigration has affected native workers, but summarize a small number of selected
studies chosen to illustrate the range of reported estimates using different approaches. At the
high end of the wage effects obtained in studies using a spatial approach, Altonji and Card
(1991) found that, over the 1970-1980 period, a 1 percentage point increase in the immigrant
share in an area was associated with a 1.2 percent decrease in the wages of less-skilled natives,
but no detectable change in their employment-to-population ratio. Using national data on male
workers disaggregated by level of education and experience, Borjas (2003) also found large
effects of immigration on wages. Over the period from 1980 to 2000, immigration raised the
supply of male labor by about 10 percent; he estimates that this increase caused a decline of
approximately 9 percent in the wages of native male high school dropouts and a decline in male
wages overall of about 3 percent. Smith (2012) estimates that a 10 percent increase in the
number of low-skilled immigrants causes roughly a 3 percent long-run decrease in the annual
hours worked by 16- and 17-year olds, but has little effect on the hours of older natives.

In contrast to these studies estimating sizeable effects for some groups, a number of studies that
rest on cross-area data in which workers are disaggregated by occupation rather than by
education, including Card (2001) and Orrenius and Zavodny (2007), find much smaller effects
of immigration on the wages of less-skilled natives. Ottaviano and Peri (2012) conclude that, in
recent decades, immigration had a small positive effects on the wages of native workers,
including those with less than a high school degree. Similarly, Basso and Peri (2015) conclude
that “the net growth of immigrant labor has a zero to positive correlation with changes in native
wages and native employment, in aggregate and by skill group.”

Although the literature has focused primarily on the effects of immigration on native workers,
for the purpose of understanding how immigration might have affected the overall employment
to population ratio, it also is relevant to ask how the employment rate among immigrants
compares to the employment rate among natives. Immigration tends to occur during a person’s
economically active years rather than later in life. All else the same, this will tend to make the
employment to population ratio higher among new immigrants than among the native
population, since the flow of new immigrants includes relatively few older people. As of 2018,
the overall employment rate among all foreign-born individuals age 16 and older was 63.4
percent, slightly higher than the native rate of 59.8 percent. Foreign-born men were more likely
than native men to be employed (75.5 percent versus 64.5 percent) and foreign-born women
were somewhat less likely than native women to be employed (52.1 percent versus 55.5
percent). 30 All else the same, given the composition of the immigrant population, the rising share
of the age-16-and-older population that is foreign born may have had a slight upward effect on
the overall employment to population ratio, but we are not aware of research that has addressed
exactly this question.



30
  Statistics on the native and foreign-born labor force reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics were
accessed at https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/forbrn.pdf.
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 38

Our reading of the available evidence is that, broadly consistent with the conclusion reached by
Blau and Mackie (2016), immigration has little overall effect on native wages or employment,
especially in the long run. There is considerable variation in the findings across studies and more
evidence to suggest that immigration could be responsible for significant wage declines—and
perhaps employment declines—among groups who are more substitutable with immigrants, such
as younger and less-skilled native workers. As a group, immigrants are somewhat more likely
than natives to be employed. The weight of the evidence in the literature leads us to be skeptical
that immigration has been an important factor in the observed overall decline in the
employment-to-population ratio.


C.    Labor Market Institutions and Frictions

Beyond the factors that have shifted labor demand and labor supply, some have suggested that
institutional constraints and growing labor market frictions increasingly could be hindering the
matching of people to jobs, leading to employment levels that are lower than they otherwise
would have been. Institutional constraints that could prevent wages from falling to market-
clearing levels and thereby dampen employment include minimum wages and occupational
licensing requirements. There has been a great deal of research on the employment effects of
minimum wages; the empirical basis for drawing conclusions about the employment effects of
occupational licensing is thinner.

Minimum Wages

The subject of how minimum wages affect employment has long been contentious. In a perfectly
competitive labor market, a minimum wage that exceeds the market-clearing wage can be
expected to reduce employment, but the size of the effect will depend on the elasticity of labor
demand. In a monopsonistic labor market in which firms’ marginal cost of labor may exceed the
wage they are paying, however, a minimum wage that raises wage rates, at least up to some
level, need not reduce employment.

For many years, the standard reference on the topic of how the minimum wage affects
employment was the review by Brown, Gilroy and Kohen (1982). Based primarily on aggregate
time series evidence, their summary conclusion was that a 10 percent increase in the minimum
wage could be expected to cause a 1 to 3 percent reduction in teen employment, with little effect
on employment among adults. The 1990s saw a renewal of interest in the minimum wage, with a
series of studies analyzing state-level responses to minimum wage changes (e.g., Card 1992a,
Card 1992b, Katz and Krueger 1992, Neumark and Wascher 1992, 2000; and Card and Krueger
2000).

The debate launched by these studies has spawned a sprawling new industry of minimum wage
research that has been facilitated by subsequent changes in the minimum wage landscape.
Whereas the Federal minimum wage was binding in all but eight states and the District of
Columbia as of the beginning of 1988, by 2018 there were 29 states plus the District of
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 39

Columbia that had minimum wages above the Federal minimum, with a difference of $1.00 per
hour or more in 28 of these jurisdictions. Many recent minimum wage studies have exploited the
ongoing changes in state minimum wages, by comparing changes in employment rates in
states—or in counties within states—where the state minimum wage had increased to the
changes in states or counties deemed to be similar where no such increase had occurred. Some of
these studies, such as Dube, Lester and Reich (2010), Allegretto, Dube and Reich (2011),
Allegretto et al. (2013) and Dube and Zipperer (2015), have found no detectable adverse
employment effects due to minimum wage increases of the magnitudes observed in the data.
Others, such as Neumark, Salas and Wascher (2014) and Powell (2016), have found significant
negative employment impacts.

One difference across this set of studies lies with the how the set of states or counties used for
making comparisons is constructed. In the literature that uses counties as the unit of observation,
the most common approach has been to use counties that are in geographic proximity—so-called
county border pairs—whereas other studies have used a more formal synthetic control or similar
methodology. Within the set of studies based on the synthetic control approach, there are also
differences in how the matching is accomplished. Another difference across the studies lies with
how underlying trends that might have affected employment in a particular county are taken into
account, for example, through a linear time trend versus some more flexible specification. The
findings of the different studies appear to be quite sensitive to these choices and there is no
consensus about the right approach to take.

An emerging literature has used individual-level data to focus on workers with wages in the
interval most likely to be affected by increases in the minimum wage. Clemens and Wither
(2019) examine the impact of the increase in the Federal minimum wage in July 2009 to $7.25
per hour on the subsequent employment of workers who had been earning less than $7.50 per
hour in 2008. They use data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to
compare the changes in employment for this group in states where the increase in the Federal
minimum was binding versus states where it was not. Their baseline estimate is that the 2009
increases in the Federal minimum wage reduced employment in the affected group by 6.6
percentage points or about 9 percent, which translates to a potential effect on the overall
employment-to-population ratio of about half a percentage point. Because minimum wage
workers commonly cycle into and out of the labor force and Clemens and Wither look only at
people who were employed in 2008, however, their baseline analysis seems likely to provide an
incomplete picture of the effects of the 2009 increase in the federal minimum.

Jardim et al. (2017) study the effect of the 2015 and 2016 increases in the Seattle minimum
wage, using repeated cross sections based on unemployment insurance wage records to track the
changes in employment in different wage intervals in Seattle as compared to other nearby
jurisdictions. They find little effect of the 2015 increase in the Seattle minimum to $11 per hour
but a significantly larger effect of the 2016 increase to $13 per hour. A limitation of this study is
that multi-establishment firms are excluded from the study sample. Finally, Cengiz et al. (2017)
study the effects of state minimum wage increases over the period from 1979 through 2016
using a bunching approach. They estimate that, when minimum wage increases occur, declines
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 40

in employment in the interval just below the new higher minimum are approximately offset by
increases in employment in the next higher wage interval, implying no net effect on employment
for minimum wage increases of the magnitude observed in the data. Again, there are a range of
estimates and no consensus in the literature.

All of the estimates we have cited account only for the direct effects of higher minimum wages
on employment. If there are indirect effects on employment resulting from increased aggregate
demand associated with increased purchasing power among low-income consumers, any
negative impacts reported in existing studies could overstate the true employment effect of
minimum wage increases. We are not aware of estimates that would allow us to credibly
quantify any such aggregate demand effect and we do not attempt to do so.

Because turnover rates are high among minimum wage workers, most existing research has
assumed that adjustments to an increase in the minimum wage occur relatively quickly. Sorkin
(2015) argues that, in a putty-clay model in which permanently higher minimum wages lead
firms to choose more capital-intensive technologies, the long-run effects of a permanent increase
in the minimum could be substantially larger than the short-run effects estimated in most studies.
Similar, Meer and West (2016) argue that a permanent increase in the minimum wage is likely to
affect employment primarily by reducing future job growth, as firms that build new production
capacity choose more capital-intensive technologies. To the extent that existing estimates look at
minimum wage effects realized over relatively short periods of time, they may understate the
long run effects of higher minimums.

Most past minimum wage increases have been specified in nominal terms and firms would have
known that the real value of the new minimum would erode over time with inflation, moderating
the incentive to invest in labor-saving technology. To the extent that state minimum wages
increasingly are indexed to inflation, however, this could change in the future. Brummond and
Strain (forthcoming) use county-level data for the period from 1990 to 2016 to compare the
effects of minimum wage increases in cases where the minimum wage is and is not indexed to
inflation. They find substantially larger employment elasticities in response to an increase in the
case of an indexed minimum wage. Further, we would add, the size of any future minimum
wage increases is likely to matter. Even if past minimum wage increases have had little effect on
employment, this would not necessarily be the case for larger increases in the future.

To estimate the potential impact of minimum wage increases between 1999 and 2018, we first
need to know how the average real minimum wage changed over this period. Data from the
Department of Labor on statutory state and federal minimum wages are not available for 1999;
we base our estimates on the information reported for 1998. According to our calculations, the
effective real minimum wage fell by 3.2 percent from 1998 to 2007 and then rose by 13.5
percent between 2007 and 2018, for a net increase of 9.9 percent over the entire 1998 to 2018
period. 31

31
  Our estimate of the effective change in the minimum wage was constructed by weighting the
percentage increase in the real minimum wage in each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia over
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 41



To set an upper bound on the potential dis-employment effect of this 9.9 percent increase in the
effective minimum wage, we take the estimated employment elasticity for teenagers of -0.44
from Powell (2016), an estimate that is relatively high compared to those reported in most other
recent papers. Powell does not report an estimated employment elasticity for adults. For the
purposes of a back-of-the-envelope calculation, we follow the convention adopted by
Congressional Budget Office (2014b) assessment of the minimum wage literature and arbitrarily
assume that the employment elasticity for affected adults with respect to an increase in the
minimum would be a third the size of the elasticity for affected teens. Teens are about four times
as likely as adults to have wages at or below the minimum wage, leading us to assume an effect
for all adults of about one-twelfth the size of the effect for all teens. Under these assumptions,
the estimated effect of minimum wage increases since 1999 on the 2018 employment-to-
population ratio is roughly 0.3 to 0.4 percentage point. Putting one-third weight on this estimate
and two-thirds weight on the zero employment effect more commonly found in the recent
literature, we speculate that minimum wage increases may have accounted for roughly a 0.10
percentage point reduction in the employment-to-population ratio between 1999 and 2018. We
hasten to add, however, that there is a considerable error band around this estimate.

Rise in Occupational Licensing

Another possible explanation for falling employment rates is the notable increase in the share of
workers in occupations for which a state or local government license is required to work. By one
estimate, this share has risen from just 5 percent of workers in the late 1950s to nearly 30 percent
of workers today (Kleiner and Krueger 2013). Occupations subject to licensing requirements in
one or more states include occupations, such as physicians, dentists, teachers, and electricians, in
which there is an obvious rationale for requiring some demonstration of the qualifications of
those performing the work. They also include a large number of occupations in which the
rationale for licensing is considerably less obvious, such as auctioneers, florists, locksmiths,
ballroom dance instructors, hair braiders, manicurists, interior designers, and upholsterers
(Kleiner 2015).

The literature offers two different perspectives on the role of occupational licensing. One
perspective emphasizes the barriers that occupational licensing creates to entry into affected
occupations. In this view, occupational licensing should raise wages but reduce employment in
covered occupations. A second perspective emphasizes the role that licensing may play in
increasing consumer confidence and thereby potentially increasing the demand for the services


each of the periods in question by the jurisdiction’s 2000 population share. Information on state minimum
wages is available at https://www.dol.gov/whd/state/stateMinWageHis.htm; data are reported only for
selected years prior to 2000. The calculation used the Federal minimum wage where it was binding and
the state minimum wage in cases where it exceeded the Federal minimum wage. Where the applicable
state minimum varied (e.g., by size of firm), the calculation used the highest reported rate. The nominal
minimum was converted to a real minimum using the Consumer Price Index as a deflator. Similar results
were obtained using 2010 rather than 2000 state population shares to carry out the calculations.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 42

of those in affected occupations. These two competing perspectives share the prediction that
licensing should raise occupational wages, but differ in their predictions about the effects of
licensing on occupational employment. Further, even if it is the case that licensing reduces
employment in the affected occupations, the effects on aggregate employment are less
straightforward. A decline in employment in the licensed sector should increase the supply of
labor to the non-licensed sector. If wages in the non-licensed sector fall as a result, those jobs
may become less attractive and some people who otherwise would have worked may decide to
leave the labor force. The magnitude of any resulting change in overall employment will depend
on the elasticities of labor demand and labor supply in the lower-paid non-licensed sector. 32

Numerous studies have concluded that occupational licensing requirements raise wages in the
licensed occupations. In an analysis using American Community Survey data for the 2000s,
Thornton and Timmons (2013) find, in models that include state fixed effects, that the
introduction of licensing requirements for massage therapists raised their wages by about 12
percent. Most state licensing requirements for nurses were introduced between 1940 and 1980.
Looking at Census data for this period, Law and Marks (2017) find that the introduction of these
licensing requirements was associated with an increase in nurses’ wages of 5 to 10 percent.
Gittleman, Klee, and Kleiner (2015) analyze data from a module included on the 2008 SIPP and,
after controlling for a large number of other observable characteristics, find that holding a state-
issued occupational license is associated with a wage premium of about 5 percent. 33 Using data
from a telephone survey they commissioned Westat to conduct, Kleiner and Krueger (2013) find
that state level licensing is associated with an average occupational wage premium on the order
of 15 percent, roughly in line with the wage premium associated with union membership.

Evidence on the employment effects of occupational licensing is more mixed. Thornton and
Timmons (2013) find that licensing requirements for massage therapists reduced their share of
employment, though we note that the data from the Occupational Employment Statistics survey

32
   Stories similar to those told about the potential effects occupational licensing also have been told about
the potential effects of unionization. On the one hand, the fact that unionization leads to a union wage
premium could mean that fewer people end up working in the union sector than would be efficient,
leading to crowding in the nonunion sector. On the other hand, unionization may be associated with
higher productivity that justifies union workers' higher wages (see, e.g., Freeman and Medoff 1984). In
recent decades, as the prevalence of occupational licensing has risen, the share of the U.S. workforce who
are union members has fallen, from more than 35 percent in the 1950s to just over 10 percent in 2016
(Hirsch and Macpherson 2003, Mayer 2004, Dunn and Walker 2016). To the extent that the growth in
occupational licensing has affected the labor market mainly by reducing the supply of workers to licensed
occupations and pushing more people towards unlicensed occupations, the decline in unionization
occurring over the same period might be expected to have had offsetting effects. More specifically, the
decline in unionization could have reduced the extent to which above-market union wages push workers
out of that sector and crowd them into the nonunion sector.
33
   Also using data from the 2008 SIPP module and controlling for a variety of observable characteristics,
Blair and Chung (2017) estimate occupational licensing premiums for black men, white women and black
women (13 percent, 14 percent and 16 percent, respectively) that are considerably larger than the
premium they estimate for white men (8 percent).
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 43

they analyze exclude self-employed massage therapists. Using decennial Census data, Law and
Marks (2017) find no significant effect of licensing requirements for nurses in a state on the
share of labor force participants who report a nursing occupation. Kleiner (2006) presents
evidence that within-occupation employment growth is substantially slower in states with full
licensing requirements. In a recent study, Blair and Chung (2018) use the cross-state county-
boundary pairs that they are able to observe in Current Population Survey data for 2015 to study
the effects of licensing requirements on the share of employment in affected occupations. Their
estimates imply that a licensing requirement reduces the share of people employed in an
occupation by 17 to 19 percent. Although the estimates in some of these studies are large, having
a lower share of employment in licensed occupations does not necessarily imply that overall
employment is lower.

The increasing prevalence of occupational licensing also could have dampened employment by
making workers less geographically mobile. Because licensing occurs at the state level, workers
in licensed occupations who move across state lines typically must meet any requirements set in
the new state to continue working in the occupation. Peterson, Pandya, and Leblang (2014)
exploit changes in state-level residency training requirements for immigrant physicians over the
years between 1973 and 2010. They find that states imposing more stringent requirements
receive fewer immigrant physicians, consistent with the prediction that occupational licensing
restricts employment-based migration. One might expect reciprocity agreements under which
states recognize licenses issued in other states to reduce the barriers to inter-state mobility
created by licensing requirements. In one recent study, however, DePasquale and Stange (2016)
find no increase in geographic mobility or employment among nurses after the reciprocal
arrangements associated with the Nursing Compact were introduced. Johnson and Kleiner (2017)
make use of a novel strategy to distinguish the effects of licensing from the effects of other
possible differences between licensed and unlicensed occupations, such as the importance of
having an established client base, on interstate mobility rates. They estimate the coefficient on
licensing in two equations, one with whether the respondent made an interstate move as the
dependent variable and the second with whether the respondent made a within-state move to a
nonadjacent area as the dependent variable. 34 The difference between these coefficients is their
estimate of the effect of licensing on interstate mobility. In Johnson and Kleiner’s models,
estimated using American Community Survey data for the period 2005 through 2015, licensed
occupations are the 22 occupations for which all states impose licensing requirements. They find
that licensing requirements that differ across states (e.g., those for lawyers, insurance agents,
elementary school teachers, electricians, and barbers) lead to significantly lower rates of inter-
state mobility, but licensing requirements that are essentially national (e.g. those for social
workers, veterinarians, nurses, doctors, dentists, optometrists and a variety of other health
professionals) have no such effect.



34
  The areas used by Johnson and Kleiner (2017) are what are referred to as Public Use Microdata Areas
of Migration, corresponding to 100,000 or more residents and defined separately within each state.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 44

Given the dramatic increase in occupational licensing over recent decades and a plausible
rationale for believing this could have led to net reductions in employment, it seems possible that
occupational licensing has contributed to the decline in the employment-to-population ratio over
the 1999 to 2018 period. One channel for such an effect might be that licensing has made it more
difficult for workers who lost their job due to other factors, such as trade or technology, to start
their own business or enter a new occupation. At this stage of the literature, however, we find it
difficult to draw any strong conclusion about the labor market effects of the growth in
occupational licensing and flag this as an area warranting additional research.

Other Institutional Frictions

The concerns about occupational licensing and its potential effects on labor market mobility are
among a set of concerns raised by Davis and Haltiwanger (2014) about institutional frictions and
reductions in labor market fluidity more generally. Davis and Haltiwanger define labor market
fluidity in terms of the rate of job entry and job exit and show that, by this definition, fluidity has
fallen considerably in recent decades, a finding corroborated by Molloy et al. (2016) using
somewhat different data. Although reduced fluidity may have beneficial effects – in particular,
by reducing the rate at which workers enter unemployment – there are channels through which it
could lead to lower employment rates. On the worker side, Davis and Haltiwanger argue, it
implies longer jobless spells that could lead to a loss of human capital and counter-productive
increases in the psychic costs of job seeking. Further, these effects could interact with employer
hiring behavior that disadvantages those with longer jobless spells (see, for example, Kroft,
Lange, Notowidigdo (2013), Ghayad (2013), and Eriksson and Rooth (2014), though in a study
focused on college-educated women, Farber, Silverman and von Wachter (2016) find no
evidence of lower employer callback rates for those with longer jobless spells).

Any negative effects of reduced fluidity are likely to inflict disproportionate harm on workers
who are more marginal or possess more limited skills. Davis and Haltiwanger present some
evidence based on annual state-level panel data that lower fluidity may indeed be linked to lower
employment rates, but without a better understanding of the causes of declining fluidity and the
channels through which these factors might affect employment, we are not comfortable drawing
any strong conclusions. For the moment, we identify this as another interesting area for future
research.

Skill Mismatch between Workers and Jobs

Another argument is that structural mismatch between the skills possessed by available workers
and the requirements of available jobs has prevented employers from hiring as many people as
they would like, leading to a lower level of employment. The fact that unemployed workers co-
exist with vacant jobs sometimes is cited in support of this argument. During the recent Great
Recession, for example, statements to this effect were made by politicians from both parties
seeking to explain why unemployment was so high (Abraham 2015). In any dynamic labor
market, however, there will always be both unemployment and vacancies resulting simply from
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 45

normal turnover. When a job vacancy is created, whether through attrition or an employer’s
desire to increase the number of people employed, filling it unavoidably takes some time. The
question of interest for our purposes is whether the process of matching available workers to
vacant jobs has become less efficient over time, reducing the steady state level of employment.

In a simple model in which unemployed workers are seeking to match with vacant jobs, frictions
in the matching process will produce an outward shift in the downward sloping curve that traces
out the relationship between unemployment and vacancies, sometimes referred to as the
Beveridge curve. As documented by Abraham (2015), the Beveridge curve was stable between
2000 and 2009. During the years following the onset of the Great Recession, however, higher
vacancy rates were associated with given unemployment rates, leading some to conclude that
mismatch between available workers and vacant jobs must have worsened. Absent direct
evidence of growing mismatch, however, this may have been the wrong conclusion to draw.

Şahin et al. (2014) use Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey and Help Wanted Online data
on job openings together with data from the Current Population Survey on the jobs most recently
held by the unemployed to look for evidence of possible changes in industry, occupational and
geographic mismatch. Their industry analysis covers the period from 2001 to 2012; the
occupational and geographic analyses cover the period from 2005 to 2012. They conclude that
increased occupational and industry mismatch could have contributed to the increase in
unemployment during and immediately after the Great Recession, but that any such increase in
mismatch was short-lived.

Other possible explanations for the apparent outward shift in the Beveridge curve include
unemployed workers searching less hard for work or employers recruiting less intensively to fill
their jobs. In either of these cases, the outward shift would be better interpreted as the result of
an underlying change in labor supply or labor demand behavior, rather than as an indication of
mismatch. Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2013) provide some evidence that the outward
post-recession shift in the Beveridge curve might have been related to declining employer
recruitment intensity. Whatever the explanation, by 2018, unemployment and vacancies were
back along the pre-recession Beveridge curve, consistent with the apparent outward shift in the
aftermath of the Great Recession having been a temporary cyclical phenomenon rather than the
result of any longer-term increase in mismatch.

More fundamentally, thinking about mismatch simply in terms of the apparent fit between
unemployed individuals and vacant jobs may be misguided (Abraham and Haltiwanger 2019).
For one thing, the unemployed are not the only people who are potentially available to fill vacant
jobs. People currently out of the labor force are an important potential source of labor supply;
perhaps surprisingly, in a typical month, a larger number of jobs are filled by people who had
been out of the labor force the previous month than are filled by people who had been
unemployed (see, e.g., Hornstein, Kudlyak and Lange 2014). Employers also fill a significant
share of their vacant positions by recruiting people who are currently employed elsewhere (see,
e.g., Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl 2018). Given the variety of options available to employers for
filling their jobs, simply comparing the industry or occupational distribution of available
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 46

positions with the industry or occupational distribution of the last job held by currently
unemployed individuals could give a very misleading picture of the extent of skill mismatch in
the labor market. Further, employers are likely to have some discretion about how to organize
work at their firms, and thus some discretion about the types of vacancies they will seek to fill.

All of this is not to say that skill mismatch plays no role in the labor market, but only that there
is a lack of direct evidence about its importance and, more important, no compelling reason to
believe that it has worsened over time. Our reading of the limited available evidence is that
growing skill mismatch is unlikely to have contributed notably to the observed decline in
employment rates, but further research on this topic would be welcome.

Spatial Mismatch and Reduced Geographic Mobility

A related explanation for the relatively low rates of employment among low-wage workers is
“spatial mismatch,” which posits that residential distance from job locations keeps workers out
of jobs. Much of the support for this notion comes from cross-sectional evidence, which is
potentially confounded by individual and neighborhood effects. A recent paper by Andersson et
al. (2018) offers causal evidence that distance from available jobs leads to longer job search
duration among low-income workers with strong labor force attachment. The authors use
longitudinal, matched employer-employee administrative data integrated with data on worker
and neighborhood characteristics from the 2000 Census, combined with comprehensive
transportation network data for nine large Great Lakes metropolitan areas. Among workers
displaced by a mass layoff, those with longer commuting times to potential new job sites
experience significantly longer spells of joblessness. While this is valuable information, it is not
clear whether the findings can be generalized. More importantly, we do not know that (travel
time) distance from possible jobs has increased for less-educated workers.

Declining rates of geographic mobility are another possible explanation for falling employment
rates. Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2011) document that internal migration rates have trended
steadily downward over the past 25 years and are now lower than at any previous time in the
post-war period. Their tabulations using data from the U.S. Census show that in 1980, 9.9
percent of the population had moved across state lines in the past five years; that rate was 9.6 in
1990 and 8.9 in 2000. Other measures reveal a similar downward trend. Davis and Haltiwanger
(2014) also document declines in geographic mobility. If workers have become less willing to
move in search of better economic opportunities, this could have caused an increase in
geographic mismatch. Ganong and Shoag (2017) present evidence suggesting that over the
period 1980 and 2010, stringent land use regulations have led to income gains being capitalized
into higher house prices, and that this in turn has led to reduced rates of directed migration. They
claim that this phenomenon has been a significant factor contributing to the decline of income
convergence across regions.

An important recent paper by Dao, Furceri, and Loungani (2017) examines the migration
response to regional labor shocks, building on the seminar work of Blanchard and Katz (1992).
The paper documents the cyclical and trend behavior of U.S. labor mobility from 1977 to 2015
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 47

using state and MSA level labor market data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and
population and migration data from the U.S. Census. A key finding of the paper is that rates of
out-migration from areas experiencing economic downturns has decreased over this nearly 30
year period. The paper also shows that interstate migration in response to regional asymmetries
in job opportunities actually increases in recessions, which implies that the finding of reduced
out-migration in response to negative shocks is more of a long-term structural phenomenon then
a feature of the Great Recession.

While declining mobility may indeed have contributed to declining employment rates, Kaplan
and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) suggest that this need not be the case. First, they argue that the
returns to occupations have become less geographically specific than in the past. Second, they
suggest that advances in information technology and declines in travel costs have made it easier
to learn about faraway places before moving there, so that there are fewer migrants who move,
discover they are unhappy in their new location, and return home. If their story is right, declines
in gross migration rates do not translate directly into workers being allocated less efficiently
across areas.

Autor (2019) casts further doubt on the role that declining mobility has played in driving down
employment among adults without a college degree. He focuses mostly on wages, but his work
likely has implications for employment as well. He shows that the urban wage premium – the
relatively higher wage that a worker of a given level of skill would earn in a metro versus non-
metro area – that historically existed for all workers has disappeared for non-college educated
workers. Whereas other authors have posited that the decline in geographic mobility of non-
college workers into high-wage cities has contributed to their weak employment and wage
outcomes, Autor (2019) shows that there has been a disappearance of the middle-skill jobs in
metro areas that once benefited non-college workers relative to their non-metro counterparts. He
proposes that “the slowing inflow of non-college workers into urban labor markets may reflect
less a failure of arbitrage than a fall in the economic allure that these labor markets once held for
less-skilled workers.” This does not imply that out of work individuals might not be able to
increase their employment by moving, but Autor (2019) raises doubts about the claim that
reduced mobility necessarily means that individuals – non-college educated individuals in
particular – aren’t taking advantage of employment opportunities that exist elsewhere.

We conclude that the role of declining geographic mobility in driving down rates of employment
is an important open question. Although we are not aware of direct evidence to suggest that
geographic mismatch has grown in recent decades, the facts about declining geographic
mobility, in particular the finding of a muted response to negative economic shocks, make it
plausible that employment-to-population ratios might be higher if rates of directed migration
were higher. This is another topic that merits further investigation.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 48

Incarceration

A final important trend that warrants attention is the dramatic increase in incarceration during the
past three decades. The incarceration rate, defined as the number of inmates per 100,000 U.S.
residents, increased from 220 in 1980 to 756 in 2008, before falling slightly to 710 in 2012
(Kearney et al. 2014). This increase is especially relevant for the demographic groups that are
most likely to face incarceration, namely young minority males. For instance, Western and
Wildeman (2009) estimate that, in 2005, a 30 to 34 year old African American men without a
high school degree would have had nearly a 70 percent chance of having been imprisoned at
some point in his life thus far. Academic research suggests that increases in crime cannot
explain the growth in the incarceration rate since the 1980s. Rather, that growth appears to be
attributable to changes in policy, such as sentencing guidelines and mandatory sentencing laws
for drug-related offenses that have increased both the likelihood of going to prison and sentence
lengths (Raphael and Stoll 2013). 35

Because standard labor market statistics derived from the Current Population Survey are based
on the non-institutionalized population and exclude those who are incarcerated, they understate
the extent to which young men have become detached from the labor market. Doleac (2016)
reexamines employment statistics in light of this fact. She compares the official employment-to-
population ratios for black and white men aged 20–39 with adjusted versions that include the
incarcerated in the denominator. As she explains, taking the incarcerated into account has only a
minimal effect on the employment-to-population ratio for white men in this age range (for
example, reducing it from around 81 percent to 80 percent in 2014). For black men in the same
age range, however, it lowers the employment-to-population ratio by almost 4 percentage points
in recent years (for example, from around 66 percent to 62 percent in 2014.)

Individuals who are incarcerated not only are unable to work during the period when they are in
prison, but having been incarcerated may have a negative effect on their employment prospects
after release. One channel through which incarceration could negatively impact subsequent
employment rates is that labor market skills could deteriorate while a person is in prison, though
in some cases well designed rehabilitation programs might actually enhance inmates’ labor
market skills. A second potentially important channel is that employers may discriminate against
those with criminal records or prison time. This is the motivation for recent “ban the box”
initiatives, though some preliminary evidence suggests that such policies could lead to statistical
discrimination that lowers hiring rates for young minority men (Agan and Starr 2017; Doleac
and Hansen forthcoming).



35
  We focus here on incarceration and its effects on subsequent employment outcomes, but note that the
number of people with felony convictions who do not serve prison time also has risen (Shannon et al.
2017). Less is known about this population and their subsequent experiences than about those who are
incarcerated.
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 49

The most credible estimates that we know of on the causal impact of incarceration on later
employment come from Mueller-Smith (2015), who uses original data from Harris County,
Texas. His dataset consists of criminal court records – over 2.6 million records accounting for
1.1 million unique defendants – linked to administrative data for state prisons and county jails
and state unemployment insurance wage records. His empirical analysis takes advantage of the
random assignment of criminal defendants to courtrooms staffed by judges and prosecutors with
different propensities of sending a defendant to prison. 36 He finds that among those with
significant previous earnings, a prison term – driven by exogenous courtroom assignment –
causes subsequent employment rates to be lower. The estimated labor market impacts grow with
previous earnings and with time spent in prison. The largest effects are for those whose annual
earnings over the three years prior to going to prison averaged over $17,050, the federal poverty
threshold at the time of observation for a family of four. Among those in that group who served
at least two years, there is a statistically significant 39 percentage point reduction in the
likelihood of employment two years after release; among those who served one to two years,
there is a statistically significant 24 percentage point reduction. These are very large effects. The
estimated effects for a 6 month prison term or for those with low or no earnings prior to a
conviction are smaller and generally not statistically different from zero.

To gauge how much of the decline in the aggregate employment rate might be attributable to
increases in incarceration rates, we make a very rough calculation based on Mueller-Smith’s
estimates of the causal impact of having served time on employment. Ideally we would have
data on the stock of U.S. adults who have been incarcerated, but this information does not exist
in any public dataset. Instead, we use estimates of the number of former prisoners developed by
Bucknor and Barber (2016). Their estimate rests on data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics on
the number of people of different ages released from prison in each year from 1968 through
2014. After adjustments to account for recidivism and mortality, these counts can be cumulated
to produce an estimate of the stock of former prisoners. Bucknor and Barber (2016) estimate
that there were 6.1 million to 6.9 million former prisoners between age 18 and 64 as of 2014; we
use 6.5 million, the midpoint of this range, in our calculations. 37 Note that this estimate does not
include people who served time in jail rather than prison. 38

36
   An earlier study by Kling (2006) used random assignment to judges to isolate a causal effect of longer
incarceration time. His study uses state prison records from Florida (1993-2002) and California (1987-
1997), so he is limited to looking at length of incarceration rather than the extensive margin of any
incarceration. In contrast to what Mueller-Smith finds with regard to length of time served, Kling (2006)
does not find evidence that a longer incarceration sentence is associated with worse outcomes; in fact, he
finds that in the one to two years post release, a longer sentence term is associated with an increase in
short-term employment and earnings.
37
   We would expect the number of previously-incarcerated individuals in the non-institutionalized civilian
population to have been larger in 2018 than in 2014, but have no way to estimate how much larger and
therefore simply use the Bucknor and Barber estimates in our calculations.
38
   Bucknor and Barber (2016) adopt the methodology used by Schmitt and Warner (2010), who show that
their estimate of the size of the ex-prisoner population for 2008 is similar to that obtained by other
independent researchers. The estimates in these two papers are also broadly consistent with those
reported by Shannon et al. (2017) using similar life table methods. Shannon et al. (2017) estimate that, in
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 50



To apply the Mueller-Smith (2015) impact estimates, we also need an estimate of the fraction of
these individuals who had been in prison two years or more, one to two years and less than one
year. We base our estimates of these fractions on data for the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth (NLSY) from 2014, when sample members were between the ages of 30 to 34. Based
on the NLSY97 data, we estimate that about 9.1 percent of adults who were age 30-34 in 2014
had spent some time in jail or prison. We assume that those reporting one-month spells in
confinement and half of those reporting spells of less than a year had been in jail rather than in
prison (2.1 percent of the population) and that the remainder of those with spells of less than a
year together with those reporting longer spells had been in prison (7.0 percent of the
population). Among the 7.0 percent we assume had been in prison, approximately 43 percent
had been confined for two years or more, approximately 27 percent had been confined for one to
two years, and approximately 30 percent had been confined for less than a year.

Based loosely on observed trends, we assume that 60 percent of the formerly incarcerated
population estimated by Bucknor and Barber (2016) served time as a result of the policy-induced
rise in incarceration rates since the 1990s. 39 This yields an additional 1.7 million working age
individuals with a prior prison term of two years or longer and 1.0 million with a prior prison
term of one to two years. Using the numbers on the distribution of pre-conviction earnings
obtained by Mueller-Smith, we further assume that 18 percent of these individuals would have
had significant earnings and 58 percent would have had some lower level of earnings prior to
serving their prison term. We then apply his estimates of the reduction in the probability of
employment associated with a prison term—39 percentage points for those with significant prior
earnings and two years or more in prison; 24 percentage points for those with significant prior
earnings and one to two years in prison; 11 percentage points for those with low prior earnings
and two years or more in prison; and 9 percentage points for those with low prior earnings and
one to two years in prison. Based on these calculations, we estimate that in the absence of the
rise in incarceration, there would have been about 324,000 more employed workers in 2018.
Note that this calculation assumes no incarceration-related employment losses among those age
65 and older. Adding these extra workers to the workforce would have increased the
employment-to-population ratio by about 0.13 percentage points.

Given the number of assumptions required to make this calculation, we do not take our estimate
too literally as a specific magnitude, but it does give us a sense for the likely ranking of
incarceration as a contributor to falling employment. The role of incarceration, and criminal



2010, there were 4.9 million U.S. adults who had been formerly in prison or on parole and predict
continuing increases in the number of former prisoners due to the release over time of those who are
currently incarcerated.
39
   Among the NLSY79 cohort born between 1957 and 1965, 7.2 percent report having been jailed before
the age of 34; the corresponding number for the NLSY97 cohort born between 1980 and 1984 is 17.4
percent, 2.5 times as large. Data on time in confinement are not available in the earlier survey, but we
assume as a rough approximation that the percent in each of the time-served categories increased in the
same proportion as the overall percent with any jail or prison time.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 51

convictions more generally, in driving down rates of employment, especially among young
minority males, is an issue that warrants further research and policy attention.


   IV.      CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS

We conclude our review of the evidence with an attempt to rank the various factors we have
considered by their likely contribution to the decline in the overall employment-to-population
ratio over the 1999 to 2018 period. Table 3 lists the factors that we have considered as potential
drivers of this decline, including labor demand factors, labor supply factors, institutional factors
and labor market frictions. Where possible, we have entered our best estimate of the effects of
the identified factors; in other cases, there is too little available evidence for us to draw
quantitative conclusions. As reported in Table 1A, the employment-to-population ratio for the
population 16 and over fell by 3.8 percentage points between 1999 and 2018. This number is
useful as a way to scale the percentage point reductions attributed to the various factors, but as
discussed at length above, it is a net figure that reflects both positive and negative influences on
the overall employment rate over the period we study.

Our review of the evidence leads us to conclude that, among the factors whose effects we are
able to quantify, labor demand factors are the most important drivers of the secular decline in
employment over the 1999 to 2018 period. In this category, the effects of increased imports from
China are single largest contributor to the decline in employment, potentially accounting for an
estimated 0.92 percentage point decline in the employment-to-population ratio. The next largest
contributor we are able to quantify is the growing penetration of robots into the labor market.
Based on the evidence reviewed, we attribute a decline in the employment-to-population ratio of
0.43 percentage point to this factor.

We judge labor supply factors as a group to have been less important drivers of the decline in
employment. Our rough estimate is that the growth in SSDI caseloads over the 1999 to 2018
period led the employment-to-population ratio to be 0.09 percentage point lower than it
otherwise would have been. We also conclude that the Veteran Affairs Disability Compensation
program likely has contributed to a reduction in the employment to population ratio, on the order
of perhaps an additional 0.07 percentage point. Taken together, the estimated effects of the two
disability programs sum to perhaps 0.17 percentage point. We do not attribute any of the
reduction in aggregate employment to other social safety net programs, such as the SNAP
program, the expansion of public health insurance or health insurance subsidies, or the EITC
program.

The difficulties that working parents face in reconciling their parental and work responsibilities
also undoubtedly are a factor in individual labor supply decisions, but lack of public support for
affordable child care or paid family leave in the United States cannot explain the secular decline
in employment, as there have been no substantial changes in these policies. It is possible,
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 52

however, that other forces have reduced the accessibility of child care, especially for low wage
workers with unpredictable schedules, and further research on the role of family policy broadly
construed as an influence on parents’ employment decisions would be welcome.

We do not attempt to assign a magnitude to the possible contribution of improved leisure
technology, in particular video gaming technology, but call attention to the provocative
hypothesis that has been advanced about its possible effects on young men’s participation. This
is an issue deserving additional attention, along with the consumption enhancing (and labor
reducing) role that (endogenously) changing social norms and the increased likelihood of living
with parents and other family members could be playing for young men. The rise in opioid use
among prime-age individuals is another factor that has been associated with decreased
employment rates, but we view the evidence on how much of the associated reduction in
employment is caused by opioid supply rather than endogenous demand for drug use as still
being rather speculative. This is another issue that warrants further research.

We do not attribute any of the reduction in aggregate employment to increases in the number of
immigrants. The available evidence suggests that immigration may have had a modest effect on
teen employment, but there is no consistent indication that it has affected either the overall
employment rate or the employment of subgroups within the prime-age adult population.

Turning to the potential effects of labor market frictions, increases in the real value of state
minimum wages also may have had an impact on the employment to population ratio,
accounting for perhaps an additional 0.10 percentage point decline over the period of interest.
Another factor that may have played a role is the rise in incarceration and the resulting growth in
the number of individuals with prison records. Our best guess is that this factor has contributed
to a decline in the EPOP on the order of 0.13 percentage points.

Although there is growing evidence that occupational licensing affects entry into covered
occupations, the literature has little to say about its effects on the level of aggregate employment.
We have seen no compelling evidence that institutional frictions have been important drivers of
falling employment, but given the decline in worker mobility and the open question about the
reasons for that decline, we view this as another topic on which the literature has not yet
produced a definitive answer.

Even where we have entered an estimate of the size of a factor’s effect on aggregate
employment, our numbers are necessarily speculative. An important consideration is that, as
described above, many of the estimates in the literature from which we draw are identified based
on some type of local variation in exposure to a policy or condition. Some of the authors of the
papers we cite have incorporated econometric adjustments in an attempt to make aggregate
statements based on parameters estimated using local data. Where that is not the case, we have
attempted to be careful in interpreting the available findings. Still, we acknowledge the
uncertainty around the available estimates and urge caution in putting too much emphasis on the
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 53

specific percentage point numbers. We are more confident about our qualitative conclusions
concerning whether a factor’s impact is relatively large or relatively small.

Throughout the paper, we have attempted to highlight open questions and identify areas in which
more research is needed. There are many outstanding questions and much to explore.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 54


REFERENCES

Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and
William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future
Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 45(2): 197-255.

Aaronson, Daniel, Jonathan Davis, and Luojia Hu. 2012. “Explaining the Decline in the U.S.
Labor Force Participation Rate,” Chicago Fed Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, No.
296.

Abraham, Katharine G. 2015. “Is Skill Mismatch Impeding U.S. Economic Recovery?” ILR
Review 68(2): 291-313.

Abraham, Katharine G. and John C. Haltiwanger. 2019. “How Tight is the Labor Market?” paper
prepared for Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices,
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, , Chicago, IL, June 4-5.

Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price. 2016.
“Import Competition and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s,” Journal of Labor
Economics 34(S1): S141-S198.

Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo. 2017. “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor
Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 23285, Cambridge, MA.

Agan, Amanda and Sonja Starr. 2017. “Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial
Discrimination: A Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 191–235.

Aguiar, Mark, Mark Bils, Kerwin Charles, and Erik Hurst. 2017. “Leisure, Luxuries and the
Labor Supply of Young Men,” NBER Working Paper No. 23552, Cambridge, MA.

Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2011. “Do Minimum Wages Really
Reduce Teen Employment? Accounting for Heterogeneity and Selectivity in State Panel Data,”
Industrial Relations 50(2): 205-240.

Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2013. "Credible Research
Designs for Minimum Wage Studies,” Institute for Research on Labor and Employment,
Working Paper No. 148-13, University of California, Berkeley.

Aliprantis, Dionissi and Mark E. Schweitzer. 2018. “Opioids and the Labor Market,” Cleveland
Federal Reserve Bank Working Paper No. 18-17, Cleveland, OH.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 55

Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card. 1991. “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives,” in J. Abowd and R. Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade, and
the Labor Market, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 201-234.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Philip B. Levine. 1999. “Child Care and Mothers’ Employment
Decisions,” NBER Working Paper No. 7058, Cambridge, MA.

Andersson, Fredrik, John C. Haltiwanger, Mark J. Kutzbach, Henry O. Pollakowski, and Daniel
H. Weinberg. 2018. “Job Displacement and the Duration of Joblessness: The Role of Spatial
Mismatch,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(2): 203–218.

Autor, David. 2019. “Work of the Past, Work of the Future,” American Economic Association:
Papers and Proceeding, 109, 1–32.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review 103:
2121-68.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2015. “Untangling Trade and
Technology: Evidence from Local Labor Markets,” The Economic Journal 125(584): 621-646.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Jae Song. 2014. “Trade Adjustment: Worker
Level Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4): 1799-1860.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1): 157–206.

Autor, David, Mark Duggan, Kyle Greenberg, and David S. Lyle. 2016. “The Impact of
Disability Benefits on Labor Supply: Evidence from the VA’s Disability Compensation
Program,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(3): 31-68.

Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman. 2014. "The Impact of
Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment,” American Economic Review 104(5): 322-28.

Baker, Miccl, Jonathan Gruer, and Kevin Milligan. 2008. “Universal Child Care, Maternal Labor
Supply, and Family Well-Being,” Journal of Political Economy 116(4): 709–745.

Basso, Gaetano, and Giovanni Peri. 2015. “The Association between Immigration and Labor
Market Outcomes in the United States,” Research Briefs in Economic Policy, No. 43, Cato
Institute, Washington, DC.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 56

Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott. 2006. “Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure
to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing Plants,” Journal of
International Economics 68(1): 219-237.

Blair, Peter Q. and Bobby W. Chung. 2017. “Occupational Licensing Reduces Racial and
Gender Wage Gaps: Evidence from the Survey of Income and Program Participation,” Clemson
University, unpublished working paper.

Blair, Peter Q. and Bobby W. Chung. 2018. “How Much of Barrier to Entry is Occupational
Licensing?,” NBER Working Paper No. 25262, Cambridge, MA.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 23(1): 1-76.

Blau, David and Philip K. Robins. 1988. “Child-Care Costs and Family Labor Supply,”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 70(3): 374-381.

Blau, Francine and Christopher Mackie. 2016. The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of
Immigration. The National Academies Press: Washington, D.C.

Bloom, Nicholas, Kyle Handley, Andre Kurmann and Philip Luck. 2019. “The Impact of
Chinese Trade on U.S. Employment: The Good, the Bad and the Apocryphal,” unpublished
working paper.

Borjas, George J. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward sloping: Reexamining the
Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1335-
1374.

Borjas, George J. 2006. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of
Immigration,” Journal of Human Resources 41(2): 221-258.

Bound, John, 1989. "The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants,”
American Economic Review 79(3): 482-503.

Boushey, Heather and Bridget Ansel. 2016. “Working by the Hour,” Washington Center for
Equitable Growth. Washington, DC.

Boyle, Melissa A. and Joanna N. Lahey. 2010. “Health Insurance and the Labor Supply
Decisions of Older Workers: Evidence from a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Expansion,”
Journal of Public Economics 94: 467–478.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1982. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
Employment and Unemployment,” Journal of Economic Literature 20(2): 487-528.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 57



Brummond, Peter and Michael Strain. Forthcoming. “Does Employment Respond Differently to
Minimum Wage Increases in the Presence of Inflation Indexing?” Journal of Human Resources.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee. 2011. Race Against the Machine: How The Digital
Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming
Employment and The Economy, Lexington, MA: Digital Frontier Press.

Buchmueller, Thomas, John C. Ham, and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2016. “The Medicaid
Program,” in R. Moffitt, ed., Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United
States,Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 21–136.

Bucknor, Cherrie and Alan Barber. 2016. “The Price We Pay: Economic Costs of Barriers to
Employment for Former Prisoners and People Convicted of Felonies,” Center for Economic and
Policy Research, Washington D.C.

Card, David. 1992a. "Using Regional Variation in Wages To Measure the Effects of the Federal
Minimum Wage,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1): 22-37.

Card, David. 1992b. "Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California,
1987-89,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1): 38-54.

Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
of Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1): 2-64.

Card, David and Alan Krueger. 2000. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the
Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply,” American Economic Review 90(5):
1397-1420.

Card, David and John DiNardo. 2000. “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?,”
American Economic Review 90(2): 360-367.

Cascio, Elizabeth. 2009. “Maternal Labor Supply and the Introduction of Kindergartens into
American Public Schools,” The Journal of Human Resources 44(1): 140-170

Cascio, Elizabeth, and Diane W. Schanzenbach. 2013. “The Impacts of Expanding Access to
High-Quality Preschool Education,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 44(2): 127-192

Case, Ann and Angus Deaton. 2017. “Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity: 397-443.

Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. Forthcoming. “The Effect of
Minimum Wages on Low-Wage Jobs,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 58



Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 2018. A Quick Guide to SNAP Eligibility and Benefits.
Washington, DC.

Charles, K.K., E. Hurst and M.J. Notowidigdo. 2016. “The Masking of Declining Manufacturing
Employment by the Housing Bubble,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30(2): 179-200.

Charles, Kerwin, Erik Hurst, and Mariel Swartz. 2019. “The Transformation of Manufacturing
and the Decline in U.S. Employment,” in B. Eichenbaum and J. Parker, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2018, 33: 307-372

Chen, Susan and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2008. “The Effect of Disability Insurance on Labor
Supply of Older Individuals in the 1990s,” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 757-784.

Clemens, Jeffrey and Michael Wither. 2019. “The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession:
Evidence of Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers,”
Journal of Public Economics, 170: 53-67

Coile, Courtney, Mark Duggan, and Audrey Guo. 2015. "Veterans' Labor Force Participation:
What Role Does the VA's Disability Compensation Program Play?" American Economic Review
May 105(5): 131-36.

Coglianese, John. 2018. “The Rise of In-and-Outs: Declining Labor Force Participation of Prime
Age Men,” unpublished working paper.

Congressional Budget Office. 2014a. The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2014 to 2024,
February, Congressional Budget Office. Washington, D.C.

Congressional Budget Office. 2014b. The Effects of a Minimum-Wage Increase on Employment
and Family Income, February, Congressional Budget Office. Washington, D.C.

Connelly, Rachel. 1992. “The Effect of Child Care Costs on Married Women’s Labor Force
Participation,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 74(1): 83-90

Connelly, Rachel and Jean Kimmel. 2003. “The Effect of Child Care Costs on the Employment
and Welfare Recipiency of Single Mothers,” Southern Economic Journal 69(3): 498-519

Council of Economic Advisers. 2016. “The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force
Participation,” Washington, DC, June.

Currie, Janet, Jonas Jin, and Molly Schnell. 2018, “U.S. Employment and Opioids: Is There a
Connection?” NBER Working Paper No. 24440, Cambridge, MA..
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 59

Dague, Laura, Thomas DeLeire, and Lindsey Leininger. 2017. "The Effect of Public Insurance
Coverage for Childless Adults on Labor Supply,” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 9(2): 124-154.

Dao, Mai, Davide Furceri, and Prakash Loungani. 2017. “Regional Labor Market Adjustment in
the United States: Trend and Cycle,” Review of Economics and Statistics 99(2): 243-257.

Davis, Steven and John Haltiwanger. 2014. “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic
Performance,” NBER Working Paper No. 20749, Cambridge, MA.

Davis, Steven, Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger. 2013. "The Establishment-Level
Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2): 581-622.

DePasquale, Christina, and Kevin Stange. 2016. “Labor Supply Effects of Occupational
Regulation: Evidence from the Nurse Licensure Compact,” NBER Working Paper No. 22344,
Cambridge, MA.

Dillender, Marcus O., Carolyn J. Heinrich, and Susan N. Houseman. 2016a. “Health insurance
reform and part-time work: Evidence from Massachusetts,” Labour Economics, 43: 151-158.

Dillender, Marcus O., Carolyn J. Heinrich, and Susan N. Houseman. 2016b. " Effects of the
Affordable Care Act on Part-Time Employment: Early Evidence,” Upjohn Institute Working
Paper 16-258. Kalamazoo, MI..

Doleac, Jennifer. 2016. Increasing Employment for Individuals with Criminal Records. A
Hamilton Project Policy Memo. The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

Doleac, Jennifer L. and Benjamin Hansen. Forthcoming. The Unintended Consequences of “Ban
the Box”: Statistical Discrimination and Employment Outcomes When Criminal Histories are
Hidden,” Journal of Labor Economics.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage Effects Across
State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties,” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4):
945–964.

Dube, Arindrajit and Ben Zipperer. 2015. “Pooling Multiple Case Studies Using Synthetic
Controls: An Application to Minimum Wage Policies,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 8944, Bonn,
Germany.

Duggan, Mark, Gopi Shah Goda and Emilie Jackson. 2019. "The Effects of the Affordable Care
Act on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Market Outcomes," National Tax Journal, 72(2):
261-322.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 60



Duggan, Mark, Melissa S. Kearney, and Stephanie Rennane. 2016. “The Supplemental Security
Income Program” in R. Moffitt, ed., Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the
United States, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1-58.

Duggan, Mark, Robert Rosenheck, and Perry Singleton. 2010. “Federal Policy and the Rise in
Disability Enrollment: Evidence for the VA’s Disability Compensation Program” Journal of
Law and Economics 53(2): 379-398.

Dunn, Megan and James Walker. 2016. “Union Membership in the United States,” Spotlight on
Statistics, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Washington, DC.

East, Chloe. 2018. “Immigrants’ Response to Food Stamp Access,” Labour Economics, 51:202-
226.

Eberstadt, Nicholas. 2016. Men without Work. West Conshohocken, PA: Templeton Press.

Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 605-637.

Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes. 2004. “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married
Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Public Economics 88(9-10): 1931-1958.

Eriksson, Stefan and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2014. “Do Employers Use Unemployment as a Sorting
Criterion When Hiring? Evidence from a Field Experiment,” American Economic Review
104(3): 1014-39.

Farber, Henry S., Dan Silverman, and Till von Wachter. 2016. “Determinants ofCallbacks to Job
Applications: An Audit Study,” American Economic Review, 106(5): 314-318.

Fitzpatrick, Marie D. 2010. “Preschoolers Enrolled and Mothers at Work? The Effects of
Universal Prekindergarten,” Journal of Labor Economics 28(1): 51-85

Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do?, New York: Basic
Books.

French, Eric and Jae Song. 2014. "The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(2): 291-337.

Frey, Carl B. and Michael A. Osborne. 2013. “The Future of Employment: How Susceptible are
Jobs to Computerization?,” Oxford Martin School, unpublished working paper.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 61

Ganong, Peter and Daniel Shoag. 2017. “Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S.
Declined?” Journal of Urban Economics 102: 76-90.

Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013. “Public Health Insurance,
Labor Supply, and Employment Lock,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2): 653-696.

Gelbach, Jonah B. 2002. "Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor Supply,”
American Economic Review 92(1): 307-322.

Gelber, Alexander, Timothy Moore, and Alexander Strand. 2017. “The Effect of Disability
Insurance Payments on Beneficiaries' Earnings,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
9(3): 229-61.

Ghayad, Rand. 2013. “The Jobless Trap,” Northeastern University, unpublished working paper.

Gittleman, Maury, Mark A. Klee and Morris M. Kleiner. 2015. “Analyzing the Labor Market
Outcomes of Occupational Licensing,” NBER Working Paper No. 20961, Cambridge, MA.

Haeck, Catherine, Pierre Lefebvre, and Philip Merrigan. 2015 “Canadian Evidence on Ten Years
of Universal Preschool Policies: The Good and the Bad,” Labour Economics 36: 137-157.

Hall, Robert and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. 2018. ”Measuring Job Finding Rates and Matching
Efficiency with Heterogeneous Job-Seekers,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
10(1): 1-32.

Harris, Matthew, Lawrence Kessler, Matthew Murray and Beth Glenn. 2017. “Prescription
Opioids and Labor Market Pains: The Effect of Schedule II Opioids on Labor Force Participation
and Unemployment,” University of Tennessee, unpublished working paper.

Havnes, Tarjei and Magne Mogstad. 2011. "No Child Left Behind: Subsidized Child Care and
Children's Long-Run Outcomes,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(2): 97-129.

Heim, Brad, Ithai Lurie and Kosali Simon. 2018. “Did the Affordable Care Act Young Adult
Provision Affect Labor Market Outcomes? Analysis Using Tax Data” ILR Review, 71(5), 1154–
1178.

Herbst, Chris M. 2015. “The Rising Cost of Child Care in the United States: A Reassessment of
the Evidence,” IZA DP No. 9072. May.

Hirsch, Barry and David Macpherson. 2003. “Union Membership and Coverage Database from
the Current Population Survey: Note,” ILR Review 56(2): 349-354.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 62

Hornstein, Andreas, Marianna Kudlyak, and Fabian Lange. 2014. “Measuring Resource
Utilization in the Labor Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly,
100(1): 1-21

Hoynes, Hilary W. and Diane W. Schanzenbach. 2012. “Work Incentives and the Food Stamp
Program,” Journal of Public Economics 96(1): 151-162.

Hoynes, Hilary W. and Diane W. Schanzenbach. 2016. “U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs,” in
R. Moffitt, ed., Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 219–301.

Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010. "How Much Does Immigration Boost
Innovation?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(2): 31-56.

Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C. Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor, and
Hilary Wething. 2017. “Minimum Wage Increases, Wages, and Low-wage Employment:
Evidence from Seattle,” NBER Working Paper No. 23532, Cambridge, MA.

Johnson, Janna E. and Morris M. Kleiner. 2017. “Is Occupational Licensing a Barrier to
Interstate Migration,” NBER Working Paper No. 24107, Cambridge, MA.

Juhn, Chinhui and Simon Potter. 2006. “Changes in Labor Force Participation in the United
States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3): 27-46.

Kaplan, Greg and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. 2017. “Understanding the Long-Run Decline in
Interstate Migration,” International Economic Review 58(1): 57-94.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Alan B Krueger. 1992. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast
Food Industry,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1): 6-21.

Kearney, Melissa, Ben Harris, Elisa Jacome, and Lucy Parker. 2014. “Ten Economic Facts about
Crime and Incarceration in the United States,” The Hamilton Project. Washington, D.C.

Kerr, William R., and William F. Lincoln. 2010. “The Supply Side of Innovation: H1-B Visa
Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention,” Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): 473-508.

Kimmel, Jean. 1998. “Child Care Costs as a Barrier to Employment for Single and Married
Mothers,” Review of Economics and Statistics 80(2): 287-299.

Kleiner, Morris M. 2006. Licensing Occupations: Ensuring Quality or Restricting Competition?,
Kalamazoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 63

Kleiner, Morris. 2015. “Reforming Occupational Licensing Policies,” The Hamilton Project.
Washington, D.C.

Kleiner, Morris M., and Alan B. Krueger. 2013. “Analyzing the Extent and Influence of
Occupational Licensing on the Labor Market,” Journal of Labor Economics 31(S1): 173-202.

Kleven, Henrik J. 2014. “How Can Scandinavians Tax So Much?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 28:4: 77-98.

Kling, Jeffrey. 2006. “Incarceration length, employment, and earnings,” American Economic
Review 96 (3), 863-876

Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski. 2016. "Mandate-Based Health Reform and the Labor
Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform,” Journal of Health Economics 47: 81-106.

Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, 2013. “Duration Dependence and
Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
128(3): 1123-1167.

Krueger, Alan B. 2017. “Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the
U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Law, Marc T. and Mindy S. Marks. 2017. “The Labor-Market Effects of Occupational
Licensing Laws in Nursing,” Industrial Relations, 56(4): 640-661.

Leung, Pauline, and Alexandre Mas. 2018. “Employment Effects of the Affordable Care Act
Medicaid Expansions,” Industrial Relations, 57(2): 206-234.

Lefebvre, Pierre and Philip Merrigan. 2008. “Child-Care Policy and the Labor Supply of
Mothers with Young Children: A Natural Experiment from Canada,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 26(3): 519-548.

Liebman, Jeffrey B. 2015. "Understanding the Increase in Disability Insurance Benefit Receipt
in the United States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29(2): 123-50.

Lundin, Daniela, Eva Mork, and Bjorn Ockert. 2008 “How Far Can Reduced Childcare Prices
Push Female Labour Supply?” Labour Economics 15(4): 647-659.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. "Does Disability Insurance
Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI
Receipt,” American Economic Review 103(5): 1797-1829.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 64

Mayer, Gerald. 2004. “Union Membership Trends in the United States,” August, Washington
D.C., Congressional Research Service.

Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
the Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 1063-1114.

Meer, Jonathan and Jeremy West. 2016. "Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment
Dynamics," Journal of Human Resources, 51(2): 500-522.

Moffitt, Robert A. 2012. “The Reversal of the Employment-to-population Ratio in the 2000s:
Facts and Explanations,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(2), 201-264.

Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, Riccardo Trezzi, and Abigail Wozniak. 2016.
“Understanding Declining Fluidity in the U.S. Labor Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 47(1): 183-259.

Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak. 2011. “Internal Migration in the
United States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 173–196.

Moore, Timothy J. 2015 “The Employment Effects of Terminating Disability Benefits,” Journal
of Public Economics 124: 30–43.

Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2015. “The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration,”
University of Michigan, unpublished working paper.

Neumark, David and William Wascher. 1992. “Employment Effects of Minimum and
Subminimum Wages: Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws,” ILR Review 46(1): 55-81.

Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2000. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case
Study of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Comment,” American
Economic Review 90(5): 1362-1396.

Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014. “Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?” ILR Review, 67(3_suppl):
608–648.

Nichols, Austin and Jesse Rothstein. 2015. “The Earned Income Tax Credit,” in R. Moffitt, ed.,
Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 137-218.

Nollenberger, Natalia and Núria Rodríguez-Planas. 2015. “Full-time Universal Childcare in a
Context of Low Maternal Employment: Quasi-experimental Evidence from Spain,” Labour
Economics 36: 124-136.
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 65



Orrenius, Pia M. and Madeline Zavodny. 2007. “Does Immigration Affect Wages? A Look at
Occupation-level Evidence,” Labour Economics 14(5): 757-773.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Giovanni Peri. 2012. “Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on
Wages,” Journal of the European Economic Association 10(1): 152-197.

Peri, Giovanni. 2007. “Immigrants’ Complementarities and Native Wages: Evidence from
California,” NBER Working Paper No. 12956, Cambridge: MA.

Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber. 2009. “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1:3: 135-169.

Peterson, Brenton D., Sonal S. Pandya, and David Leblang. 2014. "Doctors With Borders:
Occupational Licensing as an Implicit Barrier to High Skill Migration,” Public Choice 160(1-2):
45-63.

Pierce, Justin R and Peter K. Schott. 2016. "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US
Manufacturing Employment,” American Economic Review 106(7): 1632-62.

Powell, David. 2016. “Synthetic Control Estimation Beyond Case Studies: Does the Minimum
Wage Reduce Employment?” Rand Working Paper No. 1142, RAND Corporation, Santa
Monica, CA.

Raphael, Steven and Michael Stoll. 2013. Why Are So Many Americans in Prison?, New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.

Ribar, David. 1992. “Child Care and the Labor Supply of Married Women: Reduced Form
Evidence” The Journal of Human Resources 27(1): 134-165

Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2016. “Maternity and Family Leave Policy,” NBER Working Paper No.
23069, Cambridge, MA.

Şahin, Ayşegül, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. "Mismatch
Unemployment,” American Economic Review 104(11): 3529-64.

Schmitt, John and Kris Warner. 2010. “Ex-offenders and the Labor Market,” Center for
Economic and Policy Research, Washington D.C.

Shannon, Sarah, Christopher Uggen, Jason Schnittker, Melissa Thompson, Sara Wakefield, and
Michael Massoglia. 2017. “The Growth, Scope, and Spatial Distribution of People with Felony
Records in the United States, 1948-2010.” Demography 54(5): 1795-1818.
                     Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 66

Smith, Christopher L. 2012. “The Impact of Low-Skilled Immigration on the Youth Labor
Market,” Journal of Labor Economics 30(1): 55-89.

Sorkin, Isaac. 2015. “Are There Long-Run Effects of the Minimum Wage?” Review of Economic
Dynamics 18(2): 306-333.

Thornton, Robert J. and Edward J. Timmons. 2013. “Licensing One of the World’s Oldest
Professions: Massage,” Journal of Law and Economics, 56: 371-388.

von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2011. "Trends in Employment and Earnings
of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security Disability Insurance Program,”
American Economic Review 101(7): 3308-29.

Western, Bruce and Christopher Wildeman. 2009. “The Black Family and Mass Incarceration,”
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences 621: 221-42.

Yagan, Danny. 2018. “Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession.” NBER working paper
23844, Cambridge, MA.

Ziliak, James P. 2014. “Supporting Low-Income Workers through Refundable Child-Care
Credits,” The Hamilton Project. Washington, DC.
                        Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 67


Table 1A: Changes in Employment-Population Ratios and Population Shares, Total, by
Age and Education, 1999-2018

                              E/P1999   E/P2018   ΔE/P99-18   s1999    s2018    Δs99-18

Age 16-24                     0.590     0.505      -0.085     0.164   0.147     -0.016
Age 25-34                     0.813     0.792      -0.020     0.183   0.173     -0.010
Age 35-44                     0.823     0.804      -0.019     0.215   0.157     -0.057
Age 45-54                     0.805     0.785      -0.020     0.171   0.160     -0.011
Age 55-64                     0.577     0.631      0.054      0.111   0.163     0.052
Age 65+                       0.119     0.189      0.070      0.156   0.199     0.043

Age 16-24
   Not In School              0.726     0.705      -0.021     0.085   0.069     -0.016
   In School                  0.443     0.329      -0.114     0.079   0.079     0.000
Age 25-34
   Less than HS               0.650     0.606      -0.044     0.022   0.013     -0.009
   HS                         0.797     0.738      -0.059     0.056   0.045     -0.011
   Some College               0.835     0.796      -0.039     0.051   0.048     -0.003
   College                    0.875     0.863      -0.013     0.053   0.067     0.014
Age 35-44
   Less than HS               0.663     0.657      -0.005     0.025   0.015     -0.009
   HS                         0.814     0.752      -0.062     0.072   0.039     -0.033
   Some College               0.845     0.811      -0.034     0.059   0.040     -0.019
   College                    0.879     0.868      -0.012     0.059   0.063     0.004
Age 45-54
   Less than HS               0.595     0.617      0.022      0.020   0.016     -0.004
   HS                         0.771     0.734      -0.037     0.053   0.044     -0.009
   Some College               0.833     0.792      -0.041     0.047   0.042     -0.005
   College                    0.892     0.864      -0.028     0.052   0.058     0.006
Age 55-64
   Less than HS               0.408     0.453      0.045      0.021   0.016     -0.004
   HS                         0.554     0.581      0.027      0.040   0.051     0.010
   Some College               0.620     0.629      0.009      0.024   0.044     0.020
   College                    0.710     0.737      0.027      0.026   0.052     0.027
Age 65+
   Less than HS               0.071     0.100      0.029      0.049   0.026     -0.023
   HS                         0.113     0.147      0.034      0.055   0.064     0.009
   Some College               0.144     0.198      0.055      0.028   0.049     0.021
   College                    0.204     0.265      0.061      0.024   0.060     0.036

TOTAL                         0.643     0.604      -0.038     1.000   1.000     0.000

Notes for Tables 1A-1C: Authors’ calculations using monthly CPS data downloaded from IPUMS-CPS.
Sample restricted to individuals 16 and older. Data weighted using CPS composite weights.
                     Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 68


Table 1B: Changes in Employment-Population Ratios and Population Shares, Men, by
Age and Education, 1999-2018

                            E/P1999   E/P2018   ΔE/P99-18   s1999   s2018   Δs99-18

Age 16-24                   0.610     0.506      -0.104     0.171   0.153   -0.018
Age 25-34                   0.899     0.857      -0.042     0.186   0.178   -0.008
Age 35-44                   0.902     0.883      -0.018     0.220   0.160   -0.060
Age 45-54                   0.865     0.845      -0.020     0.174   0.162   -0.012
Age 55-64                   0.661     0.691      0.030      0.110   0.163   0.052
Age 65+                     0.164     0.233      0.068      0.138   0.184   0.046

Age 16-24
   Not In School            0.778     0.727      -0.051     0.090   0.075   -0.015
   In School                0.424     0.295      -0.129     0.081   0.079   -0.003
Age 25-34
   Less than HS             0.815     0.748      -0.067     0.024   0.015   -0.009
   HS                       0.892     0.823      -0.069     0.060   0.053   -0.008
   Some College             0.913     0.857      -0.056     0.049   0.048   -0.001
   College                  0.933     0.910      -0.023     0.053   0.063   0.010
Age 35-44
   Less than HS             0.778     0.805      0.027      0.027   0.017   -0.010
   HS                       0.891     0.838      -0.053     0.076   0.044   -0.031
   Some College             0.918     0.885      -0.033     0.056   0.039   -0.017
   College                  0.954     0.939      -0.015     0.062   0.059   -0.003
Age 45-54
   Less than HS             0.700     0.717      0.017      0.020   0.017   -0.003
   HS                       0.840     0.802      -0.038     0.049   0.048   -0.001
   Some College             0.876     0.847      -0.029     0.047   0.040   -0.007
   College                  0.934     0.921      -0.013     0.057   0.056   -0.001
Age 55-64
   Less than HS             0.514     0.555      0.041      0.020   0.017   -0.004
   HS                       0.640     0.644      0.004      0.036   0.052   0.016
   Some College             0.681     0.676      -0.005     0.023   0.041   0.018
   College                  0.767     0.794      0.027      0.031   0.052   0.022
Age 65+
   Less than HS             0.104     0.139      0.035      0.043   0.023   -0.020
   HS                       0.153     0.186      0.033      0.041   0.053   0.011
   Some College             0.183     0.238      0.055      0.025   0.044   0.020
   College                  0.252     0.301      0.049      0.029   0.064   0.035

TOTAL                        0.716    0.663      -0.053     1.000   1.000   0.000
                     Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 69


Table 1C: Changes in Employment-Population Ratios and Population Shares, Women, by
Age and Education, 1999-2018

                            E/P1999   E/P2018   ΔE/P99-18   s1999   s2018   Δs99-18

Age 16-24                   0.570     0.503      -0.066     0.157   0.142   -0.015
Age 25-34                   0.730     0.728      -0.002     0.180   0.168   -0.012
Age 35-44                   0.746     0.727      -0.019     0.210   0.155   -0.055
Age 45-54                   0.748     0.727      -0.020     0.169   0.158   -0.011
Age 55-64                   0.501     0.575      0.074      0.112   0.164   0.053
Age 65+                     0.087     0.154      0.068      0.173   0.213   0.039

Age 16-24
   Not In School            0.672     0.680      0.008      0.081   0.063   -0.017
   In School                0.461     0.361      -0.100     0.076   0.078   0.002
Age 25-34
   Less than HS             0.470     0.432      -0.038     0.020   0.011   -0.009
   HS                       0.697     0.628      -0.069     0.053   0.038   -0.015
   Some College             0.767     0.738      -0.029     0.052   0.048   -0.005
   College                  0.824     0.823      -0.001     0.054   0.071   0.017
Age 35-44
   Less than HS             0.538     0.484      -0.054     0.023   0.014   -0.009
   HS                       0.736     0.646      -0.090     0.069   0.034   -0.035
   Some College             0.784     0.745      -0.039     0.062   0.041   -0.021
   College                  0.803     0.808      0.005      0.056   0.067   0.011
Age 45-54
   Less than HS             0.494     0.505      0.011      0.019   0.014   -0.005
   HS                       0.716     0.659      -0.057     0.057   0.040   -0.016
   Some College             0.793     0.744      -0.048     0.046   0.043   -0.003
   College                  0.844     0.814      -0.031     0.047   0.060   0.013
Age 55-64
   Less than HS             0.312     0.349      0.037      0.021   0.016   -0.005
   HS                       0.491     0.518      0.027      0.045   0.049   0.005
   Some College             0.566     0.589      0.024      0.025   0.047   0.022
   College                  0.633     0.684      0.051      0.021   0.052   0.031
Age 65+
   Less than HS             0.047     0.071      0.023      0.055   0.029   -0.026
   HS                       0.091     0.121      0.030      0.067   0.074   0.006
   Some College             0.115     0.168      0.053      0.031   0.054   0.023
   College                  0.137     0.227      0.089      0.020   0.057   0.037

TOTAL                       0.574     0.549      -0.025     1.000   1.000   0.000
                         Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 70




Table 2A: Shares of Overall Employment-Population Ratio Changes Attributable to
Changes in Population Composition and Within-Group Employment Changes, 1999-2018

                                                           Overall         Male         Female
Contribution of si*∆E/Pi
16-24                                                      41.1%          37.9%         46.2%
25-54                                                      28.3%          27.9%         29.7%
55-64                                                      -17.2%          -7.5%        -34.9%
65+                                                        -24.3%         -15.6%        -38.6%

Contribution of E/Pi*∆si
16-24                                                      -8.5%          -6.6%          -3.8%
25-54                                                      22.0%          27.8%          52.9%
55-64                                                      22.7%           8.1%          20.7%
65+                                                        62.5%          45.8%          69.7%

Contribution of ∆E/Pi* ∆si
16-24                                                       -5.1%         -4.7%          -5.8%
25-54                                                       -4.0%         -2.8%          -5.9%
55-64                                                       -9.4%         -4.4%         -18.5%
65+                                                         -8.0%         -5.8%         -11.8%

Total                                                      100.0%        100.0%         100.0%

Notes for Tables 2A-2B: Authors calculations using monthly CPS data downloaded from IPUMS-CPS.
Sample restricted to individuals 16 and older. Data weighted using CPS composite weights. Numbers
calculated using detailed age categories (16-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59,
60-64, 65-69, 70-74, and 75 plus years) and then aggregated to the broader age groupings shown.
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 71


Table 2B: Shares of Overall Employment-Population Ratio Changes Attributable to
Changes in Population Composition and Within-Group Employment Changes, 1999-2018

Contribution of si*∆E/Pi                            Overall      Male        Female
Age 16-24
  Not in School                                      7.5%       11.0%         1.1%
  In School                                         25.8%       21.3%        34.0%
Age 25-54
  Less than HS                                       1.7%        0.9%         7.1%
  HS                                                25.3%       18.6%        51.4%
  Some College                                      15.2%       11.0%        24.2%
  College                                            7.3%        5.2%         4.6%
Age 55-64
  Less than HS                                      -2.1%        -1.2%       -2.8%
  HS                                                -2.9%        -0.4%       -5.0%
  Some College                                      -1.4%        -0.4%       -3.7%
  College                                           -2.8%        -2.3%       -5.5%
Age 65+
  Less than HS                                      -3.5%        -2.8%       -4.5%
  HS                                                -5.2%        -2.5%       -9.4%
  Some College                                      -3.2%        -2.1%       -5.0%
  College                                           -3.1%        -2.6%       -5.3%

Contribution of E/Pi*∆si
Age 16-24
  Not in School                                     -1.3%        0.2%        4.7%
  In School                                         -2.0%        -2.7%       -2.4%
Age 25-54
  Less than HS                                       -4.1%       2.8%         -6.5%
  HS                                                12.6%       13.3%        39.4%
  Some College                                       9.1%        9.1%        23.7%
  College                                           -10.1%      -2.2%        -39.9%
Age 55-64
  Less than HS                                      -3.9%        -1.7%       -5.6%
  HS                                                4.6%         2.7%        1.8%
  Some College                                      7.3%         2.5%        4.9%
  College                                           3.1%         -0.3%       -2.7%
                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 72


Table 2B: Shares of Overall Employment-Population Ratio Changes Attributable to
Changes in Population Composition and Within-Group Employment Changes
                                                    Overall       Male       Female
Contribution of E/Pi*∆si (continued)
Age 65+
  Less than HS                                      -22.9%       -55.1%      -39.4%
  HS                                                12.0%        13.3%       14.0%
  Some College                                      19.0%        38.8%       30.3%
  College                                           30.4%        59.6%       46.7%

Contribution of ∆E/Pi* ∆si
Age 16-24
  Not in School                                     -2.3%        -1.0%        -2.0%
  In School                                         -1.0%        0.2%         -0.5%
Age 25-54
  Less than HS                                      -0.6%         -3.1%       -1.0%
  HS                                                -4.2%        -20.8%       -8.3%
  Some College                                      -1.5%         -4.6%       -2.5%
  College                                           0.3%          1.3%        1.0%
Age 55-64
  Less than HS                                      0.3%         0.8%         0.5%
  HS                                                -0.3%        -0.6%        -0.8%
  Some College                                      -0.5%        -4.8%        -1.8%
  College                                           -2.1%        -9.5%        -3.6%
Age 65+
  Less than HS                                      1.3%          2.0%        1.6%
  HS                                                -0.7%         -0.5%       -0.7%
  Some College                                      -1.8%         -4.0%       -2.6%
  College                                           -3.1%        -10.6%       -4.9%

Total                                               100.0%      100.0%       100.0%
                      Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 73




Table 3: Factors Contributing to Decline in Employment-Population Ratio,
1999-2018



                                                              Estimated reduction
                                                             in EPOP (percentage
Factors                                                                    point)

Major contributing factors
 Import competition fromChina                                               0.92
 Adoption of industrial robots                                              0.43

Other contributing factors
  Increased receipt of disability benefits (SSDI, VADC)                     0.17
  Higher minimum wages                                                      0.10
  Increased rate of incarceration                                           0.13

Insignificant factors
  SNAP expansions                                                             ~0
  Public health insurance expansions                                          ~0
  More generous EITC                                                          ~0
  Increased difficulties due to lack of family leave                          ~0
  Expanded immigration                                                        ~0

Indeterminate given state of evidence
  Increased difficulties due to lack of child care                       unclear
  Changes in leisure options                                             unclear
  Changes in social norms                                                unclear
  Increased use of opioids                                               unclear
  Rise in occupational licensing                                         unclear
  Increases in institutional frictions and/or mismatch                   unclear


TOTAL NET EPOP DECLINE (percentage points)                                    3.8
                                                       Abraham and Kearney, Decline in Employment-to-Population Ratio, p. 74

Figure 1: Employment-Population Ratio, by Age, 1965-2018



                                            16-24       25-54      55-64       65+       All Ages

                                   0.9
  EMPLOYMENT-TO-POPULATION RATIO




                                   0.8
                                   0.7
                                   0.6
                                   0.5
                                   0.4
                                   0.3
                                   0.2
                                   0.1
                                    0
                                         1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                   YEAR


Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
