                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MANAGING FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION:
                       INSIGHTS FROM THE RECENT LITERATURE

                                         Shang-Jin Wei

                                      Working Paper 24330
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24330


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




This paper surveys the recent literature on the effects of financial globalization on developing
countries and draws on several research papers that I have coauthored. I would like to thank
Qingyuan Du, Jeffrey Frankel, Xuehui Han, Ayhan Kose, Jun Nie, Esward Prasad, Kenneth
Rogoff, Hui Tong, and Jing Zhou for their research collaboration. I have learned a lot from them.
I also thank Kristin Forbes and participants of the Conference on Globalization, Development,
Economic and Financial Stability in Tokyo, December 2017, for very helpful comments. The
paper is commissioned by the Asian Development Bank Institute. Any errors in the paper are
entirely my own responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Managing Financial Globalization: Insights from the Recent Literature
Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 24330
February 2018
JEL No. F2,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper seeks to draw lessons for developing countries based on a survey of the recent
literature on financial globalization. First, while capital account openness holds promises (by
potentially lowering cost of capital, promoting risk sharing, and providing disciplines on
policies), it does not always work out that way in the data. Distortions in the domestic financial
market, international capital market, domestic labor market, and domestic public governance can
all make financial globalization less beneficial for developing countries. Second, developing
countries may seek to avoid the effects of foreign monetary policy shocks. The empirical pattern
appears to be somewhere between a trilemma and a dilemma. While nominal exchange rate
flexibility provides some policy autonomy but not consistently, capital flow management can
confer additional insulation against foreign monetary shocks.


Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
                                                   2




 1. Introduction

   Cross-border capital flows have risen substantially relative to world GDP. They could
provide new opportunities for developing countries to improve efficiency, increase investment,
and reduce risks; but they could also be a source of economic instability and a magnifier of
distortions. This paper seeks to draw lessons for developing countries based on a survey of the
recent literature on financial globalization. We will focus on the following two questions. First,
when do developing countries fail to benefit from greater capital account openness? Second,
what effective ways are there for developing countries to protect themselves from undesirable
foreign monetary policy shocks?

   In neoclassical models of open economies, reducing or removing frictions on cross-border
capital flows can have two main benefits for developing countries. First, it tends to equalize the
costs of capital across countries. Since a typical developing country is relatively capital-scarce
(i.e., with a low capital to labor ratio), its cost of capital tends to go down as the cost of moving
capital across national borders goes down. For example, using firm-level data in Chile before,
during, and after its capital control era of 1991–98 (known as encaje), Forbes (2007) finds that
the cost of capital becomes higher for smaller traded firms during the capital control period.
Interestingly, larger firms do not appear to suffer more liquidity constraints during the capital
control era, possibly because they can tap into domestic savings more easily. Another piece of
evidence that capital controls raise the cost of doing business comes from Wei and Zhang (2007).
They point out that once capital controls are in place, authorities have to worry about firms using
mis-invoicing of exports or imports to evade the control. This will likely result in more
monitoring of cross-border transactions even of legitimate goods trade and a greater reporting
requirement for exporters and importers at the customs. In other words, more capital controls
likely mean a higher cost of conducting international trade. Using panel data on disaggregated
trade and capital controls, Wei and Zhang (2007) estimate that an increase in the restrictions on
FX transactions by one standard deviation in the sample has the same negative effect on trade as
an increase in tariff of 11 percentage points. In other words, the cost of capital controls could be
sizable.
                                                   3




   If capital account openness lowers the cost of capital, it can in principle spur more
investment, especially by small firms, improving economic efficiency, and raising output and
potentially economic growth. Empirically, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005 and 2011)
report that a surge in physical investment tends to follow the removing of barriers to
international equity market investment. This can be viewed as evidence in support of the notion
that greater financial globalization improves economic efficiency.

   Second, reducing the frictions in relation to international capital mobility can enhance the
ability of domestic and foreign households to share risks (Cole and Obstfeld 1991. In other
words, with more cross-holding of assets across national borders, domestic consumption should
become less sensitive to fluctuations in domestic output. Greater risk sharing by households per
se improves economic welfare. Because domestic GDP growth is more volatile in developing
countries than in rich countries, the benefits of risk sharing are in principle more important for
developing countries. Moreover, greater risk sharing could allow firms to invest more,
potentially raising economic efficiency as well.

   Compared to documenting the cost of capital controls, evidence on improved risk sharing is
elusive, especially for developing countries (Bai and Zhang 2009). That is, the sensitivity of
consumption to output fluctuation does not appear to decline much even though the ratio of
cross-border capital flows to GDP – a common measure of de facto exposure to financial
globalization – has increased. Levy Yeyati and Williams (2016), however, propose measuring a
country’s exposure to financial globalization by the ratio of its cross-border assets and liabilities
to its economy-wide assets and liabilities, and find that an important reason for not seeing an
improvement in risk sharing in Latin American countries is that the exposure to financial
globalization has in fact not changed much in recent decades.

   There is a third potential benefit of financial globalization coming from the political
economy literature. With freer capital mobility, a government’s ability to make bad choices may
be more constrained. As a consequence, the economic outcomes are better than otherwise (Tytell
and Wei 2004; Cai and Treisman 2005; Blouin, Ghosal, and Mukand 2017). In principle, the
policy discipline effect applies to developed as well as developing countries. To the extent that
macroeconomic policies are unconditionally more likely to deviate from the optimum, this policy
                                                   4




discipline effect should be more important for developing countries as well. The empirical record
on the existence and strength of the policy discipline effect is mixed. For example, Tytell and
Wei (2004) find supportive evidence that greater exposure to financial globalization helps
countries to stay away from bad monetary policies (e.g., high inflation) but no comparable
evidence on fiscal policies.

     To summarize, there are case studies on costs of capital controls (see a nice survey by Forbes
(2007a). On the other hand, systematic empirical support at the macroeconomic level turns out to
be more elusive. In particular, after surveying a large body of empirical work Kose et al. (2004,
2009) conclude that it is hard to find a robustly positive effect of financial globalization on
economic growth in developing countries.

     Another aspect of financial globalization is the transmission of monetary policy shocks,
especially those from advanced countries (the United States in particular) to developing
countries. For example, when the United States raises its interest rate (as dictated by its domestic
need), developing countries often have to decide whether to follow suit. Following the policy
move by the United States may not be the right thing to do. Indeed, for this reason, foreign
monetary shocks are often a key risk for emerging market economies and other developing
countries. An important question is what the roles of the nominal exchange rate regime and
capital flow management are in a country’s resilience to foreign monetary shocks.

     In this paper, we survey the literature on two topics. First, what are the conditions under
which greater capital account openness could lead to desirable economic outcomes? Second,
what does it take for a country to have a buffer against foreign monetary shocks?




2.    Why Do Developing Countries Fail to Benefit from Financial Globalization?

     The literature has explored four broad reasons for why developing countries may not benefit
from financial globalization: (a) distortions in the domestic financial market, (b) distortions in the
international capital market, (c) distortions in the domestic labor market, and (d) weakness in
domestic governance institutions. I will discuss each in turn and suggest some possible links
                                                   5




among them at the end of this section. Some of the discussions draw from working papers in the
last three years, which have not been synthesized in previous survey articles that I am aware of.



2.1 Distortions in the domestic financial market

     A distorted domestic financial system could make an open capital account less desirable.
Before the capital account is opened, if the distorted financial system channels domestic savings
towards less efficient firms or sectors, additional finance from a more open capital account could
simply exacerbate the misallocation of resources (Eichengreen and Leblang, 2003). Somewhat
surprisingly, while the logic of the argument is plausible, there is a relative lack of formal theories
that articulate this link

     If additional capital inflows simply magnify the existing distortions in the domestic financial
system, an open capital account could fuel asset price bubbles and raise the likelihood of domestic
financial crisis. There is a relatively large literature on how the volatility of international capital
flows could interact with domestic financial crises (Kaminsky and Reinhart, 1999; Frankel and
Wei, 2005.

     One source of distortions in the domestic financial market could be the poor quality of
domestic institutions, which could drive down domestic returns on savings in a developing country
even when the country has very little capital (Ju and Wei 2010 and 2011). In that case, capital
account openness would simply let domestic savings leave the country, producing the seemingly
paradoxical pattern of capital flowing from poor to rich countries. Corporate insiders could
expropriate outside investors for private benefits. State rulers (and bureaucrats) may also take
actions to improve their personal welfare by reducing returns to corporate investors. Without
effective institutions constraining these “twin agency problems,” the benefits of financial
globalization may be limited (Stultz 2005). In addition, these agency problems might also nudge
the composition of cross-border capital inflows to consist of less foreign direct investment (Wei
2000a and 2000b) and more volatile types of capital flow (Wei 2001), and shorten the maturity of
external debt (Wei and Zhou 2017).
                                                  6




2.2 Distortions in the international capital market

        We start with two features of the international capital market that the literature
emphasizes as relevant. First, a typical developing country often faces an aggregate borrowing
constraint from the international capital market. Second, international capital flows can exhibit
“sudden stops,” that is, a period of abundant capital from rich countries can be followed, often
suddenly, by a period of capital flow reversal. A rise in the US interest rate, for example, could
trigger such a reversal.

        When an individual private sector agent (firm or household) borrows from abroad, its
action tightens the borrowing constraint of the other agents in the economy, especially during a
time of “global capital reversal.” If the effect of one agent’s borrowing on other agents is not
taken into account by the borrowing agent, there is externality in the borrowing behavior. If the
aggregate borrowing constraint is more of a problem in the international capital market than in
the domestic capital market, then the externality is unique or at least more severe for
international borrowing by developing countries.

        Therefore, the private sector may borrow too much in “good times” relative to social
optimum. This “overborrowing” problem becomes a problem when the value of the country’s
collateral depends on the prices: In the event of a “global capital flow reversal” or “sudden
stops” of international capital flows, falling asset prices (a tighter borrowing constraint) and
shrinking ability to obtain financing feed on each other, producing a larger loss in output than
would be the case otherwise (Jeanne and Korinek, 2010.

        Since the “overborrowing” problem arises because the social cost of borrowing is higher
than the private cost faced by individual borrowers, a possible correction of this “overborrowing”
is a tax on borrowing that raises the cost of private borrowing (Jeanne and Korinek, 2010.
Restrictions on the ability of the private sector to borrow from the international capital market
can be interpreted as a tax. Banning borrowing altogether is an extreme form of tax whose rate is
infinity, which is likely to be an overkill.

        A recent paper by Zhou (2017) introduces debt maturity considerations into the
overborrowing problem. She argues that overborrowing is more severe at short maturities than at
                                                   7




longer maturities because borrowing at longer maturities has a (desirable) hedging featuring that
offsets part of its social cost. By this logic, the optimal tax structure on capital flows would also
need to have a higher rate on short-term borrowing. Furthermore, she argues, somewhat
counterintuitively, that the optimal tax rate on short-term borrowing needs to go up during a
crisis (or “sudden stop”) period.

       Perhaps as a consequence of “overborrowing,” the literature also finds that the
composition of a developing country’s external liability matters for both the likelihood and the
severity of a crisis. In particular, those countries that relied relatively more on external debt
financing relative to FDI before the global financial crisis of 2008 found that their firms had a
more severe liquidity shortage during the crisis (Tong and Wei 2010).

       A high share of foreign currency-denominated debt in total liabilities is also found to be a
predictor of a future balance-of-payments crisis. The apparent inability to issue local currency
debt has been dubbed as the “original sin” by Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999). If foreign
currency debt adds to a country’s vulnerability to a foreign currency debt crisis or a balance-of-
payments crisis, it would seem plausible that a tax on borrowing in foreign currency could
improve the national welfare by reducing the chance of a future financial crisis.

       Du and Schreger (2013) and Du, Pflueger, and Schreger (2015) notice a rise in the share
of local currency share of external debt for at least 14 major emerging market economies.
Therefore, perhaps the “original sin” problem is not that exogenous or “original,” and
improvement is possible.

       [In the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, the Asian Development
Bank set out to help its developing member economies to improve their capacity to borrow in
their own local currencies but still from foreign investors. For this to happen, one missing piece
is the existing bond rating agencies that were willing to rate local currency debt issued by these
countries. It turns out that major international rating agencies were not eager to take on this task.
Out of necessity, the ADB worked with some member countries to set up a rating agency on their
own. Both the local currency bond markets in Thailand, the Republic of Korea, and the People’s
Republic of China and the rating agency turn out to be doing well. Eventually, the ADB sold its
share in the rating agency for a profit. The ADB’s action appears to be addressing a missing
                                                  8




market. Why the rating market was missing could benefit from more careful research. In this
example, the public policy action was not a tax on capital flows, but actively promoted a missing
piece to create a well-functioning market.]

2.3 Distortions in the domestic labor market

       Du, Nie, and Wei (2017) propose a possible third channel for failing developing countries
to benefit from capital account liberalization, namely labor market rigidity. Labor market rigidity
could come from tense labor-capital relations or overregulation of the local labor market. It tends
to make it expensive for firms to hire or fire workers.

       In their theory, in order to focus on the implications of local labor market rigidity (cost of
hiring workers in our model), they deliberately assume away both distortions in the domestic
financial market and distortions in the international capital market. In other words, there is no
overborrowing by private sector agents, no sudden stops in international capital flows, and no
distortions in the cost of capital for some firms relative to others. There are also no corruption or
other institutional problems.

       Du, Nie, and Wei (2017) find that labor market institutions are more important for
developing countries than for developed countries. For developing countries, labor market reforms
and capital account openness are complements: With a flexible labor market, a more open capital
account implies more employment (lower unemployment); but with a rigid labor market, more
capital account openness leads to the opposite result. The intuition is, for developing countries, a
rigid labor market deters firm entry, which lowers demand for capital. Once the capital account is
opened, part of the domestic savings leaves the country for a better return abroad. The increased
cost of capital at home further reduces employment.

       For developed countries, domestic employment is always higher with an open capital
account. In other words, in terms of the extent of domestic labor market rigidity, a developed
country is always better off with an open capital account. The empirical work shows that these
predictions are consistent with the data. Perhaps the simplest way to summarize the key results is
two pairs of graphs from Du, Nie, and Wei (2017).
                                                    9




2.4 Weakness in domestic public governance

        The discussion so far has emphasized overborrowing and sudden reversals of capital
flows as features exogenous to developing countries. One is tempted to conclude that capital
flow management policies should be deployed to nudge the composition of external liabilities
away from debt financing and towards attracting more inward foreign direct investment.

        It is important to point out that what seems to be a feature of the international capital
market may have its root inside the developing countries.

        There are some “fundamental” reasons for why the composition of external liabilities
varies by country. Wei (2000a and 2000b) documents that countries with more severe corruption
systematically attract less FDI. Gelos and Wei (2005) show that countries with weaker public
governance in the form of more opacity tend to attract less equity investment from international
institutional investors (mutual funds, pension funds, and hedge funds) as well. Because
corruption reduces FDI more than debt financing, Wei (2001) shows that bad public governance
often results in a structure of external liabilities that is relatively heavy in external debt and
relatively light in FDI, which is precisely the liability structure that Tong and Wei (2010) show
was associated with a worse liquidity crunch during the global financial crisis. Using both firm-
level and cross-country data, Wei and Zhou (2017) show that weaker public governance tends to
simultaneously reduce the share of external equity financing in total investment and the share of
long-term debt in total debt financing. This set of papers suggests that, while capital controls
might nudge the structure of developing countries’ external liabilities to be less heavy in debt,
especially in short-term debt, and more in FDI and other forms of equity financing, more
fundamental reforms to strengthen the rule of law and protection of investors would do the same.
More importantly, as Wei and Zhou (2017) imply, these fundamental institutional reforms would
improve the capital structure of domestic firms inside these countries as well as the external
liabilities, while capital controls can at most alter the external capital compositions.

        Similarly, Engel and Park (2017) trace the problem of “original sin” – the inability of
most developing countries to borrow in the international capital market in their own currencies –
to a particular institutional problem: the inability of the government of the borrowing countries to
commit to not expropriating foreign debt holders by devaluing local currency debt. In that case,
                                                  10




institutional reforms that improve a government’s commitment to not expropriating foreign debt
holders might address the root problem more effectively.

       If the sources of overborrowing, excessive reliance on debt relative to equity financing,
and excessive reliance on foreign currency borrowing, are partly caused by corruption, inability to
commit, and other governance problems, then the countries that are most in need of capital controls
are also most vulnerable to seeing rent-seeking activities attached to the capital controls, further
raising the social cost of maintaining such controls. In the end, understanding the source of
“undesirable” capital structure also has a bearing on the desirability of capital controls.

       It is worth noting that some of the distortions in the domestic financial market in resource
misallocation can also be traced to corruption and other public governance issues. In an economy
with rampant corruption, financial institutions, especially state-owned financial institutions, which
are common in the developing world, often direct lending to politically connected borrowers.
Therefore, reforms that strengthen the quality of domestic public governance and rule of law would
also lead to a reduction in the resource misallocation in the domestic financial market. According
to the logic of Section 2.1, this will improve the chances of a developing country benefiting from
financial globalization.

        There is also a connection between domestic governance and the discussion in Section 2.3
on distortions in the domestic labor market. A key message from Section 2.3 is that a combination
of low economy-wide total factor productivity (TFP) and a rigid labor market could reduce the
domestic returns on capital sufficiently in financial autarky, such that an open capital account
would lead to capital flight.

       A key determinant of economy-wide TFP is the quality of the domestic governance
institution. Expropriation risks reduce returns on capital. Governance reforms that strengthen the
rule of law and protection of investor rights reduce risks and would help to raise the economy-
wide TFP. According to the logic of Section 2.3, this would also improve the chances of a
developing country benefiting from financial globalization.

       To summarize, governance reforms may be relevant for all three channels discussed in
Sections 2.1 to 2.3. Just because capital account openness on its own might not achieve the desired
outcomes (in terms of greater efficiency, higher growth, and lower unemployment) does not
                                                 11




automatically means maintaining the capital controls is the way to go. It might be useful to think
of complementary reforms needed that can enhance the chance of achieving more desirable
outcomes. If developing countries can make sufficient progress on governance reforms, then they
may be able to realize more favorable outcomes from a more open capital account.

       If removing capital account restrictions does not always lead to better macroeconomic
outcomes for developing countries, it is important to note that imposing capital account restrictions
does not automatically lead to better outcomes either. Because capital controls in practice are often
not put in place for macroprudential reasons, they do not necessarily deliver more economic and
financial stability (Forbes and Warnock, 2012; Forbes, Fratzscher, and Straub, 2015; and Forbes
and Klein, 2015).



3. Gaining Monetary Policy Autonomy

       One source of shocks to developing countries is foreign monetary policy shocks. For
example, when the US Federal Reserve raises its interest rate (for the benefit of US domestic
policy), tightening monetary policy might not be a desirable policy move for a given developing
country. What can a developing country do to avoid passive importation of an undesirable
macroeconomic policy shock?

       The existing literature is somewhat split on this topic. A narrow interpretation of the
trilemma hypothesis is that a country cannot simultaneously have an independent monetary
policy, a fixed exchange rate, and freely mobile capital. A broad and indeed fairly common
interpretation of the trilemma hypothesis is that a country can have an independent monetary
policy if it pursues a flexible exchange rate, or imposes capital controls, or does both. The notion
that a flexible exchange rate regime provides insulation against foreign shocks is said to be
supported in the data in Edwards (2012), Klein and Shambaugh (2015), and Obstfeld (2015),
among others.

       On the other hand, Frankel, Schmukler, and Serven (2004) do not reject the null of full
transmission of international interest rates to developing countries in the long run (during 1970-
1999), even for countries with a flexible exchange rate regime. Using equity prices for firms
                                                  12




across emerging market economies, Tong and Wei (2011) find that, in terms of the extent to
which an emerging market economy was affected by the GFC, a flexible nominal exchange rate
by itself does not provide much help, but capital flow management encouraging more FDI and
fewer non-FDI types of capital flows before the GFC tended to provide some cushion during the
GFC. While they do not use the language of trilemma versus dilemma, their results are consistent
with the idea that the presence or absence of capital controls is more crucial than the nominal
exchange rate arrangement.

        In terms of pairwise correlations among cross-border capital flows, Rey (2015) points out
that whether a country has a flexible or a fixed nominal exchange rate regime does not seem to
make a difference, but whether it has capital controls does. The findings of the last three papers
are consistent with each other. Rey’s (2015) title, “Dilemma Not Trilemma,” makes more
famous or more memorable a view that capital controls appear to be both necessary and
sufficient for a country to be insulated from global financial cycles. Interestingly, neither
Frankel, Schmukler, and Serven (2004), nor Tong and Wei (2010), nor Rey (2015) directly
examine how combinations of nominal exchange rate regimes and capital controls affect a
country’s conduct of monetary policy in relation to foreign monetary shocks, which we aim to do
in this paper.

    A key challenge in the empirical work on this question is that co-movement in interest rates
across countries does not automatically imply policy spillovers. For example, purely domestic
shocks to the United States and India could be such that both find it optimal to raise interest
rates. One would not want to label that as policy spillovers from the United States to India. Yet,
the existing literature does not formally separate co-movement in interest rates between a
peripheral and a center country due to common shocks and policy shocks.

    Han and Wei (2018) employ a set of innovations to address this challenge. First, they
estimate a desirable change in a peripheral country’s interest rate based on the changes in the
variables (revisions in the inflation projection and revisions in the output growth) that go into
that country’s Taylor rule. Second, we use revisions in the (semi-annual) projections of a
country’s inflation rate and growth rate by the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) to
approximate the surprised changes in the relevant variables. They define policy spillovers from
                                                  13




changes in the US interest rate to changes in a peripheral country’s interest rate as part of the co-
movement in the interest rates beyond what can be explained by the Taylor rule.

   Another innovation of the paper is to provide a specification and an estimation method that
can include the Quantitative Easing (QE) episodes, when one does not observe much change in
the US interest rate. Han and Wei use a likelihood function to incorporate the latent (but
censored) changes in the US policy rate. When the US interest rate is above the lower bound,
changes in the US monetary policy stance can be directly observed from the changes in its
interest rate. On the other hand, when the US interest rate is at or near the lower bound, changes
in the US policy stance are inferred from changes in the US money supply relative to its
aggregate output. This is one of the first attempts in the literature to incorporate lower-bound
episodes in a study of international monetary policy transmissions.

   The economic message of Han and Wei (2018) is interesting from the viewpoint of managing
financial globalization. They report evidence of a “2.5 lemma” or something between a trilemma
and a dilemma: A flexible exchange rate regime appears to convey monetary policy autonomy to
peripheral countries when the center country raises its interest rate, but does not do so when the
center country lowers its interest rate. In other words, “fear of floating” mostly takes the form of
“fear of appreciation.” Capital controls provide insulation to peripheral countries from foreign
monetary policy shocks even when the center lowers its interest rate. The “2.5 lemma” pattern is
more nuanced than the findings in the existing literature.

   It is useful to situate the paper in the context of the relevant literature. Obstfeld (2015)
examines the role of the nominal exchange rate regime but does not explicitly examine the role
of capital controls in the international transmission of monetary policy shocks. Since many
countries with a flexible nominal exchange rate regime also maintain capital flow management,
what appears to be the effect of a flexible exchange rate could instead be the effect of capital
controls. Han and Wei (2014) and Klein and Shambaugh (2015) look at capital controls and the
nominal exchange rate regime but do not fully account for common shocks that can give the
appearance of a lack of policy independence of the peripheral country. They also reach opposite
conclusions. While Han and Wei (2014) find that a flexible exchange rate by itself does not
confer monetary policy autonomy, Klein and Shambaugh (2015) find that a moderately flexible
                                                 14




exchange rate does but partial capital controls do not. Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito(2016) introduce
both exchange rate stability and financial openness in analyzing the sensitivity of peripheral
countries’ policy rates to core countries’ monetary policies. They find that economies that pursue
greater exchange rate stability and financial openness face stronger links with center economies,
which is consistent with our conclusion. However, they introduce exchange rate stability and
financial openness separately and not as a policy combination. In their specification, a policy
regime is jointly determined by a combination of capital controls and a nominal exchange rate
regime.

   The paper by Han and Wei (2018) also differs from previous papers by explicitly allowing
for asymmetric responses by peripheral countries in a flexible exchange rate regime to center
country interest rate changes. In other words, peripheral countries may or may not feel equally
compelled to follow the center country’s policy moves depending on whether the latter loosens
or tightens its monetary policy. In addition, this paper is the first to use IMF revisions in GDP
growth and inflation projections in gauging domestic policy needs, and the first to incorporate
the quantitative easing episodes in the context of international monetary policy transmission.

   Farhi and Werning (2014) used a New Keynesian model to investigate whether capital
controls are needed for maximizing welfare when a country already has a flexible exchange rate.
They found that the answer is yes: Even with a flexible exchange rate regime, capital controls
raise welfare. In their framework, capital controls are introduced as a “tax” over capital inflows
during capital inflow surges caused by negative risk premium shocks and as “subsidies” to
capital outflows when the capital flows revert. In other words, capital controls work in the
opposite way to risk premium shocks. When social welfare is affected by both terms of trade and
the intertemporal path of consumption, it is generally useful to employ both tools. With a flexible
exchange rate to influence terms of trade and capital controls to influence intertemporal
consumption, social welfare is higher than by just using one of the tools. This theoretical result is
consistent with the “2.5 lemma” pattern That is, when the center country loosens its monetary
policy (which tends to generate a capital flow surge into other countries), peripheral countries
appear to feel compelled to follow suit by lowering their interest rates, unless they have capital
control measures in place.
                                                  15




Specification and data

   Han and Wei’s specification can be explained in two steps. The first step describes the
relationship between the monetary policy of a periphery country and that of a center country (the
United States), after accounting for other determinants of the periphery’s monetary policy.

          𝑝
   Let Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 denote the changes in the policy interest rate of (peripheral) country 𝑖 at time 𝑡. It is
                                                                                  𝑝
assumed to depend on four factors: the value of the policy rate one period ago, 𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1 ; a change in
                            𝑃∗
the desired policy rate, Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 , driven solely by domestic factors; a change in the interest rate
driven by the center country, Δ𝑟𝑡𝑈𝑆 ; and a global financial cycle factor, which can be
approximated by percentage changes in the Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Volatility
Index, Δ𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡 . More precisely,

       𝑝       𝑝            𝑃∗
(1) Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜆𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛾1 Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛾2 Δ𝑟𝑡𝑈𝑆 + 𝛿Δ𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡 + ε𝑖,𝑡 .

                          𝑝
The lagged policy rate, 𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1 , could capture policy momentum or policy space. For example, if a
higher policy rate in the recent past allows more space for downward policy changes, one may
expect a negative coefficient, 𝜆.

       When country i’s interest rate is observed to have changed alongside that of the United
States, is it a spillover of policy shocks or coincidence of a common shock? To separate the two,
the key is to specify the desired change in country i’s policy rate that is driven solely by its
                  𝑃∗
domestic need, Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 . Han and Wei propose doing this through a combination of the Taylor rule
and the estimated surprise components in growth and inflation projections. That is, a Taylor rule
specifies on which variables the desired change in the policy rate depends, and the surprise
components in inflation and growth projections determine by how much the desired policy rate
should change.

                          𝑃∗
       This means that Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 should be driven by news about the domestic output gap and the
inflation gap. The revisions in semi-annual projections of GDP and CPI by the IMF’s World
Economic Outlook (WEO) can be used to represent the surprise components in the output gap
and the inflation gap. Economic theory tells us to expect positive coefficients on both factors.
                                                 16




This is one of the major differences between this paper and the existing literature such as Han
and Wei (2014) and Obstfeld (2015), which does not incorporate such surprise components.

         𝑝∗                                                           𝑃∗
   Let 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 be the desired monetary policy rate of country 𝑖; then Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 is the desired change in
the policy rate since the previous period. The least squares regression model of the Taylor rule is
defined as:

       𝑃∗
(2) Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡        ̃1 ∗ Δ𝐺𝐷𝑃 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜙
          = c̃ + 𝜙                     ̃2 ∗ Δ𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑒̃
                                                             𝑖,𝑡 ,


where c̃ is the intercept term and 𝑒̃
                                    𝑖,𝑡 is the error term. Crucially, Δ𝐺𝐷𝑃 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑖,𝑡 and

Δ𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖,𝑡 are revisions to the projections of GDP growth and inflation rates by the IMF
between its two projection horizons. The IMF releases its projections (typically) twice a year, in
April and October (sometimes September). For each country, the projections are done by desk
economists in the Fund, under the overall coordination of its research department to ensure
global consistency. The projections presumably take into account all information available to the
Fund and the best judgments of the Fund staff at the time of the projections. Our maintained
assumption is that the IMF projections of a member country’s growth and inflation are unbiased
estimates of the projections of the member’s central bank. Due to the IMF’s privileged access to
member countries’ central banks and the caliber of its staff, such an assumption seems
reasonable. It is also useful to note that formally made IMF projections of growth and inflation
are conditional on the government’s existing macroeconomic policies. That’s why the
projections are called projections rather than forecasts. One (helpful) consequence of the IMF
methodology is that one does not need to worry about potentially endogenous responses of
inflation and growth to anticipated changes in future interest rates.

   To find out which combinations of capital control regimes and nominal exchange rate
systems can provide monetary policy independence, 𝛾2 in equation (1) is assumed to be a
function of different regimes:

(3) 𝛾2 = 𝛽1 𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑.𝑁𝐶 + 𝛽2 𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑.𝐶 + 𝛽3 𝐷𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥.𝑁𝐶 + 𝛽4 𝐷𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥.𝐶

where 𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑.𝑁𝐶 =1 if an economy chooses a fixed exchange rate regime without capital controls,
and zero otherwise; 𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑.𝐶 =1 if an economy chooses a fixed exchange rate regime plus capital
                                                   17




controls, and zero otherwise; 𝐷𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥.𝑁𝐶 =1 if an economy chooses a flexible exchange rate regime
and no capital controls, and zero otherwise; finally, 𝐷𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥.𝐶 =1 if an economy chooses a flexible
exchange rate regime plus capital controls, and zero otherwise.

   According to Bruno and Shin (2015), Obstfeld (2015), and Rey (2015), global financial
cycles may affect a country’s monetary policy stance separately from transmissions of monetary
policies from the center to periphery countries. Following these authors, Δ𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡 – change in the
implied volatility of S&P 500 index options – is used as a measure of global financial
uncertainty. Lower values of Δ𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡 are often interpreted as a larger global risk appetite or
greater tolerance of risk taking.

                𝑃∗
   Replacing Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 and 𝛾2 in equation (1) with equations (2) and (3), we have

       𝑝           𝑝
(4) Δ𝑟𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑐 + 𝜆𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜙1 ∗ Δ𝐺𝐷𝑃 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜙2 ∗ Δ𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖,𝑡
            +𝛽1 𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑.𝑁𝐶 Δ𝑟𝑡𝑈𝑆 + 𝛽2 𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑.𝐶 Δ𝑟𝑡𝑈𝑆 + 𝛽3 𝐷𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥.𝑁𝐶 Δ𝑟𝑡𝑈𝑆 + 𝛽4 𝐷𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥.𝐶 Δ𝑟𝑡𝑈𝑆 + 𝛿Δ𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡 +
   𝑒𝑖,𝑡 ,

where 𝑐 is the intercept term and 𝑒𝑖,𝑡 is an error term.

        With this specification, one can interpret coefficient 𝛽1 as a measure of spillover from a
change in the US policy rate to the interest rate in a peripheral economy with a combination of a
fixed exchange rate regime and no capital controls. If one wishes to interpret the trilemma
hypothesis narrowly, one would expect 𝛽1 =1 or at least 𝛽1 >0. In other words, there is no
monetary policy autonomy for any economy with a fixed nominal exchange rate system and no
capital controls. Common interpretations of the trilemma hypothesis often go beyond this. In
particular, one expects that a flexible exchange rate system would confer monetary autonomy: 𝛽3
= 𝛽4 =0.

        If capital controls are not fully effective because they are “leaky,” one would observe
𝛽2 >0. On the other hand, if capital controls are completely effective in conferring monetary
policy autonomy, one will expect 𝛽2 = 𝛽4 = 0. In between the two extreme cases, if capital
controls are partially effectively (but a flexible exchange rate system is not effective on its own),
one may observe that 𝛽1 > 𝛽2 > 0, and 𝛽3 > 𝛽4 > 0. In other words, by checking for the signs and
                                                  18




relative magnitudes of different 𝛽s, one can find out whether a given policy regime (a
combination of a nominal exchange rate regime and a capital control regime) provides no,
partial, or complete monetary policy autonomy.

       An interesting twist introduced by Han and Wei (forthcoming) is to allow for potentially
asymmetric policy responses by peripheral countries depending on whether the center country
raises or lowers its own interest rate. That is, a dummy for the case of a higher US interest is
constructed; 𝛽3 and 𝛽4 are each split into two separate parameters depending on the direction of
the US monetary policy.

       Based on this methodology, Han and Wei (forthcoming) report two key findings. First,
for countries with a flexible exchange rate regime and no restrictions on capital account
transactions, there is a “2.5 lemma” pattern, or something between a trilemma and a dilemma. In
particular, when the center country (the United States) raises its interest rate, the flexible
exchange rate appears to offer some policy autonomy, in the sense that peripheral countries don’t
generally follow the US monetary policy by raising their own rates. (In contrast, those peripheral
countries on a fixed exchange rate appear to follow the US policy moves closely if they don’t
have capital controls.)

       On the other hand, when the center country lowers its interest rate, the peripheral
countries appear to follow the US policy move by lowering their own interest rates, even if they
have a flexible exchange rate. One interpretation of this pattern is that the peripheral countries
are reluctant to see their currencies appreciate relative to the US dollar. The fear of appreciation
(but not of depreciation) gives rise to this asymmetric policy response.




4. Conclusions

   As cross-border capital flows expand more rapidly than world GDP, developing countries do
not wish to miss their associated benefits. At the same time, they do not wish to unwittingly
import negative side effects of financial globalization. What are the main benefits of embracing
financial globalization? When would a country fail to benefit from financial globalization? What
should it do to insulate itself from undesirable foreign monetary shocks?
                                                 19




   There are three main potential benefits of reducing barriers to cross-border capital flows: (1)
lower cost of capital flows, especially for small and medium-sized firms, (2) better ability to
handle income risks (with a lower sensitivity of household consumption to fluctuation in output),
and (3) more discipline in macroeconomic policies. These potential benefits do not work out
strongly in the data, especially the last two.

   There are four broad reasons for why a developing country may fail to benefit from reducing
barriers to capital flows: (1) distortions in the domestic financial market (resources do not go to
the most productive firms), (2) distortions in the international capital market (tendency to
overborrow in the international market, especially in short-term debt, and/or in debt denominated
in a foreign currency), (3) distortions in the domestic labor market (which reduce the returns on
capital and raise the probability of capital flight under an open capital account), and (4) weakness
in the domestic public governance.

   Financial globalization may also bring challenges to the management of monetary policy for
developing countries. This paper also reviews the literature on the roles of the nominal exchange
rate regime and capital flow management in the transmission of international monetary shocks.

   With regard to the existing literature, Han and Wei (2018) introduced several methodological
innovations/improvements. First, a measure of a country’s desired change in the interest rate
based on the Taylor rule is proposed and the surprise components in inflation projections and
growth projections by the IMF’s World Economic Outlook are used to gauge the terms in the
Taylor rule. This modification allows for a decomposition of co-movements between a country’s
and the US interest rates into two parts: that which is caused by common shocks to fundamentals
in the US and the peripheral country, and that which reflects the dependence of the peripheral
country on US monetary policy, or “fear of deviations.” Second, since quantitative easing has
become a nontrivial part of the recent US monetary policy history, and little change in the US
interest rate is observed during this period, Han and Wei (2018) also develop a methodology that
allows this part of the time series to be incorporated in the estimation. Third, monetary autonomy
in terms of both long-term and short-term interest rates is examined.

   The paper reaches different conclusions from some of the well-known papers in the
literature. In particular, neither a dilemma nor a trilemma characterizes the patterns in the data
                                                20




completely. Instead, some combination of the two seems to be the norm: For peripheral countries
without capital controls, a flexible nominal exchange rate allows them to have some policy
autonomy when the center country tightens its monetary policy. On the other hand, when the
center country loosens its monetary policy, their “fear of appreciation” takes over and they often
pursue a similarly looser monetary policy even if the domestic Taylor rule suggests otherwise.
Therefore, a flexible exchange rate offers asymmetric or incomplete insulation from foreign
monetary policy shocks. In comparison, capital controls do offer insulation from foreign
monetary policy shocks for peripheral countries in either a fixed or flexible exchange rate
regime.
                                               21




Bibliography
Aizenman, J., M. D. Chinn, and H. Ito. 2016. “Monetary Policy Spillovers and the Trilemma in
       the New Normal: Periphery Country Sensitivity to Core Country Conditions.” Journal of
       International Money and Finance 68: 298–330.

Bai, Yan, and Jing Zhang. 2009. “Financial Integration and International Risk Sharing.”
       University of Michigan Working Paper # 594.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2005, “Does Financial Liberalization
       Spur Growth?” Journal of Financial Economics, 77: 3-55.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. 2011. “Financial Openness and
       Productivity.” World Development 39 (1): 1–19.

Bianchi, Javier, 2016, “Efficient Bailout?” American Economic Review, 106 (12): 3607-3659.

Blouin, Arthur, Sanyatan Ghosal, and Sharun Mukand. 2017. “Globalization, State Capacity, and
       the (In)Disciplining of Nations.” Unpublished working Paper.

Boivin, J., and M. P. Giannoni. 2006. “Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?” The
       Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (3): 445–62.

Bruno, V., and H. S. Shin. 2015. “Capital Flows and the Risk-taking Channel of Monetary
       Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 71 (C): 119–32.

Cai, Hongbin, and Daniel Treisman. 2005. “Does Competition for Capital Discipline
       Governments: Decentralization, Globalization, and Public Policy.” American Economic
       Review 95 (3): 817–30.

Calvo, G., and C. M. Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of Floating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117
       (2): 379–408.

Chinn, M. D., and H. Ito. 2008. “A New Measure of Financial Openness.” Journal of
       Comparative Policy Analysis 10(3): 309–22.
                                               22




Coibion, O., and Y. Gorodnichenko. 2011. “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation, and the Great
       Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation.” American Economic Review 101(1): 341–70.

Cole, Harold, and Maurice Obstfeld, 1991, “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing:
       How Much Do Financial Markets Matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 28, pp.
       3-24.

Dahlquist, M., and H. Hasseltoft. 2013. “International Bond Risk Premia.” Journal of
       International Economics 90(1): 17–32.

Di Giovanni, J., and J. Shambaugh. 2008. “The Impact of Foreign Interest Rates on the
       Economy: The Role of the Exchange Rate Regime.” Journal of International Economics
       74(2): 341–61.

Du, Qingyuan, Jun Nie, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2017. “When Do Developing Countries Benefit
       from Capital Account Liberalization? The Role of Labor Market Institutions.” Monash
       University, Federal Reserve Bank, and Columbia University.

Du, Wenxin, C.E. Pflueger, and Jesse Schreger. 2015. “Sovereign Debt Portfolios, Bond Risks,
       and the Credibility of Monetary Policy.” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.

Du, Wenxin, and Jesse Schreger. 2016. “Local Currency Sovereign Risk.” Journal of Finance
       71(3): 1027-1070.

Dunn,O.J. 1964. “Multiple Comparisons Using Rank Sums.” Technometrics 6: 241–252.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann. 1999. “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility.”
       Proceedings of Economic Policy Symposium – Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of
       Kansas City, pages 329-368.
Eichengreen, Barry, and David Leblang, 2003, “Capital Account Liberalization and Growth:
       Was Mr. Mahathir Right?” International Journal of Finance and Economics 8: 205-224.
Edwards, S. 2012. “The Federal Reserve, the Emerging Markets, and Capital Controls: A High-
       Frequency Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44 (s2): 151–
       84.
                                               23




Engel, C. 2011. “Currency Misalignment and Optimal Monetary Policy: A Re-examination.”
       American Economic Review 101 (6): 2796–822.

Engel, Charles, and JungJae Park. 2017. “Debauchery and Original Sin: The Currency
       Composition of Sovereign Debt.” Working Paper, University of Wisconsin, Maddison.

Farhi, E., and I. Werning. 2014. “Dilemma not Trilemma? Capital Controls and Exchange Rates
       with Volatile Capital Flows.” IMF Economic Review 62 (4): 569–605.

Fernández, A., M.W. Klein, A. Rebucci, M. Schindler, and M. Uribe. 2015. “Capital Control
       Measures: A New Dataset.” IMF Working Paper No. 15/80.

Forbes, Kristin. 2007a, “the Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch,” in
       Sebastian Edwards ed., Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies:
       Policies, Practices, and Consequences,” University of Chicago Press: Chicago, pp 171-
       202.

Forbes, Kristin. 2007b. “One Cost of Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial Constraints
       for Smaller Traded Firms.” Journal of International Economics 96: S76-S97.

Forbes, Kristin, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roland Straub, 2015, “Capital-flow Management
       Measures: What Are They Good For?” Journal of International Economics 71 (2):

Forbes, Kristin, and Michael Klein, 2015, “Pick Your Poison: The Choices and Consequences of
       Policy Responses to Crises,” MIT Working Paper.

Forbes, Kristin, and Francis Warnock, 2012, “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and
       Retrenchment,” Journal of International Economics 88 (2): 235-251.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler, and Luis Serven, 2004, “Global Transmission of Interest
       Rates: Monetary Independence and Currency Regime,” Journal of International Money
       and Finance 23 (5): 701-733.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, “Managing Macroeconomic Crises: Policy Lessons,”
       in Managing Economic Volatility and Crises: A Practitioner’s Guide, edited by Joshua
       Aizenman and Brian Pinto, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge UK, pages 315-405.
                                                   24




Gelos, Gaston, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2005. “Transparency and International Portfolio Holdings.”
        Journal of Finance 60 (6): 2987–3020.

Georgiadis, G., and A. Mehl. 2015. “Trilemma, not Dilemma: Financial Globalization and
        Monetary Policy Effectiveness.” Working Paper No. 222. Globalization and Monetary
        Policy Institute. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Han, Xuehui, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2014. “Policy Choices and Resilience to International
        Monetary Shocks.” Global Economic Review 43 (4): 319–37.

Han, Xuehui, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2018, “International Transmission of Monetary Shocks:
        Between a Trilemma and a Dilemma.” Journal of International Economics 110: 205-219,
        January.

Hellerstein, R. 2011. “Global Bond Risk Premiums.” Staff Report No. 499. Federal Reserve
        Bank of New York.

Hofmann, B., and B. Bogdanova. 2012. “Taylor Rules and Monetary Policy: A Global ‘Great
        Deviation’?” BIS Quarterly Review, September issue, pages 37–49.

Ilzetzki, E., C. M. Reinhart, and K. S. Rogoff. 2011. “The Country Chronologies and
        Background Material to Exchange Rate Arrangements into the 21st Century: Will the
        Anchor Currency Hold?” Mimeo. http://personal.lse.ac.uk/ilzetzki/data/ERA-
        Country_Chronologies_2011.pdf.

Javorcik, Beata, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2009. “Corruption and Cross-border Investment in
        Emerging Markets: Firm-level Evidence.” Journal of International Money and Finance
        28 (4): 605–624.

Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek, 2010, “Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian
        Taxation Approach,” American Economic Review 100 (2): 393-397.

Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010, “Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of Financial
        Globalization,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(4): 173–204.
                                                  25



Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2011, “When Is Quality of Financial System a Source of Comparative
       Advantage?” Journal of International Economics, 84 (2): 178-187.

Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
       Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review 89(3): 473-500.

Kawai M., and L. Liu. 2015. “Trilemma Challenges for the People's Republic of China.” Asian
       Development Review 32 (1): 49–89.

Klein, Michael. 2012. “Capital Controls: Gates versus Walls.” Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity 2012 (1): 317–67.

Klein, M., and J. Shambaugh. 2015. “Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma: Sources of
       Monetary Policy Autonomy.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (4): 33–
       66.

Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2009. “Financial
       Globalization: A Reappraisal.” IMF Staff Papers, Palgrave Macmillan Journals 56 (1):
       8–62.

Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2010. “Financial
       Globalization and Economic Policies.” In Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 5,
       edited by Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, 4283-362 North-Holland.

Krippner, L. 2014. “Measures of the Stance of United States Monetary Policy.” Reserve Bank of
       New Zealand. http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/research-
       programme/additional-research/measures-of-the-stance-of-united-states-monetary-policy

Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Tomas Williams. 2016. “Financial Globalization in Emerging
       Economies: Much Ado About Nothing?” Working Paper, Latin America Initiative at
       Brookings.

Meier, S. 2013. “Financial Globalization and Monetary Transmission.” Working Paper No. 145.
       Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
                                                26




Obstfeld, Maurice. 1998. “The Global Capital Market: Benefactor or Menace?” Journal of
       Economic Literature 12: 9–30.

Obstfeld, M. 2015. “Trilemma and Tradeoffs: Living with Financial Globalization.” BIS
       Working Paper Series No. 480. Bank for International Settlements. Basel.

Rey, H. 2015. “Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
       Independence.” NBER Working Paper No. 21162. National Bureau of Economic
       Research. Cambridge, MA.

Schmukler, Sergio. 2004. “Benefits and Risks of Financial Globalization: Challenges for
       Developing Countries.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review, Second
       Quarter.

Shambaugh, J. C. 2004. “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 119 (1): 301–52.

Stulz, Rene, 2005, “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of Finance, 60(4): 1595-
       1638.

Taylor, J. 1993. “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
       Series on Public Policy 39: 195–214.

Tong, H., and S.-J. Wei. 2010. “The Composition Matters: Capital Inflows and Liquidity Crunch
       During a Global Economic Crisis.” Review of Financial Studies 24 (6): 2023–52.

Tytell, Irina, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2004, “Does Financial Globalization Induce Better
       Macroeconomic Policies?” IMF Working Paper 2004/84.

Wei, Shang-Jin. 2000a. "How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?" Review of
       Economics and Statistics 82 (1): 1–11.

Wei, Shang-Jin. 2000b. “Local Corruption and Global Capital Flows.” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity 2: 303-354.
                                              27




Wei, Shang-Jin, 2001, “Domestic Crony Capitalism and International Fickle Capital: Is There a
       Connection?” International Finance 4 (1): 15–45.

Wei, Shang-Jin. 2006. “Connecting Two Views on Financial Globalization: Can We Make
       Further Progress?”" Journal of the Japanese International Economics 20 (4): 459–81.

Wei, Shang-Jin, and Zhiwei Zhang. 2007. “Collateral Damage: Capital Controls and
       International Trade.” Journal of International Money and Finance 26 (5): 841–63.

Wei, Shang-Jin, and Jing Zhou. 2017. “Quality of Public Governance and the Capital Structure
       of Nations and Firms.” Columbia University Working Paper.

Wu, J. C., and F. D. Xia. 2016. “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at
       the Zero Lower Bound.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 48 (2–3): 253–91.

Zhou, Jing, 2017, “Financial Crises, Debt Maturity, and Capital Controls,” Columbia University,
