                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:
                         AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION

                                        Patrick Bajari
                                    Victor Chernozhukov
                                        Ali Hortaçsu
                                       Junichi Suzuki

                                     Working Paper 24334
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24334


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2018




Bajari is VP and Chief Economist at Amazon, Inc. Chernozhukov and Hortacsu carried out
research work for this paper as independent contractors for Amazon, Inc. We thank Zhiying Gu
and Liquan Huang with assistance in data collection and analysis, and seminar participants at
INFORMS, Bruegel, The World Trade Organization and UCLA for insightful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Patrick Bajari, Victor Chernozhukov, Ali Hortaçsu, and Junichi Suzuki. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Big Data on Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation
Patrick Bajari, Victor Chernozhukov, Ali Hortaçsu, and Junichi Suzuki
NBER Working Paper No. 24334
February 2018
JEL No. C53,L81

                                          ABSTRACT

In academic and policy circles, there has been considerable interest in the impact of “big data” on
firm performance. We examine the question of how the amount of data impacts the accuracy of
Machine Learned models of weekly retail product forecasts using a proprietary data set obtained
from Amazon. We examine the accuracy of forecasts in two relevant dimensions: the number of
products (N), and the number of time periods for which a product is available for sale (T). Theory
suggests diminishing returns to larger N and T, with relative forecast errors diminishing at rate
1/√𝑁𝑁 + 1/√𝑇𝑇. Empirical results indicate gains in forecast improvement in the T dimension; as
more and more data is available for a particular product, demand forecasts for that product
improve over time, though with diminishing returns to scale. In contrast, we find an essentially
flat N effect across the various lines of merchandise: with a few exceptions, expansion in the
number of retail products within a category does not appear associated with increases in forecast
performance. We do find that the firm’s overall forecast performance, controlling for N and T
effects across product lines, has improved over time, suggesting gradual improvements in
forecasting from the introduction of new models and improved technology.

Patrick Bajari                                   Ali Hortaçsu
University of Washington                         Department of Economics
331 Savery Hall                                  University of Chicago
UW Economics Box 353330                          1126 East 59th Street
Seattle, Washington 98195-3330                   Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                         and NBER
Bajari@uw.edu                                    hortacsu@uchicago.edu

Victor Chernozhukov                              Junichi Suzuki
Department of Economics                          Amazon Inc.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            sjunich@amazon.com
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Mass. 02139
vchern@mit.edu
2     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

                                   1. Introduction

    The use of data as an input into the production function of a firm dates back at
least to the emergence of the modern industrial firm in the 19th century (Chandler
(1977)). Indeed, the first mention of the word “business intelligence” is in Devens’
Cyclopaedia of Commercial and Business Anecdotes’ in 1865. The dramatic drop
in the cost of computation technologies since the 1990s has made it much easier
for firms to collect, store, and analyze data to help with their decision processes,
leading to changes in organizational and management practices, and hence pro-
ductivity growth (see e.g. Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, Hitt (1994)), Tambe and Hitt
(2012), Bloom et al. (2012), McElheran and Jin (2017)).
    In this paper we study the performance of Amazon’s retail forecasting system,
an important use of data within the firm. At any point in time, there are a large
number of unique retail products in Amazon’s warehouses supplied by vendors.
Each product has a forecast produced internally. The forecast is a probability dis-
tribution function for the current week and up to 52 weeks into the future.
    Amazon’s automated purchase ordering systems use forecasts as an important
input. Forecast accuracy is important for the performance of Amazon’s retail busi-
ness. If a forecast is downward biased (i.e. the forecast is less than the actuals),
Amazon loses short run sales and profits from going out of stock. Also, it risks
disappointing customers and they may be less likely to make future purchases. If
the forecasts are upward biased (i.e. the forecast is greater than the actuals), Ama-
zon will have inefficient inventory turns and may need to markdown or liquidate
overstock products.
    Our analysis will build on a proprietary panel data set on 5 years of weekly his-
torical forecasts and actual demands for 36 major product lines including apparel,
books and consumer electronics. Our ability to observe the Amazon’s internal de-
mand forecasts along with data on actual product sales allows us to define a very
clear measure of process improvement: does having access to more data allow
Amazon to reduce forecast error?
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:        AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION      3

  This question has also recently attracted attention in some policy discussions,
with the business press and research literature advancing the “data feedback loop”
hypothesis. This can be interpreted as the presence of an indirect network effect,
where the accumulation of bigger data sets by firms, through the addition of more
users and/or products, helps to improve their products and services. This, in turn,
attracts more users/products, and thus access to more data. In the context of fore-
casting, one might interpret this as with more data, firms can produce better fore-
casts, which in turn allows them to better serve customers, which in turn leads to
more data. There are a number of theoretical discussions of the “data feedback
loop” hypothesis e.g. Newman (2014), Grunes and Stucke (2015), Lerner (2014),
and Lambrecht and Tucker (2017). However, to the best of our knowledge, there is
no empirical research that examines the performance of a large scale software sys-
tem within the modern corporation to determine how adding more data changes
forecast errors.
  We consider four hypotheses of factors which might influence the accuracy of
forecasts. First, statistical learning theory typically suggests diminishing returns to
data set size in terms of estimation error or predictive performance (Lerner (2014)).
In our particular setting, the underlying data is a panel, and the theory suggests
that forecast accuracy should improve as we change N , the number of products
within a product category. Second, we would expect forecast errors to decrease
as T , the number of observations per product, increases. Third, as pointed out
by Bresnahan, Brynjolffson, and Hitt (2004), Bloom et al. (2012), Lambrecht and
Tucker (2017), complementary investments and organizational practices often play
a very important role in generating productivity gains from the use of data. In our
particular setting, there is learning by doing on the forecasting team as they build
new models, use improved hardware due to improvements in Amazon Web Ser-
vices, and concurrently improve their organizational practices. Finally, there can
be “diseconomies of scale” in forecasts. As the amount of data grows, the team
4     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

may need to apply the same model to an increasing number of products with dif-
ferent demand patterns. If Amazon lacks the headcount to customize the forecast-
ing models to a specific group of products, it will need to use a more ”one-size fits
all” modeling approach and accuracy may suffer.
    The first step in our analysis is to develop a theory of forecast errors for our
application. In practice multiple models are used and they are constantly chang-
ing. Rather than characterize the behavior for a specific production model, our
theoretical benchmark model is based on a state of the art forecasting paradigm
applicable to panel data sets such as ours. In particular, in Section 2, we use the in-
teractive fixed effect model, also known as the augmented factor model, following,
e.g., Bernanke et al (2004) and Bai (2009). We characterize the asymptotic distribu-
tion of forecast errors and show that they shrink to the irreducible level at the rate
   √        √
1/ N + 1/ T . We note that in practice, the underlying data is high dimensional
and the teams need to engage in model and variable selection. Asymptotic theory
suggests that the rate of convergence may be slower as a result.
    We next use panel data models to estimate forecast errors as a function of N ,
T and other factors. Our dependent variables are measures of forecast accuracy
(e.g. making a percentage forecast error greater than some threshold). Asymptotic
theory suggests the rate at which forecast errors decrease towards the irreducible
level, and we use this to control for N and T parametrically. We use time effects to
estimate flexible models that control for trend and seasonality. If there is learning
by doing in forecasting, we would expect to see a negative time effect.
    Our results suggest that there is robust improvement in forecast performance in
the T dimension (though subject to diminishing returns, agreeing with the the-
oretical prediction). This is perhaps unsurprising given that many product lines
have highly unbalanced panels with half or more of the products entering and ex-
iting in a given year. For a new product, T may be near zero and even a small
number of observations may be impactful in terms of reducing forecast errors.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:       AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION      5

  Our results suggest that N has relatively little impact on forecasting perfor-
mance, except when the number of products is relatively small (e.g. a completely
new product line with only a few thousands unique products). This is largely con-
sistent with what we expect from theory, which tells us that prediction errors will
typically exhibit diminishing returns in the relevant dimensions of data.
  Finally, our results suggest that there is a trend rate of improvement in our fore-
casts. This is consistent with ”learning by doing” where the team improves their
models through a process of trial and error. Also, improvements in infrastructure
enable them to train increasingly complicated models and more efficiently scale
their forecasting systems.
  We note that our results are inconsistent with a naive ”data feedback loop,”
where the addition of new products always results in better models. We inter-
pret our results as instead consistent with the statistical theory for the size of the
forecasting errors. Our data is relatively scarce in the T dimension, particularly for
new products. Increasing T from 1 to 52 weeks should be expected to meaning-
fully improve accuracy. However, in the N dimension, our empirical results show
that having ”Big Data” across a large array of products has little value in improv-
ing model accuracy. This could be because N has diminishing effects as suggested
by the theory, and, as a consequence, scientists often do not use all of the data to
train their models (focusing on random subsamples instead). For example, Var-
ian (2014) suggests that Google uses only 0.1% subsamples of its data to power its
decision-support systems. In our discussions with the forecasting team, we also
learned that the team does not use all of the data to train their models, and that the
accumulation of ”Big Data” across a growing variety of products is often viewed as
an engineering challenge rather than a modeling benefit. The teams need to worry
about scaling challenges to run and vend the models to downstream systems. As
the amount of data increases, the engineering challenges will become more diffi-
cult and more advanced solutions need to be deployed. In addition, learning from
additional products are often limited as many of these new products do not sell at
all for a period of time.
6     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

    There are important limitations of our study. As we noted above, the T effect that
we identify may not be the true causal effect of having access to longer histories.
This could be driven also by the continual improvements in forecasting technology
over time. As we discuss in Section 3.2, what we can recover, however, are bounds
on the true effect of T .
    Another important caveat we should emphasize is regarding the scope of this
study. Clearly, data is used in many aspects of company decision making, and
our focus is on the application to demand forecasting. We believe that this is a
particularly good area to study, as the success of forecasting models are relatively
straightforward to assess. However, our conclusions regarding the presence of
scale benefits to data are limited to this particular application.
    As we noted, there are not, to our knowledge, a large number of empirical stud-
ies testing the “scale effect of data” hypothesis. Lerner (2014) is a theoretical piece
that suggests the inverse square root relationship, as arising from asymptotic the-
ory. As noted above, Varian (2014) suggests that scale effects may not be important,
as Google uses only 0.1% subsamples of its data to power its decision-support sys-
tems. Lambrecht and Tucker (2017) point out that often the algorithm used rather
than the size of the data set is what improves prediction performance. De Fortuny
et al. (2013) discuss the performance of a variant of Naive Bayesian classification al-
gorithm on a number of data sets from online content providers as well as a bank.
They find that the performance of the classifier algorithm continues to improve,
with some evidence for diminishing returns, even after the number of data entries
exceeds, in some cases, 500 million.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: in Section 3 we lay out a theoretical
model specifying the data generation process for the stochastic demand faced by
Amazon. We also specify the benchmark forecasting model and investigate its
asymptotic properties. In Section 3, we discuss the data. Section 4 reports detailed
results from the Electronics category. Section 5 reports results from all 36 product
categories. Section 6 concludes.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:        AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION      7

    2. Quality of Forecast Learning in a Stylized Factor-Augmented Model

  Retail companies use proprietary forecasting models, which are often the result
of a complicated engineering effort, tailored to the particularities of the business.
Theoretical properties of such complicated forecasting models may never be un-
derstood completely. What we strive to do here is to give a theoretical benchmark
based on a well-known, state-of-the-art model used in academia to model panel
time series and forecasting. In particular, we utilize the Augmented Factor model;
see, for example, Bai and Ng (2002), Bernanke et al (2004), and Bai (2009). The Aug-
mented Factor model is a rather general model, encompassing the standard fixed
effects model from microeconometrics, factor models from macro, finance, and
matrix completion models, and traditional regression models. Within this fairly
general, yet tractable model, we ask the question of how forecast errors would be
determined and what role do the data size, the number of products and number
of time periods in the available history, have. We also pose the same question at
a more general level, when we consider various deviations and generalization of
the model, still reaching similar conclusions. We think of this section as providing
independent, theoretical evidence on the likely causal effects of big data on the
quality of demand forecasting. We also use this section to inform our empirical
analysis.




2.1. Theoretical Framework and Questions. Our goal is to perform comparative
statics on the quality of demand learning by the retailer firm with respect to the size
of the data that it obtains over a period of time of operating in the retail business.
  An important challenge in modelling demand for retailers is that demand may
have a non-trivial non-stationary component; especially for rapidly growing re-
tailers. Hence, we first consider a simple, multiplicative model of the following
type:
8     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

    M1: The quantity Qki,t sold by the retailer k of a product i at time t, obeys the
        following equation:

                       Qki,t + 1 =          Vi,tk      ·       Q0i,t          ,
                        quantity      velocity multiplier base demand index


                                   t = 1, ..., T ;   i = 1, ..., N ;

        where Vi,t ≥ 1 is a known velocity variable, which describes the stochas-
        tic, possibly non-stationary level of the series, and Q0i,t ≥ 1 is a reference
        demand level, where {Q0i,t }∞
                                    t=0 is stationary for each i. Note that


                      Qki,t = 0 if and only if Vi,tk = 1 and Q0i,t = 1.

    In model M1, the quantity Qi,t (plus 1) is determined by the base demand times
the multiplier Vi,t that captures the “size of the firm” in product i sales as well as
”velocity” of the product:

      • Velocity Vi,t reflects the notional popularity of the product i at time t, and
        represents the product-specific size of the retailer, as specific to the product.
        A simple example of Vi,t is given by the lagged sales times a growth rate

                                      Vi,tk = (Qki,t−1 + 1).

        We can normalize the velocity at Vitk = 1 for t = 1 for retailer k = 1. The
        vector of velocities {Vi,t }N
                                    i=1 characterizes the overall “size of the retailer”.
      • Both velocity and the base demand are conceptual quantities, which we in-
        troduce to perform the comparative statics on the quality of demand learn-
        ing by the retailer firm with respect to the size of the data. We will dis-
        cuss the ramifications of the assumption that the velocity part of demand
        is “known” below.

    We next give a model for the base demand level, following the Augmented Fac-
tor panel data model introduced above. In this model, both time series dimension
T and cross-sectional dimensions N play a crucial role in learning.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                            AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION            9

  M2. The base demand of a product i at time t, obeys the following equation:
                                                                   

                   Q0i,t        := exp       αi0 Ft        +        0
                                                                    Xi,t β         +         i,t          ,
            base demand index              latent factors       observed factors       stochastic shocks


                                       t = 1, ..., T ;      i = 1, ..., N ;

          where the latent shocks {i,t }∞
                                         t=1 obey


                   i,t | αi , {i,l }t−1        t            t        k t              2
                                      l=l , {Fl }l=1 , {Xi,l }l=1 , {Vi,l }l=1 ∼ N (0, σi ).


          Vector Ft contains 1 as the first component and obeys the normalization
          EFt Ft0 = I and follow the transition equation

(2.1)                             Ft = Φ1 Ft−1 + ... + Φd Ft−d + νt ,

          where vt ∼ N (0, Σv ) are i.i.d. shocks across time, and such that {Ft } is sta-
          tionary. The latent loadings (αi )N                     i N
                                            i=1 and shock sizes (σ )i=1 are identically
          distributed, obeying normalization Eαi αi0 = Diagonal and maxi σi ≤ L.
          The relevant moments are bounded, namely Ft and Xi,t are sub-exponential
          with common upper bound on scale L, uniformly for all i and t.

  In model M2, the base quantity index Q0i,t is determined by latent factor compo-
nents plus observed components plus stochastic shocks:

        • Time-varying factors Ft are latent time-varying common factors, such as
          macro-economic factors, seasonality, and fashion factors.
        • The product varying factors αi are the product-specific loadings on the la-
          tent factors Ft , to which product demand responds differently. The include
          the conventional fixed effects model, when Ft = 1.
        • The observed component is determined by a p-dimensional vector Xi,t of
          observed time-varying product features, such as prices of the product as
          well as its substitutes and complements, multiplied by a common parame-
          ter β.
        • The latent shocks i,t are unobserved, unlearnable error components.
10     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

2.2. Comparative Statics for Quality of Learning. Within the model posed above,
we ask the following comparative statics questions:

     Q1: How does N , the number of products, and T , the number of available time
         periods, affect the quality of learning/demand forecasting? Are there de-
         creasing returns to scale with respect to both N and T ?


     Q2: How does N affect the quality of learning, where adding new products
         changes velocity of other products? For example, how does adding many
         substitutes for an item i, which lowers velocity Vi,t , affect the quality of
         learning with respect to the data size (N, T )?


     Q3: How does velocity/size of the company affect the quality of learning? For
         example, for a big and a small retailer, with velocities of the first greater
         than the velocities of the second, {Vi,t1 }N        2 N
                                                    i=1 > {Vi,t }i=1 , t = 1, ..., T, are there
         different qualities of learning with respect to the data size (N, T )?


     Let Q̂ki,t denote the forecast of the demand Qki,t made by forecaster k, taking the
form:
                                      Q̂ki,t + 1 = Vi,t Q̂0,k
                                                          i,t ,

where Q̂0,k                                                0
        i,t denotes the forecast of the base demand index Qk,t made by forecaster
k.
     We next study the quality of forecast in relative terms:

                                               |(Q̂ki,t + 1) − (Qki,t + 1)|
                       relative errorki,t :=                                ,
                                                         (Qki,t + 1)

and also in absolute terms

                              absolute errorki,t := |Q̂ki,t − Qki,t |.

     Within the model M.1, we immediately arrive at the following obvious assertion.
    THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                     AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 11

  Assertion 1: The relative forecast error does not depend on velocity Vi,tk , it only depends
on the relative error of forecasting base demand Q0i,t with Q̂0,k
                                                              i,t :


                                                         |Q̂0,k      0
                                                            i,t − Qi,t |
                                relative   errorki,t   =                 .
                                                               Q0i,t

The absolute error is an increasing function in velocity Vi,tk :

                              absolute errorki,t = Vi,tk |Q̂0,k    0
                                                            i,t − Qi,t |,



holding the base demand and the base forecast fixed, at Q̂0,k     0
                                                          i,t 6= Qi,t .

  This admittedly trivial assertion on velocity runs counter to the following in-
tuitive statement: “the bigger the sales of a product, the more data we have, the
more accurate the forecast we should have.” Systematically higher sales are cap-
tured by the velocity multiplier Vi,t , and Vit simply cancels out in the definition of
the relative error, as we have seen above. What about absolute error? Higher ve-
locity leads to a higher absolute forecasting error, and lower velocity leads to lower
forecasting error. Indeed, in the extreme case, it is very easy to forecast demand
for products that do not sell. Does velocity affect the quality of learning the base
demand? We examine this question below.
  In the model above, one can estimate the base demand as follows. Since veloc-
ity is known, dividing through by velocity and taking logs, yields the regression
model:

(2.2)      log((Qki,t + 1)/Vi,tk ) = αi0 Ft + Xi,t
                                               0
                                                   β + i,t ,       i = 1, ..., N,   t = 1, ..., T.

We see immediately that in this model velocity will play no role in learning the
parameters of the base forecast, and we only need to analyze the impact of data
size (N, T ) on the quality of the base forecast. The base demand can be estimated
                       √         √
usually at the rate 1/ T + 1/ N in this model, and this is what we will show
below.
12      PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

Basics of Base Demand Forecasting. In what follows we go though the basics of
the base demand forecasting. We emphasize here the conceptual blocks that are
simple and useful for empirical economists.
     Consider the least squares estimator

                                           ({α̂i }N           T
                                                  i=1 , {F̂t }t=1 , β̂),


which solves
                                           N X
                                           X T
                        min                          (log((Qki,t + 1)/Vi,tk ) − αi0 Ft − Xi,t
                                                                                          0
                                                                                              β)2 ,
            ({αi }N         T
                  i=1 ,{Ft }t=1 ,β)∈ΘN,T   i=1 t=1

where
               (                                    N                                 T
                                                                                                      )
                                                 1 X                               1X
      ΘN,T =       {αi }N          T
                        i=1 , {Ft }t=1 , β :           αi αi0 = diagonal;                Ft Ft0 = I       .
                                                 N i=1                             T t=1

Restrictions on the parameter space reflect the normalization assumptions on the
latent factors, requiring them to be orthogonal to each other; see, e.g., Bai (2009)
for the detailed discussion. The time-varying factors are normalized to have unit
variance, while the product loadings have unrestricted variance.
     It follows from Bai (2009)’s analysis, that under the condition M2 and additional
regularity conditions, as N , T → ∞, the estimator obeys for each t and i (that is,
pointwise),
                                       √                                   √
             kF̂t − Ft k = Op (1/ N ),                 kα̂i − αi k = Op (1/ T ),
(2.3)                                     √      √                        √      √
             |α̂i0 F̂t − αi0 Ft | = Op (1/ T + 1/ N ), kβ̂ − βk = Op (1/ T + 1/ N ),

with the average squared errors bounded as:
                   T                                            N
                1X                                           1 X
(2.4)                 kF̂t − Ft k2 = Op (1/N ),                    kα̂i − αi k2 = Op (1/T ).
                T t=1                                        N t=1

Instead of stating the additional conditions here, we will simply assume the per-
formance bound (2.3-2.4).
     The performance bound has an intuitive interpretation:
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                   AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 13

        • even if we observe directly the product specific loading parameters αi , we
          need sufficiently many cross-sectional observations N to learn the time-
                                                                √
          varying latent factors Ft , with error scaling like 1/ N , and
        • even if we observe the latent factors Ft , we need sufficiently many time
          series observations to learn the product specific parameters αi , with error
                         √
          scaling like 1/ T .

Taken altogether the rate of learning the inner product αi0 Ft is
                                              √      √
                                            1/ T + 1/ N .
                                                                         √
Note that the worst case rate for learning common parameter β is also 1/ T +
  √
1/ N . However, the common parameters can be learned at the faster rate of
  √
1/ T N under the additional side conditions (for example, T ∝ N ). Even if such
a faster rate is available for the common component, it will not determine the rate
of convergence of the overall forecast.
  Moreover, for prediction purposes, we need to estimate the parameters of the
autoregressive model for latent factors. We can obtain the estimator (Φ̂l )dl=1 as the
solution of the least squares problem:
                                    T
                                    X
                         min            (F̂t − Φ1 F̂t−1 − ... − Φd F̂t−d )2 .
                        (Φl )dl=1
                                    t=d+1

Under condition M2 and under (2.3-2.4), it can be shown that the estimator obeys
                                                         √      √
(2.5)                  k(Φ̂l )dl=1 − (Φl )dl=1 k = Op (1/ N + 1/ T ).

  It is reasonable to assume that retailers’ forecasts can not be worse than using
this estimator. Since the above rates can not be improved in general, it is also rea-
sonable to assume that the rates achieved by the retailers’ forecasters can not be
better than the rates above. Given, this, without loss of generality for the rate of
learning results that follow, we assume that the retailers use the least squares esti-
mators above:
14     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

       L. The forecasting team of retailer k use the correct model, which they know
          up to the parameters, and they know velocity Vi,tk at time t. The latent factors
          are treated as unknown parameters. They follow a good practice, namely
          they use estimators that exhibit performance bounds (2.3)-(2.5). Without
          loss of generality for the rate of learning results, assume that they use the
          estimators used above.

     We next turn to forecasting. The base oracle forecast is given by:
                                          n                    o
                            0,oracle        0        0
                          Q̂i,t      = exp αi F̄t + Xi,t β + ai ,

                                F̄t = Φ1 Ft−1 + ... + Φk Ft−k ,

where ai is a constant chosen depending on the loss function used to evaluate the
forecast:
                      ai = (σi2 + αi0 Σv αi )/2,   if predicting mean,
                   q
               ai = (σi2 + αi0 Σv αi )Φ−1 (p),     if predicting p-th quantile,

That is, we define the oracle forecast for this model as the forecast one would make in
the presence of unlimited data to estimate the parameters ({αi }N          T             N
                                                                i=1 , {Ft }t=1 , β, {ai }i=1 )
without error.
     In reality, however, the parameters are not known to the forecasters, and have to
be estimated. Using the estimator described above, one can form a feasible one-
step ahead base forecast for t = T + 1 using data of size (T, N ), given by:
                                     n                      o
                            0           0 b̄    0
                          Q̂i,t = exp α̂i Ft + Xi,t β̂ + âi ,

where Fb̄t = Φ̂1 F̂t−1 + ... + Φ̂k F̂t−k . Moreover, the estimator of ai is defined by the
plug-in principle (see Appendix A).


Dependency of Quality of Base Forecast Learning on Data Size. The basic cal-
culations above imply the following assertion, derived in the appendix.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                  AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 15

  Assertion 2. (Dependency of Quality of Base Forecast Learning on Data Size).
Suppose conditions M1-2 and L hold, then the relative forecast error does not depend on the
velocity. Define also:

                                                    |Q̂0,oracle
                                                       i,t      − Q0i,t |
                          irreducible errori,t   :=                       ,
                                                            Q0i,t

which is the forecasting error one would make in in the presence of unlimited data to esti-
mate the parameters ({αi }N          T             N
                          i=1 , {Ft }t=1 , β, {ai }i=1 ) without error. Letting K be a positive
constant, there are N and T sufficiently large, such that the relative forecast error is bounded
in expectation as follows: for t = T + 1,

                    E|relative errorki,t | ∧ K ≤ E|irreducible errori,t |
                                                     p        p
                                               + Ci ( 1/N + 1/T ),

where Ci ≤ C, and C is a constant that does not depend on N and T . Moreover, the
probability that the relative error exceeds a threshold c is given by:
                                                              p           p
                 Pr(|relative errorki,t | > c) ≤ Λi + Ci (        1/N +    1/T ),

where
                            Λi = P(|irreducible errori,t | > c/2),

where Ci ≤ C, and C is a constant that depends on c but does not depend on N and T .


  For the detailed argument, please see Appendix A. The relative forecast error is
                                    p       p
bounded by a term proportional to 1/N + 1/T and a constant term equal to
the expectation of the irreducible error, which is the amount of error that would
result from the (infeasible) oracle forecast formed with unlimited data.
  We state the main consequences on comparative statistics.


  Implication 1 (Comparative Statics on the Quality of Forecast Learning). Sup-
pose conditions M1-2 and L hold. We have the following answers to the questions Q1-Q3.
16     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

     A1: There are diminishing improvements in quality of forecast with respect to both N
                                                                                          √
         and T , with the relative error decreasing to the irreducible size at the rate 1/ N +
          √
         1 T.
     A2: Velocity Vi,t has no impact on the relative forecast error, so if the fraction of prod-
          ucts with higher velocity goes up, without affecting N and T and average (across
          products) error of forecasting base demand indices, the average (across products)
          quality of overall forecast stays constant in relative terms.
     A3: Retailers with different vectors of velocities (retail sizes) and the same data size
          (N, T ) make the relative forecast errors that decay to the same irreducible size at
                          √          √
          the same rate 1/ N + 1/ T .

     We next make an observation about the absolute error:

     absolute errorki,t := Vit | exp(α̂i0 F̂t + Xi,t
                                                 0
                                                     β̂ + âi ) − exp(αi0 Ft + Xi,t
                                                                                0
                                                                                    β + i,t + ai )|.


     Implication 2 (Comparative Statics on The Quality of Forecast Learning). Sup-
pose conditions M1-2 and L hold, we have the following supplemental answers to the ques-
tions Q2-Q3.

     A20 : Velocity Vi,t increases the absolute forecast error, so if the fraction of products with
          higher velocity goes up, without affecting N and T and average (across products)
          relative error of the forecast, the average (across products) quality of forecast becomes
          worse in absolute terms.
     A30 : Retailers with higher vector of velocities (retail sizes), having the same forecast for
          base demand, incur higher absolute forecast error.


2.2.1. Inactive Products. A significant fraction of products are never sold. We note
that this is a special case where the base demand can be learned very fast, faster
        √        √
than 1/ T + 1/ N . More formally, we can call a product inactive if the demand is
zero most of the time, or,

                          log((Qki,t + 1)/Vi,tk ) = 0, for all t = 1, . . . , T.
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                  AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 17

                                Probability that Forecast Error > X%

                 1.0
                 0.8
   Probability

                 0.6
                 0.4




                                                           Stylized Model
                 0.2




                                                           Extended
                                                           Irreducible Level
                 0.0




                           50         100           150      200         250   300

                                              age in weeks (T)
                                Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                 1.0
                 0.8
   Probability

                 0.6
                 0.4




                                      Stylized Model
                 0.2




                                      Extended
                                      Irreducible Level
                 0.0




                       0        200           400         600          800     1000

                                            Number of Producs (N)



    Figure 1. A schematic impact of N and T on the Quality of Learning
    in the Stylized Model M.1-2 and in the Extended Model described in
    the next subsection, in equation (2.7) using parameters a = b = 1/3.
    In both models, there are diminishing improvements in the quality of
    forecast as N and T increase, and the forecast error can not decrease
    below the irreducible level. In the Extended Model, which is a more
    realistic approximation, the improvements occur even more slowly,
    with data size helping much less.
18     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

                Probability that Forecast Error > X%


                     Prob
                          ab
                        ility




                                                                          )
                                                                    eks (T
                                Nu
                                   m

                                                                 We
                                    be
                                       ro
                                          fP                   e in
                                               rod
                                                   uct
                                                           Ag

                                                      s(
                                                         N)

         Figure 2. The Joint Impact of N and T on the Quality of Learning in
         the Stylized Model M.1-2. There are diminishing improvements in
         the quality of forecast as N and T increase.

In the model that we wrote down, these zeroes can be learned very fast by simply
testing if log((Qki,t + 1)/Vi,tk ) = 0 for t = 1, ..., T and the probability of making a
mistake goes to zero exponentially fast. This means that very little data is needed
to forecast in-active products.
     Assertion 3. (Informal: Dependency of Quality of Forecast Learning on Data
Size for In-Active Products). For in-active products, we can state the following informal
approximation, which may be sharper:

                                         Λi ≈ 0,     Ci ≈ 0,

once N and T are sufficiently large.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                       AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 19

  In Appendix B we state some empirical results that seem to offer some empirical
evidence supporting this theoretical prediction.


2.3. Comparative Statics under Extensions and Complications. We also discuss
extensions and complications that arise beyond the stylized model:

   E1: Velocities Vi,t are the main source of non-stationarity in the problem. Sup-
        pose that velocities are not known, but unmodeled changes in velocities
        occur slowly enough, to allow for local learning of the best forecast, which
        implicitly introduces a model with time-varying parameters. How does
        this affect the quality of learning with respect to data size (N, T )?


   E2: The production model could involve a much greater degree of complexity
        than the augmented factor linear model specified above. For example, the
        complexity/dimension of the model p and k could be increasing with the
        size of the data. Or the model could be entirely non-parametric. How does
        this affect the quality of learning with respect to data size (N, T )?

  Let us try to analyze E.1 from an informal point of view. Suppose we use a proxy
for velocity given by Pi,t and that this proxy is not perfect, then defining

                                         aki,t = log(Pi,t
                                                       k
                                                          /Vi,tk )

the model for predicting base forecast becomes:

(2.6)   log((Qki,t + 1)/Pi,t
                          k
                             ) = aki,t + αi0 Ft + Xi,t
                                                   0
                                                       β + i,t ,      i = 1, ..., N,   t = 1, ..., T.

The term aki,t is potentially non-stationary and correlated with latent factors and
observed features. Since aki,t can not be treated as an orthogonal error, any model
that omits aki,t is subject to the (time changing) specification error. That is, the best
approximating model

                              α̃i0 F̃t + Xi,t
                                          0
                                              β̃     ≈ aki,t + αi0 Ft + Xi,t
                                                                         0
                                                                             β
                          best approximating model
20      PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

will depend on the historical window over which t varies. In order to construct
the best approximating model that is most pertinent for the most recent history, it
is therefore common to limit the observation data only to some recent history:

                                        T − M ≤ t ≤ T.

This limits the effective amount of data and makes the effective time series dimen-
sion M and not T . Under this scenario we expect that the impact of large T on the
quality of forecast is in fact limited by
                                       p
                                     1/ min(M, T ).

The marginal effect of data size T here is zero, once T > M , and so the marginal
effect of data size is always lower in this extended model than in the stylized model.
Surprisingly this also limits the usefulness of N , since for any fixed constant C,
    √           p                  p                             p
  1/ CN + 1/ min(M, T ) ≥ 1/ min(CN, min(M, T )) = 1/ min(M, T, CN )

In summary, non-stationarity severely limits the usefulness of both N and T .
     For the second scenario we expect the results to change as follows. If d is the
number of latent factors, and p is the number of covariates, which are modeled as
large, non-negligible compared to N or T , we expect the following change in the
performance bound
                                                         p        p        p
             Pr(|relative errorki,t | > c) ≤ Λi + Ci (    d/N +    d/T +        p/T N ).

Hence the errors now become much larger in magnitude, while decreasing to zero
at the slower rates that depend on how d and p depend on N and T . The marginal
effects of data sizes can be higher in these models than in the stylized models (de-
pending on the constants).
  There are other extensions we can consider, all leading to deterioration of quality
                                                                            √
of learning, making errors larger in magnitude, resulting in slower than N and
√
  T learning rates:

(2.7)                 Pr(|relative errorki,t | > c) ≤ Λi + Ci (N −a + T −b ),
      THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:            AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 21

with 0 ≤ a, b ≤ 1/2. For example, in the model where all parameters of the base
demand are heterogeneous across products, cross-sectional dimension can play no
role, leading to a = 0 and the learning exploits the time series variation only. All
                                                                                 √
kinds of nonparametric learning of base demand also leads to slower than 1/ T
             √
rates and 1/ N rate. We visualize the impact on the quality of learning in Figure
1. The marginal effect of N in this model is −Ci aN −a−1 , which can be larger than
the marginal effect −Ci (1/2)N −3/2 in the stylized model (this comparison depends
on the constants Ci that can differ in the two places).
  In summary, the marginal value of each data point can be either higher or lower
in these extended models, and we can only try to determine this value empirically.
The bottom line, however, regardless of the extension discussed here, there are
diminishing returns to data sizes in each model, with marginal value of each data
point decreasing to zero as the data sizes increase.

3. Empirical Specification and Results for the Case of Forecasting Demand for
                                           Electronics

3.1. Data and Empirical Specification. We will now perform tests of the compar-
ative statics derived in the previous section using a panel data set that consists of
up to H = 234 weekly observations on M = 6079 products, which is a random
sample of traded products from the electronics product group.1 The panel covers
weekly observations for the period ranging from 2012/12/08 to 2017/06/03.
  We observe Qi,t , the quantity of product i sold during week

                                         t = 1, . . . , H,

as well the corresponding one-week ahead mean forecast Q̂i,t that was produced
using data available at one week ago, that is, at t−1. We also shall use the following
variables:
  1
   Note that the relevant dimensions of panel data here are H and M – these symbols are used in
order not to confuse with the symbols ”N” and ”T” used in the previous section and here, which
have a related, but different meaning.
22       PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

         • Ti,t = the ”Age” of product at the company, which describes the length of
           data available for product i at time t, as consumed by the forecasting model.
           The own history data, especially if available for substantive ranges, can be
           used to build a high quality forecast.
         • Ni,t = the number of products in the same category ( ”NCat”) as product i
           at time t−1, that was consumed by the forecasting model and for which the
           forecasts were produced.2 It is reasonable to expect, from both theory and
           common sense, that data on these products can be used to capture season-
           ality and fashion patterns, improving the forecast based upon own history
           alone.

     We define the relative forecast error as before, namely as

                                    |Qi,t − Q̂i,t |/(Qi,t + 1).

We would like to assess how the size of the available data (Ti,t , Ni,t ) affect the rel-
ative forecast error.
     Specifically, motivated by the previous comparative statics results we define the
following dependent variable

                            Yi,t = 1{|Q̂i,t − Qi,t |/(Qi,t + 1) > X }.
                                          ”Big Forecast Error Event”

This variable describes the event of making a big forecast error, namely X% error.
The threshold of X is chosen so that this threshold is exceeded for any random
product-week pair (t, i) with probability P = 30%. We obtained quantitatively
analogous results with larger P ’s. When we extend the analysis to all other product
groups in Section 4, the same uniform rule for P = 30% defining the big error event
will be applied.
     2
      The categories include Home Entertainment, Home Audio, Portable Electronics, Portable Dig-
ital Players, GPS and Car Audio, PC Products, Audio Speakers, Audio Receivers, Wireless Audio,
Audio Components, Warranty & Services, Portable Media Players, Entertainment Software - Sports
& Outdoors, Headphones,Accessories Power, Video Components, Cables, Other Accessories Soft-
ware - Business & Productivity, Uncategorized, as well as several other deprecated categories.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:          AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 23

  Some basic descriptive statistics for the variables defined above is given in the
following table.
                             Table 1. Descriptive Statistics



   Statistic             N        Pctl(25)   Pctl(75)     Mean       Max     Min

   BigErrorEvent      497,078        0          1         0.300       1        0
   Age                497,078        68        187       127.950     278       0
   NCat               497,078      4,087     10,437     8,083.528   15,705     1


  Figure 3 shows the cross-sectional averages of Relative Forecast Error, Big Error
Event occurrence, Age, and Number of Products, for each week t = 1, ..., H. Figure
Figure 4 shows the fraction of products with no sale by week and fraction of the
forecasted products with no sale. Note that that a big improvement in the Relative
Forecast Error occurring at about two-third of the time window is due to drastic
addition of the new products for which the forecast is made at about the same
time.
  Giving the raw data, it is useful to ask an ”identification question”: what is the
source of variation that will help us identify the projection coefficients in the pre-
dictive models? Figure 5 shows the source of variation: after taking out the time
and product fixed effects from the key variables that measure the data sizes, we are
left with residuals that exhibit variation. The Number of Products have consider-
able independent variation left after taking out the product and time fixed effects:
Number of Products Ni,t varies across categories, and the time effects can only take
out the aggregate variation. The Age of Products Ti,t varies across (i, t) as well, but
note that the amount of variation is small. The small variation still allows us to pin
down the projection coefficients on age Ti,t in the predictive models that we will
estimate. We note that identification of projection coefficients does not necessarily
imply identification of causal impacts, as predictive models that we will estimate
have a causal interpretation only under rather strong exogeneity conditions.
24            PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡




                                                                 Average Probability of Error Event

                                                                                                      0.8
              4




                                                                                                      0.6
Average RFE

              3




                                                                                                      0.4
              2




                                                                                                      0.2
              1




                                                                                                      0.0
                    0       50     100      150   200                                                        0   50   100     150   200

                                     Date                        Average N by Category                                 Date
              160




                                                                                                      9000
Average Age

              120




                                                                                                      7000
              80




                                                                                                      5000
              40




                    0       50     100      150   200                                                        0   50   100     150   200

                                     Date                                                                              Date


                Figure 3. Cross-sectional averages of Relative Forecast Error, Big Er-
                ror Event occurrence , Age, and Number of Products, by Date
Theory-Motivated Empirical Specification. We first consider the following linear
prediction equations for Yi,t :

               Yi,t =              αi + βt
                            Product and Time Effects
                                                                                        p
                        + δ1 1(Ti,t > 20) + δ2 (Ti,t > 20)/                              Ti,t + δ3 1(Ti,t > 20)/Ti,t
                                                        Product Age Effect
                                                              p
                        + γ1 1(Ni,t > 200) + γ2 1(Ni,t > 200)/ Ni,t + γ3 1(Ni,t > 200)/Ni,t
                                                         Number of Products Effect
                        + i,t ,
                                 THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                                      AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 25




                                               All Products                                                 All Products with Forecast
Fraction Products without Sale




                                                                           Fraction Products without Sale

                                                                                                            0.8
                                    0.82




                                                                                                            0.7
                                    0.78




                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                            0.5
                                    0.74




                                                                                                            0.4
                                    0.70




                                           0   50       150                                                        0   50      150

                                                    Date                                                                    Date


                                    Figure 4. Fraction of products with no sale by week , and fraction of
                                    forecasted products with no sale.



where the terms αi are the product specific fixed effects, which capture the notion
that some products are inherently harder to forecast than others, even using the
same data size (Ni,t , Ti,t ) = (N, T ). The terms βt are the time effects, which capture
that on some dates it may be harder or easier to forecast than on others; moreover,
these time effects also partly capture the overall improvement in the forecasting
model that produces Q̂i,t . We consider three specifications for time effects:

                                 (1) No Trend: the specification with βt = 0 for all t = 1, ..., H.
                                 (2) Smooth Trend: the specification, where for some parameters b1 and b2 , βt =
                                     b1 (t/H) + b2 (t/H)2 .
                                 (3) Time Fixed Effects: the specification, where βt ’s are unrestricted parameters.
26     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡



                                                                −2e−08                  0e+00




                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                             ●             ●
                                                                          ●   ●                                                           ●●
                                                                                        ●                                             ●
                  BigErrorEvent                                                 ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                           ● ●●            ●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                        ●●● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●●●●    ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                          ● ● ● ●    ●●●                ● ●                             ●●●




                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                               ● ● ●●
                                                                                    ●● ●●●●              ●● ●              ●● ●●    ●●● ●  ● ●●      ● ●
                                                                                    ●● ●
                                                                                    ●   ●●●●●  ● ●●●      ●                       ●●  ●●  ● ●●●  ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●●● ●      ●
                                                                             ● ●●           ●● ●
                                                                                               ●● ●  ●●● ●     ●         ● ●      ●●●
                                                                                                                                   ●     ●      ●
                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                ●●   ●●
                                                                                                                       ●                        ●
                                                                                  ●    ●● ● ● ●● ●    ● ●
                                                                                                                ●        ●      ● ●● ● ●●    ●●      ●  ●
                                                                                  ●                ●●●                               ●     ● ●      ●
                                                                                ● ●              ●●●●                                      ●● ●       ●
                                                                                     ●●                                             ●
                                                                                                                                    ●            ●●
                                                                      ●                       ●                                     ●         ●
                                                                                                   ●




                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                ●●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●    ●    ●●
                                                                                              ●●   ●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                  ●●● ●       ●                 ●●●●● ●   ●
                                                                                                                                          ●●●● ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                 ●           ●
                                                                           ●●●●
                                                                              ●●●●
                                                                                 ●   ●
                                                                                     ●●●●●●● ●  ●      ● ●●                          ●
                                                                                                                                     ●  ●
                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                     ●       ●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                              ●●●
                                                                                ●●●●●● ●  ●●●●●
                                                                                           ●    ●●●      ●●               ●●●● ●
                                                                                                                                ●  ●
                                                                                                                                   ●   ● ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                                           ●● ●
                                                                                                                                              ●●●      ●
                                                                            ●●●●● ●●●   ●● ● ●● ● ●● ●    ●            ●         ●● ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●●●●●  ●●
                                                                          ●●●      ● ●
                                                                                     ● ●  ● ●               ●●
                                                                                                            ●           ● ●  ●           ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                                          ●●● ●
                                                                                                                                              ● ●                ●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                  ● ●           ●● ● ●                     ●  ● ● ● ●● ●●
                                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                          ●  ●       ●●●● ●  ●● ●      ●● ● ●●●             ●●
                                                                                                                                 ● ● ●   ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●●●     ●          ● ●
                                                                               ●● ● ●   ●●●●
                                                                                           ● ●  ●
                                                                                                 ●● ● ●
                                                                                                    ●      ●●  ●    ● ● ●●    ●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                                          ● ●     ●   ●●● ●     ●
                                                                                ●    ●●          ●●●  ●                     ●           ● ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                            ●●  ●   ●
                                                                                                    ●        ●●       ●           ●●       ●
                                                                                                                                   ●● ●● ● ● ● ●            ●●




                                                                                                                                                                     −0.5
                                                                                       ●  ●   ● ●   ●●● ●
                                                                                                     ●     ●●                   ● ●                  ●●●    ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                 ●    ● ●      ●           ● ●                ● ●             ●        ●       ●
                                                                                    ● ●    ●                                                ●●   ●●
                                                                                    ●     ●●●     ●●                       ●
                                                                                                                                    ● ●                      ●
                                                                                         ●●     ●● ●                                 ● ●       ●●●       ●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●          ● ●● ● ●                       ●        ●    ●
                                                                                                                                          ● ●  ●    ●     ●
                                                                                      ●                                                         ●


                            ● ●               ●●                                                                      ●●          ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                         ●●● ●●        ●          ●         ●                                                           ●●        ●                          ●●●
                          ●     ●●●                                                                                   ●                  ●                ●     ●
                          ●● ●                                                                                                          ●

                    ●
                    ●
                        ●●
                          ● ●
                          ●●
                                ●

                               ● ●
                                  ●●●●
                                ● ●●
                                 ● ●●
                                      ●
                                            ●
                                            ●
                                             ●
                                               ●
                                             ● ●
                                                ●● ●
                                                ● ●
                                                  ●
                                                  ●
                                                ● ●
                                                    ●
                                                                                  Age                                 ● ●
                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                                                                                             ● ●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                  ●● ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                     ● ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                         ● ●●
                                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                          ●  ●●●
                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●

                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●
                      ● ●                        ●●                                                                             ●●               ●
                   ●● ● ●  ●
                           ●
                           ●●●●      ●●● ●
                                       ●
                                       ●  ●
                                           ● ●
                                           ●●● ●
                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                                          ● ●
                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                  ●●●●● ●  ●●●
                                                                                                                                             ●●●●●        ●
                           ●●● ● ●●●
                                          ● ●● ● ● ●                                                                         ●    ●● ●● ● ●  ●● ●●● ●● ●
                    ●       ● ● ●    ●●                                                                                    ● ● ●●       ●●
                                                                                                                                         ●● ●●    ●● ●
       0e+00




                          ●●          ●
                   ●
                   ●
                   ●    ●● ●●● ●  ●●● ●
                                      ●●●
                                       ●      ●●
                                               ●●● ●●
                                                 ●    ●
                                                                                                                               ●●●
                                                                                                                                   ●● ●●●●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●● ●●● ●  ●● ●●
                              ●    ●●                                                                                                   ●
                  ●    ●
                       ●
                           ●   ●
                            ●● ● ●
                                      ●
                                     ●●         ●
                                              ●●●     ●●                                                              ●       ●● ● ● ● ●●●●
                                                                                                                                         ● ●●● ● ●● ●
                     ●●●●● ● ● ●●●              ●●                                                                            ● ●  ●     ●
                    ●●               ●●
                                      ●
                                      ●       ●●   ● ●●●                                                            ●  ●●
                                                                                                                            ●      ●●
                                                                                                                                ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                ●       ● ●
                                                                                                                                       ●● ● ●● ● ●    ●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                        ●
                         ●●● ●●
                             ● ● ●●   ●●
                                       ●     ●   ●
                                                 ●●●                                                                   ●●                ●● ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                 ● ● ●●●
                 ●     ●● ● ●  ●● ●  ●
                                     ●●  ●       ●  ●    ●                                                                       ●●   ●●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●●     ●●    ●
                                                                                                                                                      ●      ●
                                ● ●   ●   ●       ●                                                                      ● ●       ●●
                       ●
                       ●         ●
                                 ●●
                                  ●●●
                                     ●
                                     ●
                                      ●
                                       ●
                                          ●    ●●●
                                                 ●●●
                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                      ●      ● ●● ● ●  ●●●
                                                                                                                                            ●● ●●●●● ●●         ●
                                ●    ● ●    ●●                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                        ●   ● ●    ●
                   ●     ●● ●      ●● ●
                                      ●
                                      ●●        ● ●                                                                           ● ● ●●  ●● ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●● ●● ●    ● ●
                             ● ●   ● ●●●
                                      ●
                                      ●
                                      ●
                                          ●       ● ●                                                                              ● ●  ●
                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                        ●●●
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●
                               ●●●● ●●
                                     ●
                                     ●●         ●         ●                                                              ●      ●●      ●
                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                        ●●●● ● ●
                                ● ●●                                                                                       ●            ●●
                                ●● ●                      ●                                                                 ●           ●
                                                                                                                                         ●                  ●
       −2e−08




                                   ● ●                                                                                                ●   ●
                                   ●                                                                                                      ●


                                 ●                   ●                              ●                      ●
                             ●●                                                                             ●
                        ● ●                                                                                 ●●
                                                   ●                                 ● ●
                   ●●
                      ● ●

                        ●
                          ●
                          ● ●
                         ● ● ●
                               ●

                                             ●●
                                                ●
                                                  ●
                                                ● ●●
                                                ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                    ●●●●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                 ● ●
                                                                                                    ●       ●
                                                                                                                                   NCat
                                                                                 ● ●●




                                                                                                                                                                     0 1000
                             ●       ●●   ● ●                                                  ●●
                         ●●
                          ●           ●●    ● ●● ●                             ●  ●●        ●
                                                                                            ●●●●       ●
                   ●   ●                                                        ● ●● ●●        ●            ●
                    ● ● ●● ●
                           ●● ● ●●        ●   ●●● ●●                               ●    ●●      ●●●●●
                                                                                                   ● ●●
                     ●           ●●●     ●●   ●●●
                                                ●●●                         ● ● ●   ●●●●●● ● ● ● ●●
                 ● ●●     ●       ●●● ●       ●●●   ●                             ●● ●      ●
                                                                                            ●●●● ●
                                                                                                       ●
                   ● ●●         ●●  ●●● ● ●●●●●
                                              ● ●●                           ●● ●
                                                                              ●       ●
                                                                                    ● ● ●    ●   ●●
                                                                                                   ● ● ●   ●
                       ● ●  ●●  ●●
                                  ●●
                                     ●
                                     ●
                                     ●●
                                                                             ●● ● ●●
                                                                                 ● ●●●●
                                                                                 ●         ● ●●●    ●
                                                                                                  ●●●
                    ●    ●●●
                           ●●
                            ● ●●●●
                                 ●●●●
                                    ●
                                    ●●
                                     ●
                                     ●
                                      ●
                                      ●
                                      ●
                                      ●
                                          ●●● ●● ●       ●       ●           ●●●
                                                                          ● ●●  ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●●  ● ●  ●
                                                                                          ●● ●●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ● ●●    ●●
                                                                                                       ● ●●●●
                  ●●     ●●● ●●●
                               ●
                               ● ●
                                 ●●●
                                   ●
                                   ●●
                                    ●
                                    ●●
                                     ●       ● ●    ●    ●           ●     ●●●●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ● ●●
                                                                                  ●  ●
                                                                                     ● ● ●●●●●●●● ● ●     ●●●
                               ●
                               ●
                                ●
                                  ● ●●
                                     ●●
                                      ●
                                                ● ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●  ● ● ●●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●         ●● ● ●
                      ●         ●               ●●                                        ●    ● ●●   ●
                    ●     ●
                          ●   ● ● ●
                              ●       ●
                                      ●● ●● ● ●●
                                      ●                                          ● ●   ●●            ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ● ●● ●
                   ● ● ●   ● ●● ●   ●●●●    ●●●●
                                               ●
                                               ●
                                                 ●      ●            ●       ●●      ●●
                                                                                    ●●   ●●●●●●● ●●
                                                                                                 ●       ●●● ● ●●
                       ● ●● ●● ●   ●●●         ●●
                                                ●    ●                       ● ●● ● ●    ● ● ●●     ●● ●●
                            ●         ●      ● ●                                          ●●●●        ● ●
                        ●● ●●●● ● ●
                             ●                                                  ●             ● ●●       ●
                                ●                 ●                       ●        ●
                           ● ●                                                       ● ●                    ●
                  ● ●           ● ●
                                ●  ●          ●●                           ●                   ● ●●      ●●●




                                                                                                                                                                     −2000
                                                  ●        ●                                         ●     ●  ●
                             ●     ●         ● ●                             ●       ●●
                            ● ●                  ●●                                    ●●●                    ●
                                                                                                              ●
                          ●●     ●            ●       ●                           ●        ●          ●      ●●
                             ●                                                            ●


                     −0.5         0.0         0.5        1.0                                                        −2000                 0    1000




                Figure 5. A Scatter Plot of 300 randomly selected data points on Age,
                Number of Products, and Big Error Event Indicators, after taking out prod-
                uct and time effects. The Number of Products has considerable indepen-
                dent variation left after taking out the product and time fixed effects, since
                Ni,t varies across categories, and the time effects can only take out the ag-
                gregate variation. The Age of Products Ti,t varies across (i, t) as well, but
                the amount of variation left after taking our the product and time effects is
                small. The small variation still allows us to pin down the projection coeffi-
                cients on age Ti,t in the predictive models that we will estimate.


     The term ”Product Age Effects”, or the ”T Effect”, is meant to capture the non-
linear effect of the age of product i on the relative forecast error. The leading part
                                               p
of this term, δ1 1(Ti,t > 20) + δ2 (Ti,t > 20)/ Ti,t , is motivated by the theoretical
    THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:         AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 27

bounds on the relative forecasting error derived in the theoretical stylized model.
As above, the remaining term δ3 1(Ti,t > 20)/Ti,t is meant to capture deviations and
nonlinearities relative to the leading term. For example, this term could capture
the ”moderation” of the impact of data size due to unknown velocity multiplier
(if the coefficient δ3 > 0), as discussed in Section 2.3 on the extended comparative
statics.
  From the discussion in Section 2 we expect that the coefficients will exhibit the
following signs:

                             δ1 ≤ 0 and δ2 ≥ 0 and δ3 ≤ 0,

although we will not restrict the signs in the estimation. The expected sign δ1 ≤ 0
is obvious, while to make sense of δ2 ≥ 0, note that we expect that the derivative of
               p
δ2 (Ti,t > 20)/ Ti,t w.r.t. Ti,t is non-positive, which translates into δ2 ≥ 0. Similarly,
if the higher order term is meant to moderate the effect the of the first-order term,
we expect the derivative of δ3 1(Ti,t > 20)/Ti,t with respect to Ti,t to be non-negative,
which translates into δ3 ≤ 0.
  Similarly, the term ”Number of Products Effect”, or the ”N Effect”, is meant to
capture the nonlinear effect of the number of products Ni,t in a similar broad cat-
egory as i, on the relative forecast error. The leading part of this term, γ1 1(Ni,t >
                         p
200) + γ2 1(Ni,t > 200)/ Ni,t , is motivated by the theoretical bounds on the rela-
tive forecasting error derived in the stylized model applied to i and products in
the same category. And the remaining part γ3 1(Ni,t > 200)/Ni,t is the square of
              p
1(Ni,t > 200)/ Ni,t and is meant to capture deviations and nonlinearities, such
as “moderation” or “acceleration” effects depending on the sign of the coefficient,
relative to the leading term.
  From the discussion in Section 2 we could expect that the coefficients will exhibit
the following signs:

                            γ1 ≤ 0 and γ2 ≥ 0 and γ3 ≤ 0,

although we will not restrict the signs in the estimation, as stated above.
28       PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

     The projection error i,t is by definition orthogonal to the space spanned by all
variables, including the product and time fixed effects.
     We believe it is reasonable to always include product fixed effects as the lead-
ing empirical specification. Indeed, the product fixed effects control for changing
product mix and for the fact that the products are added in a non-random manner.
Time effects capture phenomena like forecasting demand in holiday period might
be more difficult than in non-holiday periods as well as roll-outs of upgraded fore-
casting model over time. The threshold of Ti,t > 20 in the definition above is meant
to signify a minimum sample size for time series dimension such that it is conceiv-
able that the theoretical motivations of the previous section apply here. Likewise,
Ni,t > 200 was chosen similarly, based upon our practical experience that substan-
tial cross-sectional size is needed to start to learn factors (e.g. seasonality) properly.
Third, our model as well as the model described below are predictive models, they
describe how changes in the data sizes (Ni,t , Ti,t ) affect the predicted probability
of the large forecast errors. We don’t necessarily ascribe a causal interpretation to
                  3
these results.




Agnostic Empirical Specification. We also consider a flexible, easy-to-interpret
model that does not impose the functional form of the theoretical model, and al-
lows the data to speak for itself more strongly. The model is still informed by
theory in that we are linking the probability of big error event to the data sizes Ti,t
and Ni,t , but we relax the functional form so that the empirical results can more
easily differ from the predictions derived from the theoretical model.




     3
      The models can have a causal interpretation under some well-known exogeneity conditions.
Getting a causal interpretation out of the fixed effects model is implausible in the setting with
short time-series dimension.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                        AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 29

  In this agnostic specification, we divide the ranges of Ti,t and Ni,t into regions
and predict Yi,t using region dummies as well as product and time effects:
                                             5
                                             X                          5
                                                                        X
     Yi,t =          αi + βt             +         δj 1(Ti,t ∈ Aj ) +         γk 1(Ni,t ∈ Bk ) +i,t ,
              Product and Time Effects       j=1                        k=1

                                                Product Age Effect      Number of Products Effect




where the projection error i,t is by definition taken to be orthogonal to the space
spanned by all variables, including the product fixed effects and time effects. Here
we consider three specifications for the time effects as in the motivated model: (1)
No Trend, (2) Smooth Trend, (3) Time Fixed Effects.
  The regions are set as follows: The first regions are A1 = (0, 20] and B1 = (0, 200],
and correspond to the short age group and a group with very small number of
products in the same category. The remaining regions A2 , ..., A6 are determined as
intervals with the endpoints defined by the quantiles of Age Ti,t with indices

                                             .2, .4, .6, .7, .8, 1.

The remaining regions B2 , ..., B6 are determined as intervals defined by the quan-
tiles of the Number of Products by Category Ni,t with indices .2, .4, .6, .7, .8, 1, as
well as values 200, 1000, 2000. The resulting regions are reported as part of the re-
gression results in Table 3.
  The same remarks as before apply here regarding the inclusion of fixed effects.
Note that in this specification the base prediction is the one using the small number
of products, N < 200, or short age, T < 20. The coefficients measure how our
prediction changes as we go through the various regions for age or for the number
of products in the same category.


3.2. Empirical Results for the Motivated Model. Table 2 shows the results for the
theory-motivated models with product fixed effects, with three specifications for
the time effects: (1) No Trend, (2) Smooth Trend, and (3) Time Fixed Effects. We
30       PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

report there the estimated coefficients as well as the (standard) standard errors that
have been clustered by product and time.4
     The signs on the coefficients for the terms containing age T are consistent with
the model, and the signs for the N follow less systematic patterns. We examine the
T and N effects graphically. We show in Figures 6, 7, and 9 the estimated Product
Age (T) Effect, the Number of Products (N) Effect, and the Time Effects on the
predicted probability of Big Forecast Error Event:

     R1: The T effect is the strongest in the model without trends, reaching −.35 for
           high T . The T effect is more modest in the models that allow for smooth
           trends or time effects, flattening at −.1 in the time effects models. There are
           essentially no improvements due to large T in the two models that adjust
           for time effects. As we argue below, the true effect trajectory probably lies
           in a convex combination of these reported effect trajectories. Overall, the T
           effect seems to agree with predictions of the theoretical model, and there
           are diminishing returns (improvement in forecast error) to large T .


     R2: Without time adjustments, the N effect seems to be strong early on, but it
           does exhibit diminishing returns to scale and saturates at −.4 once N >
           5000. Note, however, that this effect is not statistically significant, and we
           can’t reject the hypothesis of a flat effect with respect to N , see Table 2. If
           we inspect the model with the smooth trends, we see that the N effect takes
           values of about -.25 at moderate N levels (relative to the inception point)
           and then attenuates toward zero at high N . This effect is also not statisti-
           cally significant.   5
                                    This contradicts the predictions of the theoretical model.
     4
      The reported standard errors probably only partially account for the dependence in the data,
which is quite complex due to the presence of forecast learning, entering the definition of the de-
pendent variable through Q̂i,t . We followed a good empirical practice here, and note that our
problem is about getting point estimates of the effect of data size on quality of forecast learning,
and not about the (precise) significance testing.
  5
    In the third model with unrestricted time effects, large N seems to moderately increase the
probability of the big error event.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:       AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 31

       This modestly harmful effect of increasing N does appear to be significant,
       at least given the conventional time-product clustered standard errors we
       use. In summary, the N effect seems to exhibit either positive, quickly di-
       minishing returns to scale or modestly negative dis-returns, depending on
       how we control for time effects.


   R3: The estimated time effects indicate that there is a general improvement in
       the relative forecast error over time; this could reflect improvements in the
       forecasting engine itself, for example using more features (traffic data etc.),
       as well as the time evolution of the mix of products.

  We need to interpret the empirical result R1 in light of R3. The ages Ti,t and
trends t are correlated in this data. Hence the model without trends attributes the
aggregate changes in the occurrence of the BigErrorEvent, shown in Figure 3, to
the longer T effect, whereas the model with the trends or time effects projects out
the aggregate changes or trends, before it attributes the effect to longer T . The ag-
gregate changes, shown in Figure 3, suggest gradual improvements in forecasting
performance, which occur due to both

     • (1) methodological improvements (e.g. using more features), and
     • (2) availability of longer histories/ages (T ) for many products.

Hence the model without trends attributes the aggregate changes to source (2).
The Time Effects model attributes the aggregate changes captured by time effects
to source (1) and the remainder of the effects for source (2). The Smooth Trend
model attributes aggregate changes captured by a smooth trend to source (1) and
the rest of the changes to source (2).




3.3. Empirical Results for the Agnostic Model. In Table 3 we show the results for
the agnostic model with three specifications for the time effects: (1) No Trend, (2)
32   PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

       Table 2. Estimation Results of Fixed Effects Models for the Moti-
       vated Model


                                                 Dependent variable:

                                             1(Relative Forect Error > X)
                               Without Trend       Time Trend          Time Effects

                                     (1)                (2)                 (3)

     Age > 20                     −0.800∗∗∗           −0.029             −0.140
                                   (0.046)            (0.086)            (0.085)
     (Age>20) Inv Root Age         9.230∗∗∗           0.395               1.460
                                   (0.574)            (0.948)            (0.936)
     (Age> 20) Inverse Age       −27.472∗∗∗           −1.717             −4.247
                                   (1.826)            (2.678)            (2.643)
     N> 200                       −0.487∗∗            0.053               0.292
                                   (0.212)            (0.229)            (0.237)
     (N>200) Inverse Root N        8.534∗             −6.234            −13.931∗∗
                                   (4.608)            (5.106)            (5.422)
     (N> 200) Inverse N           −23.457             81.345            153.613∗∗
                                   (62.620)          (65.474)            (67.159)
     Trend                                          −0.327∗∗∗
                                                      (0.075)
     Squared.Trend                                    −0.060
                                                      (0.045)

     Observations                  496,259           496,259             496,259
     R2                             0.276             0.278               0.284
     Adjusted R2                    0.268             0.270               0.277

     Note:                     Standard errors are clustered by product and date.
      THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:         AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 33

Smooth Trend, and (3) Time Fixed Effects. We report the estimated coefficients as
well as the standard errors that have been clustered by product and time.6
  We show in Figures 10, 11, and 12 the estimated Product Age (T) Effect, the
Number of Products (N) Effect, and the Time Effects on the predicted probability
of Big Forecast Error Event:

 AR1: The early T effect is the strongest in the model without trends, reaching -
         .5 to -.6 for the high T group. The T effect is modest in models that allow
         for smooth trends or time effects, reaching the magnitude of -.05 to -.07 in
         the high T group. The true effect is probably between these two reported
         effects, by the argument we gave for the result R2.


 AR2: The N effect seems flat, sometimes even negative, and is qualitatively sim-
         ilar across three different specifications. Note that here the point estimates
         from the Agnostic Model deviate from those of the Motivated Model with-
         out time adjustments, but the differences are not statistically significant,
         despite the visual differences in plotted effects.


 AR3: The estimated Smooth Trend and Time Effects indicate that there is a gen-
         eral improvement in the relative forecast error over time; this could re-
         flect improvements in the forecasting model itself or, as discussed previ-
         ously, could also capture improvements due to the average histories getting
         longer.

Overall Conclusions. In both empirical specifications, age T , and, to a much smaller
extent, number of products N , explain a portion of the forecast accuracy. Data sug-
gests there are diminishing returns to T , and the effects tend to reach saturation
once T reaches medium sizes in some models. The early effect of T could be sub-
stantial or small, depending on how we attribute the overall trends in forecasting
errors. Forecast errors overall show general but gradual improvement in time.
  6
   The previous comment about standard errors applies here as well.
34        PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

     Table 3. Estimation Results of Fixed Effects Models for the Agnostic Model


                                                         Dependent variable:

                                                     1(Relative Forect Error > X)
                                       Without Trend       Time Trend          Time Effects

                                             (1)                (2)                 (3)

     Age.Region.(20,58]                  −0.059∗∗∗          −0.024∗∗∗           −0.017∗∗
                                           (0.006)            (0.007)            (0.007)
     Age.Region.(58,99]                  −0.098∗∗∗           −0.018∗            −0.019∗∗
                                           (0.008)            (0.010)            (0.009)
     Age.Region.(99,148]                 −0.167∗∗∗          −0.033∗∗∗           −0.031∗∗∗
                                           (0.010)            (0.013)            (0.012)
     Age.Region.(148,199]                −0.265∗∗∗          −0.071∗∗∗           −0.047∗∗∗
                                           (0.012)            (0.017)            (0.015)
     Age.Region.(199,278]                −0.342∗∗∗          −0.076∗∗∗           −0.047∗∗∗
                                           (0.014)            (0.021)            (0.017)
     N.Region.(200,1e+03]                  −0.028             −0.007              0.020
                                           (0.061)            (0.061)            (0.060)
     N.Region.(2e+03,3.72e+03]              0.055             0.071∗              0.014
                                           (0.036)            (0.037)            (0.036)
     N.Region.(3.72e+03,7.74e+03]           0.050             0.088∗∗             0.021
                                           (0.038)            (0.039)            (0.038)
     N.Region.(7.74e+03,9.65e+03]           0.059            0.106∗∗∗             0.031
                                           (0.040)            (0.041)            (0.040)
     N.Region.(9.65e+03,1.07e+04]           0.035             0.099∗∗             0.027
                                           (0.040)            (0.041)            (0.040)
     N.Region.(1.07e+04,1.57e+04]           0.064            0.134∗∗∗             0.075∗
                                           (0.041)            (0.042)            (0.041)
     Trend                                                  −0.262∗∗∗
                                                              (0.063)
     Squared.Trend                                            −0.056
                                                              (0.044)

     Observations                         496,275            496,275             496,275
     R2                                     0.276             0.278               0.284
     Adjusted    R2                         0.269             0.271               0.277

     Note:                             Standard errors are clustered by product and date.
      THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:               AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 35

  Data suggest that there do not seem to be statistically significant positive returns
to the number of products N , and the estimated effect of N is actually negative
(and statistically significant in at least two models). The latter finding does not
accord well with the stylized theoretical model, though somewhat aligned with
predictions from the ”extended” theoretical model in Section 2.3, with the ”slow”
effect N −a with a ≈ 0.


            4. Results for All Other Major Product Groups: Summary

  The purpose of this section is to generalize the analysis to all 36 major product
groups. 7 We define the relative forecast error as before, namely as

                                   |Qi,t − Q̂i,t |/(Qi,t + 1),

and the following dependent variable

                          Yi,t = 1{|Q̂i,t − Qi,t |/(Qi,t + 1) > X }.
                                         ”Big Forecast Error Event”

This variable describes the event of making a big forecast error, namely X% error.
The threshold of X is chosen so that, within given product group, this threshold is
exceeded for any random product-week pair (i, t) with probability P = 30%. We
maintain the same uniform rule for P = 30% for all 36 product groups, to determine
the thresholds X. A nice feature of this uniform-in-product group ”P rule” is
that it allows us, on the one hand, to treat all products group equally, avoiding
arbitrariness, and, on the other hand, allows for automatic adjustment of threshold
X for the obvious heterogeneity across products groups (some product groups are
much harder to forecast than others).
  7
   These product groups include Apparel; Automotive; Baby; Beauty; Business, Industrial & Sci-
entific Supplies; Books; Camera; Electronics; Furniture; Grocery; Health & Personal Care; Home;
Home Entertainment; Home Improvement; Jewerly; Kitchen; Lawn and Garden; Luggage; Luxury
Beauty; Major Appliances; Music; Musical Instruments; Office Products; Outdoors; PC; Pantry; Pet
Products; Shoes; Software; Sports; Tools; Toys; Video & DVD; Video Games; Watches; and Wireless.
36     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

     We would like to estimate a predictive model for the effect of Ni,t and Ti,t on the
probability of the Big Error Event. We shall employ the Agnostic Model, where we
divide the ranges of Ti,t and Ni,t into regions, as well as product and time effects:

                                                5
                                                X                          5
                                                                           X
        Yi,t =          αi + βt             +         δj 1(Ti,t ∈ Aj ) +         γk 1(Ni,t ∈ Bk ) +i,t ,
                 Product and Time Effects       j=1                        k=1

                                                   Product Age Effect      Number of Products Effect




where the projection error i,t is by definition taken to be orthogonal to the space
spanned by all variables, including the product fixed effects and time effects. As
before, the terms αi are the product specific fixed effects, which capture the notion
that some products are inherently harder to forecast than others. The terms βt are
the time effects, which capture that on some dates it may be harder or easier to
forecast than on others; moreover, these time effects also partly capture the overall
improvement in the forecasting model that produces Q̂i,t . As before, we consider
three specifications for time effects:

      (1) No Trend: βt = 0 for all t = 1, ..., H.
      (2) Smooth Trend: βt = b1 (t/H) + b2 (t/H)2 , where for some parameters b1 and
          b2 ,
      (3) Time Fixed Effects: βt ’s are unrestricted parameters.

     The regions are set as follows: The first regions are A1 = (0, 20] and B1 = (0, 200],
and correspond to the short age group and a group with very small number of
products in the same category. The remaining regions A2 , ..., A6 are determined as
intervals with the endpoints defined by the quantiles of Age Ti,t , within the given
product group, with indices

                                                .2, .4, .6, .7, .8, 1.

The remaining regions B2 , ..., B6 are determined as intervals defined by the quan-
tiles of the Number of Products by Category Ni,t with indices .2, .4, .6, .7, .8, 1, within
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:         AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 37

the given product group, as well as values 200, 1000, 2000. Not all regions will be pop-
ulated for all products groups, in which case the estimation results will return no
estimate of the coefficients corresponding to that region.
  We are focusing our analysis on the agnostic model, since it is a flexible, easy-to-
interpret model and allows the data to speak for itself. The model is still informed
by the theory in Section 2 in that, as before, we are linking the probability of the
big error event to the data sizes Ti,t and Ni,t in a general manner prescribed by the
theory, but we relax the functional form so that the empirical results can easily
differ from the predictions derived from the stylized form of the theory. By doing
so, for example, we are allowing the model to capture the N and T effects of the
form allowed for in the ”extended” theoretical model.
  We will summarize the results graphically, but a full set of empirical results
recorded in a table form is available on request. We show in Figures 13-15, and
Figures 16-18 the estimated Product Age (T) Effect and the Number of Products
(N) Effect for all other major product groups. Figure 19 shows the estimated Time
Effects for the agnostic model with the time effects for all major product groups.
Overall, we find that the results qualitatively agree with those for the case of Elec-
tronics.




 GR1: The T effect is the strongest in the model without trends, reaching -.3 or
       -.6 in the high T bucket for some product groups – for instance Apparel,
       Shoes, Watches and Wireless. The T effect is more modest in models that
       allow smooth trends or time effects. For many products, there are essen-
       tially no detectable improvements due to large T in the two models that ad-
       just for time effects. Some more notable exceptions include Apparel, Shoes,
       and Video Games product groups, where the effect bottoms out at about -.2
       and -.25. As we argue before in the case of Electronics, the true effect prob-
       ably lies in a convex combination of these reported effects. Overall, once
       we control for time effects, the effect of age T exhibits small, diminishing
38     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

         returns to scale. Without controlling for time, increases in T can keep sub-
         stantially improving the forecast quality in some cases that we noted above.


 GR2: The N effect appears to be qualitatively similar across three specifications
         for time effects, so we will focus on the most flexible specification with the
         unrestricted time effects. The N effect seems essentially flat for many prod-
         uct groups, with a few exceptions. For example, for Apparel, Kitchen, PC,
         and Shoes product groups, the N effect reaches −.3 to −.5 early on, but
         stays essentially flat at that level, thereby exhibiting diminishing returns to
         scale. However, for example, for Home product groups, the estimated N
         effect is actually associated with higher relative forecast errors, reaching a
         large positive magnitude for early buckets of N , and then staying flat at that
         level. By inspecting the figures we can classify about 90% of other product
         groups into cases where the N effect is associated with either a .15 decrease
         or increase in the probability of the big error event. In summary, the N ef-
         fect, when not already being essentially flat, seems to exhibit either positive
         (or negative), quickly diminishing returns to scale.


 GR3: The estimated time effects indicate that there is a general improvement in
         the relative forecast error over time; this could reflect improvements in the
         forecasting engine itself, for example, due to using more features (traffic
         data etc.), as well as the time evolution of the mix of products.



     As in the case of Electronics, we need to interpret the empirical result GR1 in
light of GR3. The ages Ti,t and trends t are highly correlated in this data. Hence
the model without trends attributes aggregate changes in the occurrence of the
BigErrorEvent to the longer T effect, whereas the models with the trends or time
effects project the aggregate changes or trends out, before they do the attribution
to the longer T effect. As we argued before, the true effect of age is thus likely to
be bounded between these two effects.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:        AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 39

                                   5. Conclusion

  We have developed theoretical and empirical evidence on the impact of the size
of panel data sets on the quality of demand forecasting. Empirical evidence uti-
lizes a large data set on all major product groups from Amazon.com. Theoret-
ical evidence makes use of a state-of-the art theoretical learning model in order
to see what can happen in principle to the quality of forecast as the data size be-
comes larger. The data size dimensions include N , the number of products in a
broad similar category, and T , the length of available histories for a given prod-
uct. In the theoretical learning model, there are diminishing returns to the size
of data, and the returns become flatter in non-stationary environments. Our the-
oretical model also informs our empirical analysis, where we consider a ”theory
motivated” model and an ”agnostic” model, where the first model allows for some
deviations from the functional form prescribed by the theoretical model, and the
second model allows for more flexibility, to let data speak for itself.
  Generally we find that T , the length of histories, is robustly helpful in improving
the forecast quality. The effect of N , the number of products in the same category,
is robustly flat (with a few exceptions). When the estimated effects of T and N are
not flat, they exhibit diminishing returns to scale, with the exception of T effects
in the model without time controls.
  We believe that our results are helpful in terms of understanding how data size
influences firm performance. In particular, asymptotic/statistical learning theory
typically tells us that data in general has diminishing returns. The accuracy of
our forecasting models improves at a decreasing rate as the sample size increases.
While this result is unsurprising from the viewpoint of asymptotic theory, the con-
nection to the broader policy issues seems not to have been widely made. In par-
ticular, we do not see evidence for a version of the “data feedback loop” theory,
wherein adding new products leads to an indirect network effect with more ac-
curate forecasts leading to more customers/sales leading in turn to more accurate
40     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

forecasts. As we demonstrate, velocity does not improve the accuracy of percent-
age forecast errors and indeed decreases forecast accuracy in levels. We do not
find that adding new products add to forecast accuracy, except perhaps in the case
where the number of products in a product line is very small.
     We find instead that the performance of our forecasting models is improving in
product age. This, again, is different than a naive description of a data feedback
loop based on indirect network effects caused by the addition of new products. The
source of improvement has a very simple and fundamental root cause: the longer
the time series, the better we can learn the parameters of the demand forecast, be
it a standard time series forecasting model or the state-of-the art augmented factor
model used in out theoretical benchmarking. Also, models seem to demonstrate a
trend level of improvement which is most likely associated with the trial and error
of the scientific method and investment in better engineering and infrastructure.
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 41


                       Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




                0.4
                0.2
       Effect

                0.0
                −0.2
                −0.4




                             50       100       150        200     250

                                            Age In Weeks
                                              No Trend


                       Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                0.4
                0.2
       Effect

                0.0
                −0.2
                −0.4




                             50       100       150        200     250

                                            Age in Weeks
                                            Smooth Trend


                       Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                0.4
                0.2
       Effect

                0.0
                −0.2
                −0.4




                             50       100       150        200     250

                                            age in weeks
                                            Time Effects



   Figure 6. The Estimated Impact of T on the Quality of Learning in
   the Motivated Model with No Trend, Smooth Trend, and Time Ef-
   fects
42   PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


                    Num Prod (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                           0          5000            10000         15000

                                         Number of Products
                                             No Trend


                    Num Prod (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                           0          5000            10000         15000

                                         Number of Products
                                           Smooth Trend


                    Num Prod (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                           0          5000            10000         15000

                                         Number of Products
                                           Time Effects



       Figure 7. The Estimated Impact of N on the Quality of Learning in
       the Motivated Model with No Trend, Smooth Trend, and Time Ef-
       fects
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                    AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 43


                   Joint Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




                       Effec
                             t




                                                                        s
                                                                       ek
                                                                    We
                                                                e in
                                   Nu




                                                               Ag
                                     mb
                                           er
                                                of A
                                                    sin
                                                       s




                                            No Trend


                   Joint Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                       Effec
                            t




                                                                        s
                                                                       ek
                                                                    We
                                                                e in




                                   Nu
                                                               Ag




                                      m   ber
                                                of A
                                                       sin
                                                           s




                                        Smooth Trend


                   Joint Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                       Effec
                         t




                                                                      eks
                                                                    We
                                                                 e in




                                   Nu
                                                               Ag




                                     mb
                                           er
                                                of A
                                                    sin
                                                       s




                                          Time Effects



   Figure 8. The Estimated Impact of N and T on the Quality of Learn-
   ing in the Motivated Model with No Trend, Smooth Trend, and Time
   Effects
44   PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


                       Date/Time Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




                    1.0
                    0.5
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.5
                    −1.0




                           0        50        100         150     200

                                              Date/Time




       Figure 9. The Estimated Date/Time Effects on the Quality of Learn-
       ing in the Motivated Model with Smooth Trend and Time Effects
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                     AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 45


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                             Age Groups
                                          Model with No Trend


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                            Age Groups
                                           Model with Trend


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                            Age Groups
                                       Model with Time Effects



   Figure 10. The Estimated Impact of T on the Quality of Learning in
   the Agnostic Model with No Trend, Smooth Trend, and Time Effects
46   PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                            1      2        3       4       5          6   7

                                       Groups of Numbers of Products
                                           Model with No Trend


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                            1      2        3       4       5          6   7

                                       Groups of Numbers of Products
                                          Model with Smooth Trend


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                            1      2        3       4       5          6   7

                                       Groups of Numbers of Products
                                          Model with Time Effects



       Figure 11. The Estimated Impact of N on the Quality of Learning in
       the Agnostic Model with No Trend, Smooth Trend, and Time Effects
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 47


                  Date/Time Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




               1.0
               0.5
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.5
               −1.0




                      0        50        100         150         200

                                         Date/Time




   Figure 12. The Estimated Date/Time Effects on the Quality of Learn-
   ing in the Agnostic Model with Smooth Trend and Time Effects
48    PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect
               0.0   ●
                     ●            ●                                                                                   0.0    ●
                     ●
                     ●
                     ●            ●
                                  ●                   ●                     ●                                                ●
                                                                                                                             ●           ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●                                          ●                           ●           ●                        ●             ●
                                  ●                   ●                     ●                                                            ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●             ●                ●
                                  ●                   ●                     ●
                                                                            ●                    ●                                                                              ●                ●
                                                                                                 ●                                                                ●                              ●
              −0.3                                    ●
                                                                                                 ●                   −0.3                                                       ●                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                            ●
              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                     1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                                 Apparel                  Baby            Biss                                                Luxury Beauty           Music                      Office Products
                      Product Groups             Automotive               Beauty          Books
                                                                                                                      Product Groups          Major Appliances        Musical Instruments        Outdoors




               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect




               0.0   ●
                     ●            ●
                                  ●
                                                                                                                      0.0    ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●           ●
                                                                                                                                         ●                        ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●                     ●                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                         ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●             ●
                                                      ●                     ●                    ●                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                            ●                    ●                                                                ●             ●                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
              −0.3                                                                               ●
                                                                                                 ●                   −0.3                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                     1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                        Camera                Furniture            Health & Personal Care                                                PC            Pet Products         Software
                 Product Groups         Electronics           Grocery              Home
                                                                                                                             Product Groups              Pantry        Shoes                Sports




               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect




                     ●            ●                                                                                          ●           ●
               0.0   ●
                     ●
                     ●            ●
                                  ●
                                  ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●                    ●
                                                                                                                      0.0    ●
                                                                                                                             ●           ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●                ●
                                  ●                   ●                                          ●                           ●           ●
                                                                                                                                         ●                        ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●                                                            ●                        ●             ●
                                                      ●                     ●                    ●                                                                ●             ●                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
              −0.3                                                          ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●                   −0.3                                         ●             ●
                                                                                                 ●                                                                              ●                ●
              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6                                                                        ●

                     1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                       Home Entertainment               Jewelry           Lawn and Garden                                                Tools        Video DVD             Watches
                Product Groups         Home Improvement                 Kitchen           Luggage
                                                                                                                             Product Groups              Toys         Video Games           Wireless




              Figure 13. The Estimated Impact of T on the Quality of Learning in
              the Agnostic Model with No Trends, applied to all product groups.
              Note that the label ”rn” stands for the age group.
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                                                                                 AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 49


          0.6                                                                                                    0.6
          0.3                                                                                                    0.3
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect
                ●            ●                   ●
                                                 ●                     ●
                                                                       ●                    ●
                                                                                            ●                           ●                                                  ●                ●
          0.0   ●
                ●
                ●
                             ●
                             ●
                             ●
                                                 ●                     ●
                                                                       ●                    ●
                                                                                                                 0.0    ●
                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                             ●                   ●                                                                                                           ●             ●
                                                 ●                     ●
         −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                            Apparel                  Baby            Biss                                                Luxury Beauty           Music                      Office Products
                 Product Groups             Automotive               Beauty          Books
                                                                                                                 Product Groups          Major Appliances        Musical Instruments        Outdoors




          0.6                                                                                                    0.6
          0.3                                                                                                    0.3
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect



                ●            ●                                                                                          ●
          0.0   ●            ●
                             ●
                                                 ●
                                                 ●
                                                 ●                     ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                 0.0    ●
                                                                                                                        ●           ●
                                                                                                                                    ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●                                                                ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●                ●
         −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                   Camera                Furniture            Health & Personal Care                                                PC            Pet Products         Software
            Product Groups         Electronics           Grocery              Home
                                                                                                                        Product Groups              Pantry        Shoes                Sports




          0.6                                                                                                    0.6
          0.3                                                                                                    0.3
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect




                ●            ●
                             ●                   ●                     ●                    ●                           ●           ●                        ●
          0.0   ●            ●
                             ●
                             ●
                                                 ●
                                                 ●
                                                 ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●                    ●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                 0.0    ●
                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                       ●                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
         −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                  Home Entertainment               Jewelry           Lawn and Garden                                                Tools        Video DVD             Watches
           Product Groups         Home Improvement                 Kitchen           Luggage
                                                                                                                        Product Groups              Toys         Video Games           Wireless




         Figure 14. The Estimated Impact of T on the Quality of Learning in
         the Agnostic Model with Smooth Trends, applied to all all product
         groups. Note that the label ”rn” stands for the age group.
50    PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect
                     ●            ●                   ●
                                                      ●                     ●
                                                                            ●                    ●
                                                                                                 ●                           ●                                                  ●                ●
               0.0   ●
                     ●
                     ●
                                  ●
                                  ●
                                  ●
                                                      ●                     ●
                                                                            ●                    ●
                                                                                                                      0.0    ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                  ●                   ●                                                                                                           ●             ●
                                                      ●                     ●
              −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                     1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                                 Apparel                  Baby            Biss                                                Luxury Beauty           Music                      Office Products
                      Product Groups             Automotive               Beauty          Books
                                                                                                                      Product Groups          Major Appliances        Musical Instruments        Outdoors




               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect



                     ●            ●                                                                                          ●
               0.0   ●            ●
                                  ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●                     ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                      0.0    ●
                                                                                                                             ●           ●
                                                                                                                                         ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●                                                                ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●                ●
              −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                     1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                        Camera                Furniture            Health & Personal Care                                                PC            Pet Products         Software
                 Product Groups         Electronics           Grocery              Home
                                                                                                                             Product Groups              Pantry        Shoes                Sports




               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect




                     ●            ●
                                  ●                   ●                     ●                    ●                           ●           ●                        ●
               0.0   ●            ●
                                  ●
                                  ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●                    ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                      0.0    ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                            ●                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
              −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                     1            2                   3                     4                    5                           1           2                       3              4                5
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                       Home Entertainment               Jewelry           Lawn and Garden                                                Tools        Video DVD             Watches
                Product Groups         Home Improvement                 Kitchen           Luggage
                                                                                                                             Product Groups              Toys         Video Games           Wireless




              Figure 15. The Estimated Impact of T on the Quality of Learning
              in the Agnostic Model with Time Effects, applied to all all product
              groups. Note that the label ”rn” stands for the age group.
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                                                                                 AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 51


          0.6                                                                                                    0.6
          0.3                                                                                                    0.3
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect
                                                                                                                                  ●
                            ●
                            ●     ●              ●            ●               ●                                         ●                    ●
                                                                                                                                             ●              ●
          0.0   ●           ●     ●
                                  ●              ●
                                                 ●            ●
                                                              ●               ●
                                                                              ●             ●                    0.0    ●
                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●         ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                            ●     ●              ●            ●               ●             ●
         −0.3   ●                                                                                               −0.3
                            ●
                                  ●              ●            ●                             ●
                                                                              ●
         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                         2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                     6
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                            Apparel                  Baby            Biss                                                Luxury Beauty           Music                      Office Products
                 Product Groups             Automotive               Beauty          Books
                                                                                                                 Product Groups          Major Appliances        Musical Instruments        Outdoors




          0.6               ●
                                                                                                                 0.6
                                  ●              ●            ●               ●             ●
          0.3                                                                                                    0.3
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect


                            ●     ●
                                  ●
                                  ●              ●
                                                 ●            ●
                                                              ●               ●
                                                                              ●             ●
                                                                                            ●                                                ●              ●       ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                 ●            ●               ●             ●                           ●         ●
          0.0   ●
                ●
                ●
                            ●
                            ●     ●              ●            ●               ●
                                                                              ●                                  0.0    ●         ●          ●              ●       ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●         ●
                ●
                                                                                                                        ●         ●
         −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3                         ●              ●       ●                       ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●       ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●         ●
         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                         2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                     6
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                   Camera                Furniture            Health & Personal Care                                                PC            Pet Products         Software
            Product Groups         Electronics           Grocery              Home
                                                                                                                        Product Groups              Pantry        Shoes                Sports




          0.6                                                                                                    0.6
          0.3                                                                 ●                                  0.3
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect




                                                              ●                             ●                           ●         ●
                ●           ●     ●              ●
                                                                                                                        ●         ●          ●                                    ●
                            ●     ●              ●            ●                                                                   ●          ●              ●
          0.0   ●
                ●
                ●           ●     ●              ●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●
                                                                              ●                                  0.0    ●
                                                                                                                        ●         ●
                                                                                                                                             ●              ●       ●             ●
                            ●                                                 ●                                                                                     ●
                ●                 ●              ●            ●                                                                              ●               ●      ●             ●         ●
                                                                              ●             ●                                                                                     ●         ●
         −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                         2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                     6
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                  Home Entertainment               Jewelry           Lawn and Garden                                                Tools        Video DVD             Watches
           Product Groups         Home Improvement                 Kitchen           Luggage
                                                                                                                        Product Groups              Toys         Video Games           Wireless




         Figure 16. The Estimated Impact of N on the Quality of Learning in
         the Agnostic Model with No Trends, applied to all product groups.
         Note that the label ”rn” stands for the N group.
52    PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect
                                                                                                                                                                 ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●             ●
                                 ●     ●              ●                                          ●                           ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●         ●          ●              ●
               0.0   ●
                     ●
                                 ●     ●              ●            ●
                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●                                  0.0    ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                  ●              ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●       ●             ●         ●

                                       ●              ●            ●               ●             ●
                     ●           ●
              −0.3               ●
                                 ●     ●              ●            ●                             ●
                                                                                                                     −0.3
                                                                                   ●
              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                              2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                     6
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                                 Apparel                  Baby            Biss                                                Luxury Beauty           Music                      Office Products
                      Product Groups             Automotive               Beauty          Books
                                                                                                                      Product Groups          Major Appliances        Musical Instruments        Outdoors




               0.6               ●
                                                                                                                      0.6
                                       ●              ●            ●               ●             ●
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect



                                       ●              ●            ●               ●             ●
                                 ●     ●              ●            ●               ●             ●                                     ●          ●              ●       ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
               0.0   ●
                     ●           ●
                                 ●     ●              ●            ●                                                  0.0    ●         ●                         ●       ●             ●         ●
                     ●                                ●            ●               ●                                                              ●
                     ●                 ●                                                                                     ●         ●
                                 ●                                                                                                     ●
              −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3                         ●              ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●         ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●       ●             ●         ●

              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                              2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                     6
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                        Camera                Furniture            Health & Personal Care                                                PC            Pet Products         Software
                 Product Groups         Electronics           Grocery              Home
                                                                                                                             Product Groups              Pantry        Shoes                Sports




               0.6                                                                                                    0.6
               0.3                                                                                                    0.3    ●         ●
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect




                                                                                   ●                                                              ●               ●
                                       ●              ●            ●                             ●                           ●         ●                                               ●         ●
                     ●           ●
                                 ●                                                                                           ●                    ●              ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●             ●
               0.0   ●
                     ●           ●     ●
                                       ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                                   ●               ●                                  0.0    ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                  ●              ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                     ●           ●     ●              ●            ●               ●                                                              ●              ●                     ●         ●
                     ●                                             ●               ●             ●
              −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
              −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                              2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                     6
                                                      rn                                                                                                        rn

                                       Home Entertainment               Jewelry           Lawn and Garden                                                Tools        Video DVD             Watches
                Product Groups         Home Improvement                 Kitchen           Luggage
                                                                                                                             Product Groups              Toys         Video Games           Wireless




              Figure 17. The Estimated Impact of N on the Quality of Learning
              in the Agnostic Model with Smooth Trends, applied to all product
              groups. Note that the label ”rn” stands for the N group
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                                                                                 AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 53


          0.6                                                                                                    0.6
          0.3                                                                                                    0.3
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect
                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                             ●              ●      ●             ●
                                                                              ●             ●                           ●         ●
                                                                                                                                  ●          ●
                                                                                                                                             ●              ●                    ●         ●
          0.0   ●
                ●
                            ●     ●
                                  ●              ●
                                                 ●            ●
                                                              ●               ●             ●                    0.0    ●         ●
                                                                                                                                  ●          ●
                                                                                                                                             ●              ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                   ●             ●         ●

                            ●     ●              ●            ●               ●             ●
         −0.3   ●           ●                                                                                   −0.3
                            ●     ●              ●            ●               ●             ●

         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                         2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                    6
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                            Apparel                  Baby            Biss                                                Luxury Beauty          Music                      Office Products
                 Product Groups             Automotive               Beauty          Books
                                                                                                                 Product Groups          Major Appliances       Musical Instruments        Outdoors




          0.6                                                                                                    0.6
                            ●                                                                                                     ●
                                                 ●            ●               ●             ●
                                  ●
          0.3                                                                                                    0.3    ●
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect



                                  ●
                                  ●              ●            ●               ●             ●
                                                                                            ●                                     ●          ●                     ●
                ●                                ●            ●
                                                              ●               ●
                                                                              ●             ●                                                               ●      ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                 ●         ●
          0.0   ●
                ●
                            ●
                            ●     ●
                                  ●              ●            ●               ●             ●                    0.0    ●
                                                                                                                        ●         ●
                                                                                                                                  ●          ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●      ●
                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                   ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                 ●         ●

         −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                         2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                    6
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                   Camera                Furniture            Health & Personal Care                                                PC           Pet Products         Software
            Product Groups         Electronics           Grocery              Home
                                                                                                                        Product Groups              Pantry       Shoes                Sports




          0.6                                                                                                    0.6
          0.3                                                                                                    0.3    ●         ●
Effect




                                                                                                       Effect




                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                             ●                                   ●
                                  ●              ●            ●               ●                                         ●
                                                                                                                        ●         ●          ●              ●      ●
                                                                                                                                                                   ●             ●         ●
                                                                                                                        ●         ●          ●              ●
          0.0   ●           ●
                            ●
                            ●
                            ●
                                  ●
                                  ●
                                  ●
                                                 ●
                                                 ●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●               ●             ●                    0.0    ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                             ●              ●      ●             ●
                ●           ●     ●                           ●               ●                                                              ●              ●      ●                       ●
                ●                                ●            ●               ●                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                            ●
         −0.3                                                                                                   −0.3
         −0.6                                                                                                   −0.6
                         2                       4                            6                                                   2                         4                    6
                                                 rn                                                                                                        rn

                                  Home Entertainment               Jewelry           Lawn and Garden                                                Tools       Video DVD             Watches
           Product Groups         Home Improvement                 Kitchen           Luggage
                                                                                                                        Product Groups              Toys        Video Games           Wireless




         Figure 18. The Estimated Impact of N on the Quality of Learning in
         the Agnostic Model with Time Effects, applied to all product groups.
         Note that the label ”rn” stands for the N group.
54    PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


               1.0                                                                                                    1.0
               0.5                                                                                                    0.5
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect
               0.0                                                                                                    0.0
              −0.5                                                                                                   −0.5
              −1.0                                                                                                   −1.0
                     0            50         100              150                  200                                       0         50             100         150             200
                                         Date/Time                                                                                                 Date/Time

                                                 Apparel                  Baby            Biss                                                Luxury Beauty       Music                      Office Products
                      Product Groups             Automotive               Beauty          Books
                                                                                                                      Product Groups          Major Appliances    Musical Instruments        Outdoors




               1.0                                                                                                    1.0
               0.5                                                                                                    0.5
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect




               0.0                                                                                                    0.0
              −0.5                                                                                                   −0.5
              −1.0                                                                                                   −1.0
                     0            50         100              150                  200                                       0         50             100         150             200
                                         Date/Time                                                                                                 Date/Time

                                        Camera                Furniture            Health & Personal Care                                                PC        Pet Products         Software
                 Product Groups         Electronics           Grocery              Home
                                                                                                                             Product Groups              Pantry    Shoes                Sports




               1.0                                                                                                    1.0
               0.5                                                                                                    0.5
     Effect




                                                                                                            Effect




               0.0                                                                                                    0.0
              −0.5                                                                                                   −0.5
              −1.0                                                                                                   −1.0
                     0            50         100              150                  200                                       0         50             100         150             200
                                         Date/Time                                                                                                 Date/Time

                                       Home Entertainment               Jewelry           Lawn and Garden                                                Tools    Video DVD             Watches
                Product Groups         Home Improvement                 Kitchen           Luggage
                                                                                                                             Product Groups              Toys     Video Games           Wireless




              Figure 19. The Estimated Time Effects in the Agnostic Model with
              Time Effects, applied to all product groups.
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:       AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 55

                                    References

  Bai, Jushan. “Panel Data Models with Interactive Fixed Effects.” Econometrica,
2009, 77(4), 1229-352.
  Bai, Jushan, and Serena Ng. ”Determining the number of factors in approximate
factor models.” Econometrica 2002, 70(1), 191-221.
  Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz, “Measuring the Effects of Mone-
tary Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach”, NBER
working paper no. 10220, January 2004.
  Bresnahan, Timothy F., Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt, “Information Tech-
nology, Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level
Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117(1), 339-76.
  Bloom, Nicholas R., Rafaella Sadun, and John van Reenen, “American do IT bet-
ter: U.S. Multinationals and the productivity miracle,” American Economic Review,
2012, 102(1), 167-201.
  Chandler, A. D., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business,
1977, Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press.
  de Fortuny, Enric J., David Martens, and Foster Provost, “Predictive Modeling
with Big Data: Is Bigger Really Better?”, Big Data, 2013, 1(4), 215-26.
  Grunes, Allen P. and Maurice E. Stucke, “No Mistake about it: The Important
Role of Antitrust in the Era of Big Data,” 2015, University of Tennessee Legal Stud-
ies Research Paper No. 269.
  Lambrecht, Anja and Catherine Tucker, “Can Big Data Protect a Firm From Com-
petition,” 2017, Competition Policy International Antitrust Chronicle, January 2017,
1-8.
  Lerner, Andreas, “The Role of ‘Big Data’ in Online Platform Competition,” 2014,
working paper.
56     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

     McElheran, Kristina, and W. Jin, “Economies before scale, I.T. investment and
performance in young firms,” working paper, University of Toronto.
     Newman, Nathan, “Search, Antitrust and the Economics of the Control of User
Data,” 2014, working paper, NYU Information Law Institute.
     Tambe, Prasanna and Lorin Hitt, “The productivity of Information Technology
Investments: New Evidence from IT labor data,” Information Systems Research, 2012,
23(3-part-1), 599-617.
     Varian, Hal, “Big Data: New Tricks for Econometrics,” Journal of Economic Per-
spectives,” 2014, 28(2), 3-28.
      THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                     AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 57

                             Appendix A. Derivation of Assertion 2

  Here we first explain the estimation of ai via the plug-in principle. The plug-in
estimator is defined by:

                    âi = (σ̂i2 + α̂i0 Σ̂v α̂i )/2,         if predicting mean,
                   q
              âi = (σ̂i2 + α̂i0 Σ̂v α̂i )Φ−1 (p),         if predicting p-th quantile,
for
                                  T
                               1X
                      σ̂i2   =       (log[(Qki,t + 1)/Vi,tk ] − α̂i0 F̂t − Xi,t
                                                                            0
                                                                                β̂)2
                               T t=1
                                     T
                  v    1 X 0
                Σ̂ =           v̂t v̂t ,           v̂t = F̂t − Φ̂1 F̂t−1 − ... − Φ̂d F̂t−d .
                     T − d t=d
For each i, it obeys under the previous conditions,
                                            √       √
                           âi − ai = Op (1/ N + 1/ T ).

  We now turn to proving the main assertion regarding the relative error. Under
the stated assumptions and definitions, we see that

  relative errorki,t = relative errori,t
                               |Q̂0i,t − Q0i,t |
                       =
                                      Q0i,t
                       = | exp(−i,t ) exp(α̂i0 F̂t + Xi,t
                                                       0
                                                           β̂ + âi − αi0 Ft − Xi,t
                                                                                0
                                                                                    β − ai ) − 1|.

We can further bound

             relative errori,t ≤ irreducible errori,t + estimation errori,t ,
                                              |Q̂0,oracle
                                                 i,t      − Q0i,t |
             irreducible errori,t          :=                       = | exp(−i,t ) − 1|,
                                                      Q0i,t
                                             |Q̂0i,t − Q0,oracle
                                                         i,t     |
             estimation errori,t          :=           0
                                                      Qi,t
                                                                                   
             = exp(−i,t ) exp(α̂i0 F̂t + Xi,t
                                           0
                                               β̂ + âi − αi0 Ft − Xi,t
                                                                    0
                                                                        β − ai ) − 1 .
58     PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

The last term can be upper-bounded, using the bounds on α̂i0 F̂t −Xi,t
                                                                   0
                                                                       β̂ −αi0 Ft −Xi,t
                                                                                    0
                                                                                        β
stated in the main text:
                                                               √            √
                |α̂i0 F̂t − Xi,t
                             0
                                 β̂ − αi0 Ft − Xi,t
                                                0
                                                    β| = Op (1/ N ) + Op (1/ T ),

and the bounds on âi − ai stated above, as follows:
                        √            √                              √            √
 exp(−i,t )| exp[Op (1/ T ) + Op (1/ T )] − 1| ≤ exp(−i,t )|Op (1/ T ) + Op (1/ N )|.

This implies that for any finite constant K we have
                                                              √      √
             E[estimation errori,t ∧ K] ≤ K 0 E[exp(−i,t )(1/ T + 1/ N )],

where K 0 is another constant. Hence by the Markov inequality
                                                    √      √
                 P(estimation errori,t > t) ≤ Ci (1/ T + 1/ N ),

where Ci depends on t and K. Hence by the union bound

P(relative errori,t > c) ≤ P(irreducible errori,t > c/2) + P(estimation errori,t > c/2)
                                                                 √      √
                         ≤ P(irreducible errori,t > c/2) + Ci (1/ T + 1/ N ),

and, substituting the expression irreducible errori,t = | exp(−i,t ) − 1|, we obtain:
                                                                    √        √
     P(relative errori,t > c) ≤ P(| exp(−i,t ) − 1| > c/2) + Ci (1/ T + 1/ N ).

Similarly we have that

      E[relative errori,t ∧ K] ≤ E[irreducible errori,t ] + E[estimation errori,t ∧ K],

and the claimed bound follows from the above substitution.

     Appendix B. A Robustness Check: Empirical Results for Agnostic Model for
                      Active and In-Active Products. The Case of Electronics

     Here we cut the panel data into two halves across the time dimension. We look
at the first half of the panel, and isolate two subgroups of products (that existed in
the first half of the panel):

       • active products: products whose average unit sales were above 1;
   THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:        AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 59

     • in-active products: products whose average unit sales were below .5.

Then we look in the second half of the panel and analyze the predictive equations
for the probability of the Big Error Event for the two groups of products. In this
section as well as in the remainder of the paper, we focus on the agnostic specifi-
cations as they tend to be more flexible and easier to interpret.

B.0.1. Active Products. We begin with descriptive statistics. Figure 20 shows the
cross-sectional averages of Relative Forecast Error, Big Error Event occurrence,
Age, and Number of Products, for each week t = 1, ..., H. Figure 21 shows the time
averages of Relative Forecast Error, Big Error Event occurrence, Age, and Number
of Products, for each product j = 1, ..., M .
  From descriptive statistics we notice that the Relative Forecast Errors are bigger
for the active products than for all products in the previous section. This literally
means that the active products are harder to forecast, while in-active products (as
we shall see below) are easier to forecast. We next estimate the agnostic model
from the previous section on the active products and present the results in Table 4
and Figures 22 and 23. Relative to the previous analysis we see the following:

 RC.1 For active products, the T effect is somewhat stronger than before.
 RC.2 For active products, the N effect is essentially flat, as before.

There is not much to add here, and essentially the same comments apply as before,
apart from the age effect being stronger here.
60   PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

         Table 4. Estimation Results of Fixed Effects Models for the Agnostic
         Model for Active Products


                                                      Dependent variable:

                                                  1(Relative Forect Error > X)
                                    Without Trend        Time Trend         Time Effects

                                          (1)                (2)                 (3)

     Age.Region.(20,58]                −0.030               0.010             −0.003
                                        (0.045)            (0.046)            (0.046)
     Age.Region.(58,99]                −0.082               0.004             −0.006
                                        (0.051)            (0.053)            (0.053)
                                                ∗∗∗
     Age.Region.(99,148]              −0.184               −0.048             −0.058
                                        (0.053)            (0.055)            (0.055)
                                                ∗∗∗
     Age.Region.(148,199]             −0.249               −0.061             −0.070
                                        (0.055)            (0.059)            (0.059)
                                                ∗∗∗
     Age.Region.(199,278]             −0.309               −0.060             −0.066
                                        (0.057)            (0.063)            (0.063)
                                                                    ∗
     N.Region.(1e+03,3.72e+03]          0.013             −0.077
                                        (0.043)            (0.046)            (0.000)
     N.Region.(3.72e+03,7.74e+03]       0.032              −0.025             0.055∗∗
                                        (0.038)            (0.039)            (0.022)
     N.Region.(7.74e+03,9.65e+03]       0.035              −0.022              0.055
                                        (0.028)            (0.029)            (0.036)
     N.Region.(9.65e+03,1.07e+04]      −0.001              −0.030              0.044
                                        (0.025)            (0.026)            (0.040)
     N.Region.(1.07e+04,1.57e+04]                                             0.081∗
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.047)
     Trend                                                 −0.565
                                                           (0.508)
     Squared.Trend                                          0.132
                                                           (0.309)

     Observations                       88,149             88,149             88,149
       2
     R                                  0.237               0.239              0.242
     Adjusted R2                        0.229               0.231              0.232

     Note:                          Standard errors are clustered by product and date.
              THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                      AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 61

               3.5




                                                   Average.Prob.Event

                                                                        0.8
Average RFE

               2.5




                                                                        0.4
               1.5




                                                                        0.0
                     0   20   40   60   80   100                               0   20   40   60   80   100

                               Date                                                      Date

                                                                        9000
               220




                                                   Average N by Cat
Average Age




                                                                        8000
               180
               140




                                                                        7000




                     0   20   40   60   80   100                               0   20   40   60   80   100

                               Date                                                      Date


                 Figure 20. Active Products: Cross-sectional averages of Relative
                 Forecast Error, Big Error Event occurrence , Age, and Number of
                 Products, by Date
62                 PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡




                                                          Time Average Prob Event
                   5
Time Average RFE




                                                                                    0.8
                   4
                   3




                                                                                    0.4
                   2
                   1




                                                                                    0.0
                   0




                         0   200   400   600   800                                          0   200   400   600   800

                                   Product                Time Average N by Cat                       Product
Time Average Age

                   200




                                                                                    10000
                   150




                                                                                    4000
                   100
                   50




                                                                                    0




                         0   200   400   600   800                                          0   200   400   600   800

                                   Product                                                            Product


                     Figure 21. Active Products: Time Series averages of Relative Forecast
                     Error (truncated at 5), Big Error Event occurrence , Age, and Number
                     of Products, by Product
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                     AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 63


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                             Age Groups
                                          Model with No Trend


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                            Age Groups
                                           Model with Trend


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                            Age Groups
                                       Model with Time Effects



   Figure 22. Active Products: The Estimated Impact of T on the Qual-
   ity of Learning in the Agnostic Model with No Trend, Smooth Trend,
   and Time Effects
64   PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                              1        2          3           4      5

                                     Groups of Numbers of Products
                                         Model with No Trend


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                              1        2          3           4      5

                                     Groups of Numbers of Products
                                        Model with Smooth Trend


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                              1        2          3           4      5

                                     Groups of Numbers of Products
                                        Model with Time Effects



       Figure 23. Active Products: The Estimated Impact of N on the Qual-
       ity of Learning in the Agnostic Model with No Trend, Smooth Trend,
       and Time Effects
    THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:       AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 65

B.0.2. In-Active Products. We begin with descriptive statistics. Figure 24 shows
the cross-sectional averages of Relative Forecast Error, Big Error Event occurrence,
Age, and Number of Products, for each week t = 1, ..., H. Figure 25 shows the time
averages of Relative Forecast Error, Big Error Event occurrence, Age, and Number
of Products, for each product j = 1, ..., M .
  From descriptive statistics we notice that the Relative Forecast Errors are much
smaller for the active products than for all products in general. This literally means
that the in-active products are easier to forecast, which agrees with any intuition
as well as observations we made in Section 2. We next estimate the agnostic model
from the previous section on the in-active products and present the results in Table
5 and Figures 22 and 23. Relative to the previous analysis we see the following:

 RC.3 For in-active products, the T effect is somewhat less strong than before.
 RC.4 For in-active products, the N effect is essentially flat, as before.

The result RC.4 agrees with Assertion 3 from comparative statics analysis in Sec-
tion 2, namely that for in-active products the probability of Big Error Event is af-
fected less by the size of data, which is the product age here.

Overall Conclusion from the Robustness Checks. Relative to the main analysis,
we observe similar predictive impacts of data size on the probability of the Big
Error Event, with the T effect being somewhat stronger for active products and
somewhat weaker for in-active products. The effect of N continues to be essentially
flat.
66        PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡

             Table 5. Estimation Results of Fixed Effects Models for the Agnostic
             Model for In-Active Products


                                                         Dependent variable:

                                                     1(Relative Forect Error > X)
                                       Without Trend       Time Trend          Time Effects

                                             (1)                (2)                 (3)

     Age.Region.(20,58]                  −0.069∗∗∗           −0.047∗             −0.027
                                           (0.026)            (0.027)            (0.028)
     Age.Region.(58,99]                  −0.110∗∗∗           −0.064∗∗            −0.043
                                           (0.027)            (0.027)            (0.029)
     Age.Region.(99,148]                 −0.133∗∗∗           −0.066∗∗            −0.043
                                           (0.028)            (0.028)            (0.030)
     Age.Region.(148,199]                −0.153∗∗∗           −0.063∗∗            −0.037
                                           (0.029)            (0.029)            (0.031)
     Age.Region.(199,278]                −0.184∗∗∗           −0.068∗∗            −0.041
                                           (0.030)            (0.031)            (0.032)
     N.Region.(1e+03,3.72e+03]                                                  −0.052∗∗
                                           (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.025)
     N.Region.(3.72e+03,7.74e+03]           0.014             0.027              −0.027∗
                                           (0.018)            (0.018)            (0.015)
     N.Region.(7.74e+03,9.65e+03]           0.020             0.043∗∗           −0.022∗∗
                                           (0.020)            (0.021)            (0.011)
     N.Region.(9.65e+03,1.07e+04]           0.011             0.044∗∗           −0.021∗∗
                                           (0.021)            (0.022)            (0.008)
     N.Region.(1.07e+04,1.57e+04]           0.022             0.055∗∗
                                           (0.023)            (0.025)            (0.000)
     Trend                                                   −0.732∗∗
                                                              (0.290)
     Squared.Trend                                            0.356∗∗
                                                              (0.173)

     Observations                         173,384            173,384             173,384
     R2                                     0.332             0.332               0.335
     Adjusted    R2                         0.323             0.324               0.326

     Note:                             Standard errors are clustered by product and date.
              THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                      AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 67




                                                   Average Prob Event

                                                                        0.8
Average RFE

               0.5




                                                                        0.4
               0.3




                                                                        0.0
               0.1




                     0   20   40   60   80   100                               0   20   40   60   80   100

                               Date                Average N by Cat                      Date
               180




                                                                        9500
Average Age

               140




                                                                        8500
                                                                        7500
               100




                     0   20   40   60   80   100                               0   20   40   60   80   100

                               Date                                                      Date


                 Figure 24. In-Active Products: Cross-sectional averages of Relative
                 Forecast Error, Big Error Event occurrence, Age, and Number of
                 Products, by Date
68                 PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡




                                                          Time Average Prob Event
                   5
Time Average RFE




                                                                                    0.8
                   4
                   3




                                                                                    0.4
                   2
                   1




                                                                                    0.0
                   0




                          0   500 1000        2000                                          0   500 1000      2000

                                  Product                                                           Product

                                                                                    15000
                                                          Time Average N by Cat
                   250
Time Average Age

                   150




                                                                                    5000
                   0 50




                                                                                    0




                          0   500 1000        2000                                          0   500 1000      2000

                                  Product                                                           Product


                      Figure 25. In-Active Products: Time Series averages of Relative Fore-
                      cast Error (truncated at 5), Big Error Event occurrence, Age, and
                      Number of Products, by Product
THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:                     AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 69


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                             Age Groups
                                          Model with No Trend


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                            Age Groups
                                           Model with Trend


                      Age (T) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
               0.4
               0.2
      Effect

               0.0
               −0.2
               −0.4




                            1         2           3             4        5

                                            Age Groups
                                       Model with Time Effects



   Figure 26. In-Active Products: The Estimated Impact of T on the
   Quality of Learning in the Agnostic Model with No Trend, Smooth
   Trend, and Time Effects
70   PATRICK BAJARI∗ , VICTOR CHERNOZHUKOV† , ALI HORTAÇSU? , AND JUNICHI SUZUKI‡


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%




                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                              1        2          3           4      5

                                     Groups of Numbers of Products
                                         Model with No Trend


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                              1        2          3           4      5

                                     Groups of Numbers of Products
                                        Model with Smooth Trend


                    Num Prods (N) Effect on Probability that Forecast Error > X%
                    0.4
                    0.2
           Effect

                    0.0
                    −0.2
                    −0.4




                              1        2          3           4      5

                                     Groups of Numbers of Products
                                        Model with Time Effects



       Figure 27. In-Active Products: The Estimated Impact of N on the
       Quality of Learning in the Agnostic Model with No Trend, Smooth
       Trend, and Time Effects
 THE IMPACT OF BIG DATA ON FIRM PERFORMANCE:   AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 71

University of Washington

E-mail address: Bajari@uw.edu


MIT

E-mail address: vchern@mit.edu


University of Chicago

E-mail address: hortacsu@uchicago.edu


Amazon, Inc.

E-mail address: sjunich@amazon.com
