                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY:
                     EVIDENCE FROM TERRORIST ATTACKS

                                       Kenneth R. Ahern

                                      Working Paper 24331
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24331


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




I thank Fernando Anjos, Cary Frydman, Arjen Siegmann, Jose Tavares and seminar participants
at the American Economic Association Annual Meeting, Nova School of Business and
Economics, Texas A&M University, University of British Columbia, and University of Porto.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kenneth R. Ahern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Importance of Psychology in Economic Activity: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks
Kenneth R. Ahern
NBER Working Paper No. 24331
February 2018
JEL No. E7,K42,O1,O43

                                           ABSTRACT

Terrorist attacks influence economic growth and individual psychology. However, identifying
the direct effect of terrorism on economics and psychology is difficult because institutions also
change in response to terrorist attacks. This paper controls for institutional responses to terrorist
attacks by studying people who live beyond the institutions' borders, but are exposed to the
attacks. I find that terrorism leads to declines in trust, subjective well-being, and the importance
of creativity and freedom. However, at the macro-level, terrorism leads to increases in economic
output and household income. These results are consistent with a growing literature that finds
counterintuitive responses to trauma.


Kenneth R. Ahern
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway, HOH 718
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
kenneth.ahern@marshall.usc.edu
                     THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                                1



  Figure I shows that the number of terrorist attacks across the world has risen dramatically
from 1,162 attacks in 2004 to a peak of 16,860 attacks in 2014. The sharp increase in
terrorist attacks has potentially severe consequences for mental health, political stability,
and economic growth. In particular, terrorist attacks cause increases in post-traumatic
stress disorder, depression, and anxiety.1 They also alter institutions by changing political
views (Gould and Klor, 2010), election outcomes (Montalvo, 2011), and political regimes
(Gassebner, Jong-A-Pin, and Mierau, 2008). Finally, terrorism is associated with changes
in macroeconomic outcomes, including decreases in GDP (Blomberg, Hess, and Orphanides,
2004), investment (Llussá and Tavares, 2011), and trade (Blomberg and Hess, 2006).
  Given the rising influence of terrorism in society, it is important to understand the ways
in which terrorism influences institutions and economies. Because few people are physically
harmed by terrorist attacks, terrorism’s primary channel of influence must be psychological.
Exposure to a terrorist attack could change economic attitudes and political opinions, which
leads to changes in institutions and economic behavior. However, attitudes, institutions, and
economic behavior are intertwined. This makes it difficult to disentangle whether psychology
impacts economic outcomes (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009), economic outcomes impact in-
stitutions (Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi, 2004), or institutions impact psychology (Di Tella,
Galiani, and Schargrodsky, 2007).
  This paper studies the causal effect of terrorist attacks on individual psychology and
macroeconomic outcomes while controlling for local institutional responses. First, using data
from the European Social Survey for 21 countries from 2002 to 2011, I measure the change
in individual psychology caused by the two largest terrorist attacks in European history:
the 2004 Madrid train bombing and the 2005 London metro attacks. Individual psychology
is measured by psychological traits related to economic choices, including cultural values,
trust, subjective well-being, and attitudes towards free markets. In a difference-in-difference
framework, I measure the change in the psychological traits of people closer to the attacks
1See   Schuster et al. (2001), Galea et al. (2002), Rubin et al. (2005), and Gabriel et al. (2007).
2                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



compared to people further from the attacks. I use two proxies to measure closeness to the
attacks: 1) travel time to Madrid or London, and 2) language spoken at home (Spanish or
English). People who speak Spanish or English are more likely to be exposed to greater
media coverage of the events (Speckhard, 2003). To control for endogenous institutional
responses, I study people who do not live in the country where the terrorist attack occurred,
and hence, are not influenced by the institutional response to the attack.
    The first set of results shows that the endogenous institutional response to terrorist at-
tacks can obscure the effects on individual psychology. Without controlling for institutional
responses, trust and egalitarian values increase following the London attack, but not the
Madrid attack. The effect on well-being also varies between the Madrid and London attacks:
subjective well-being decreases following the London attack, but chronic health problems de-
crease following the Madrid attack.
    Once I control for institutional responses to the attacks by excluding respondents who
live in Spain or the UK, the effects of terrorist attacks become clearer. Following both
attacks, trust decreases, chronic health problems increase, subjective well-being decreases,
and the importance of creativity and freedom decrease. Thus, terrorist attacks have signifi-
cant detrimental impacts on individual psychological traits after controlling for endogenous
institutional responses to terrorism.
    In the second set of tests, I use a similar research design to measure the effect of terrorist
attacks on macroeconomic outcomes. Because I study aggregated outcomes rather than
individual psychology, I expand the sample of terrorist attacks to increase the power of the
tests. In particular, for each of 91 sub-national regions in Europe from 1995 to 2008, I
calculate the fraction of the foreign population that comes from countries which experienced
an abnormally high level of terrorism in a given year. To record detailed citizenship status of a
region’s population, I use census microdata from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
– International (IPUMS-I). I identify abnormally high levels of terrorism as years in which
a country experiences more terrorism-related fatalities than the country’s median number
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                              3



of fatalities during the previous five years. This controls for resilience among populations
living in countries with greater levels of terrorism (Becker and Rubinstein, 2011).
  In tests that control for regional fixed effects and region-specific time trends, but that
allow for endogenous institutional responses, I find that exposure to terrorist attacks have
a negative impact on GDP per capita and GDP growth, while the unemployment rate de-
creases and employee compensation increases. These results are consistent with prior studies
(Blomberg, Hess, and Orphanides, 2004; Eckstein and Tsiddon, 2004), which suggest that the
simultaneous decrease in output and increase in labor share may be explained by inefficient
government spending following a local terrorist attack.
  When I study regions not directly affected by a local terrorist attack, but whose popula-
tion is affected by foreign attacks, I find strikingly different results. As a larger fraction of
a region’s population is exposed to terrorism in their home countries, the region’s GDP per
capita, GDP growth, and household income increase. In addition, the magnitude of these
effects increases as terrorist attacks in expatriates’ home countries become more deadly, pro-
viding evidence that the results are not spurious, but driven by exposure to terrorism. Ro-
bustness tests verify that the results are not caused by reverse causation, terrorism-induced
immigration, or spillovers in institutional responses. These results provide suggestive evi-
dence that the psychological impact of terrorism leads to improvements in macroeconomic
outcomes, contrary to conventional wisdom.
  My results are consistent with a growing literature that finds that exposure to violence has
counter-intuitive effects. For example, Brück, Llussá, and Tavares (2011) report evidence
that terrorist attacks increase entrepreneurial activities. Similarly, Voors, Nillesen, Verwimp,
Bulte, Lensink, and Soest (2012) find that exposure to violence during the civil war in
Burundi caused lasting increases in altruism, and decreases in risk aversion and patience.
Other papers report increases in egalitarianism, altruism, and civic participation following
exposure to violence in a wide range of settings, including Uganda, Sierra Leone, Nepal, and
4                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



Georgia.2 However, while my research design helps to separate the effect of institutions from
psychological changes, identifying the exact psychological mechanisms that cause positive
changes in macroeconomic outcomes is challenging.
    As one way to better understand the underlying psychological mechanisms, in the final part
of the paper, I compare natural and technological disasters to terrorist attacks. Natural and
technological disasters, such as earthquakes and accidental factory explosions, share many
similarities with terrorist attacks. Each of these incidents involves a random, unexpected,
and traumatic loss of life. However, only terrorist attacks are intentionally committed acts
of violence by other people. Thus, the psychological impact on economic outcomes following
terrorist attacks may differ from natural or technological disasters. For instance, a natural
disaster might not affect trust because no person is to blame, whereas a terrorist attack
could affect trust because the act was committed intentionally by another person. I find
that terrorist attacks have a substantially larger impact on macroeconomic outcomes than
do accidental disasters (roughly five times as large), even though disasters have higher num-
bers of fatalities, on average. These results are consistent with the idea that psychological
views towards others, such as trust, have a stronger influence on economic outcomes than
psychological views towards oneself, such as subjective well-being.
    The central contribution of this paper is to provide new evidence of terrorism’s effect on
individual psychology and macroeconomic outcomes, controlling for endogenous institutional
responses. This paper contributes to the literature that links macroeconomic outcomes with
psychological traits, such as trust (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2009; Knack and Keefer,
1997; Algan and Cahuc, 2010), cultural values (Barro and McCleary, 2003; Gorodnichenko
and Roland, 2017; Tabellini, 2010), and subjective well-being (Di Tella, MacCulloch, and
Oswald, 2001, 2003). This paper also contributes to the literature on the direct effects of
terrorism on macroeconomic outcomes (Abadie and Gardeazabal, 2003; Blomberg and Hess,

2See  Bellows and Miguel (2009), Blattman (2009), Bauer, Cassar, Chytilová, and Henrich (2014), and
Gilligan, Pasquale, and Samii (2011).
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                             5



2006). Finally, this paper presents some of the first evidence that terrorism affects cultural
values and beliefs, not just psychological disorders like PTSD and depression.



                    I. Theoretical Framework and Definitions


  In this paper, I consider multiple dimensions of an individual’s mental state, and denote
them collectively as psychology. This includes cultural values, subjective well-being, and
attitudes towards ideas typically associated with free markets.


I.A. Cultural Values

  Cultural values, as defined in Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006), are fundamental be-
liefs that are passed from one generation to another relatively unchanged. In this paper,
I focus on three cultural values: trust/distrust, collectivism/individualism and egalitarian-
ism/hierarchy. Trust has been widely studied in economics and shown to affect a multitude
of economic outcomes (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2006). The second and third dimen-
sions, collectivism and hierarchy, are the only two dimensions that are common across the
majority of leading classification systems of cultural values (Fiske, 1991; Hofstede, 1980,
2001; Schwartz, 1994; Trompenaars, 1993). While other dimensions of cultural values are
likely to affect economic behavior, by focusing on just these three dimensions, I am restricting
attention to the most central and robust dimensions of culture.
  First, trust is the willingness to rely on another to fulfill an obligation. Since contracts
are necessarily incomplete, trust between economic agents reduces transaction costs and
facilitates trade (Arrow, 1972; Zak and Knack, 2001). Empirical evidence supports this
argument in a wide range of economic outcomes. At the same time, trust is likely to be
affected by exposure to terrorist attacks. Both victims of domestic violence and children
exposed to violence suffer from an inability to trust others (Carmen, Rieker, and Mills, 1984;
Margolin and Gordis, 2000). Exposure to terrorism could have similar effects. However,
6                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



there is evidence that trust could increase following exposure to terrorist attacks. Smith,
Rasinski, and Toce (2001) report a slight increase in trust among U.S. residents after the
9/11 attacks, but lower averages for New York City residents.
    Second, collectivism is the importance placed on group goals, as opposed to individualism,
where individual aspirations are given greater priority. In collectivist cultures, individuals are
rewarded for sacrificing individual achievement for the overall benefit of society (Brett, 2000).
Tabellini (2008) presents a theoretical model that shows that collectivist social norms can
arise endogenously and lead individuals to forgo individually-beneficial outcomes. Gorod-
nichenko and Roland (2017) presents evidence that individualism leads to greater innovation,
productivity, and income.
    Third, hierarchy refers to the variation in vertical social status in a society. More hier-
archical cultures have greater separation of social status between social classes. Egalitarian
societies have less differences between social classes. Bartling, Fehr, Maréchal, and Schunk
(2009) present experimental evidence that a preference for egalitarianism leads participants
to select less competitive tasks. Ahern, Daminelli, and Fracassi (2015) and Siegel, Licht,
and Schwartz (2011) show that cross-border differences in egalitarianism affect foreign direct
investment and cross-border mergers.
    Though there is little existing evidence that terrorist attacks may alter views on collec-
tivism and hierarchy, it is reasonable to expect that exposure to intentional random violence
could change one’s beliefs about social capital and the importance of equality. To the best
of my knowledge, Murphy, Gordon, and Mullen (2004) is the only other study that uses pre-
and post-terrorist attack survey responses to test for cultural value shifts. They find that
following the 9/11 attacks in New York and Washington, people placed more emphasis on
survival, safety, and security, and less on self-esteem and self-actualization. Somewhat re-
lated, Bonanno and Jost (2006) present evidence that political views shifted following 9/11.
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                            7



In post-attack surveys, they report that 9/11 survivors shifted their political ideologies to-
wards conservatism. This evidence suggests that terrorism may also affect people’s views on
the importance of cooperation and fairness.




I.B. Subjective Well-Being


  While cultural values represent beliefs about how individuals should interact in society,
subjective well-being (SWB), or happiness, reflects an individual’s self-assessment of one’s
own mental state. SWB was first proposed by psychologists as a self-reported assessment
of overall mental well-being. Since Easterlin (1974), a relatively small, but growing set of
economics papers have used SWB as a measure of experienced utility, as an alternative to
the more traditional revealed preferences decision-based concept of utility (Kahneman and
Thaler, 1991; Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin, 1997). In particular, SWB has been linked
with GDP, income, unemployment, and inflation (Di Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald, 2001,
2003; Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008). Di Tella and MacCulloch (2006) and Dolan, Peasgood,
and White (2008) provide overviews of this literature.
  Exposure to terrorism is likely to reduce happiness. Numerous papers in the psychology
literature show that terrorist attacks have substantial impacts on mental health. Galea et
al. (2002), Schulster et al. (2001), and Schlenger et al. (2002) all provide evidence that
greater exposure to the 9/11 terrorist attacks caused meaningful increases in symptoms of
post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, and life-threatening perceptions. The only study,
to my knowledge, that directly tests for changes in overall SWB following terrorist attacks
is Frey, Luechinger, and Stutzer (2009), who find that terrorist attacks in France and Great
Britain led to a significant decrease in happiness for residents in the regions where terrorist
attacks occurred.
8                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



I.C. Attitudes Towards Free Markets

    Last, attitudes towards free market ideals are likely to affect economic activity. Though
there is no definitive set of beliefs that are necessary for a capitalist society, the following three
ideals appear to be important: 1) the value of creativity, 2) the importance of success and
recognition, and 3) freedom of choice. In particular, capitalist societies reward innovation.
Schumpeter’s theory of creative destruction posits that innovation is the outcome of capitalist
forces. Second, as suggested by Di Tella, Galiani, and Schargrodsky (2007), beliefs in merit-
based rewards are important for capitalism.3 Finally, the third belief is that freedom of
choice is important.
    To my knowledge, no prior study has investigated the effect of terrorism on these beliefs.
It is possible that terrorist attacks could lead people to prefer less freedom if it means
greater security through government intervention in their daily lives. Thus, beliefs could
become less capitalist. Alternatively, terrorist attacks could strengthen individualistic and
self-interested beliefs. Thus, ideals associated with capitalism could be strengthened and
economic outcomes improved.


                                        II. Research Design

    There are at least two challenges to identifying the effect of terrorism on individual psy-
chology and macroeconomic outcomes. First, psychology or macroeconomic conditions could
cause the likelihood of terrorist attacks to increase (reverse causation). Second, terrorist at-
tacks could lead to institutional changes which affect both psychology and economic activity
(omitted variables).
    To address both of these potential identification problems, I study the effect of foreign,
rather than local, terrorist attacks on local populations. This means that I use variation in
local populations’ exposure to attacks that occur in foreign countries to measure variation
3DiTella, Galiani, and Schargrodsky (2007) also proposes individualism as an important belief for capitalism,
which I have included as one of three primary cultural values dimensions.
                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                               9



in changes in psychology. Exposure to foreign terrorist attacks can occur through expatriate
populations, geographic proximity, or common language, among other channels.
  First, using attacks that occur abroad addresses reverse causation, where macroeconomic
conditions lead to terrorism. Though terrorists prefer to make random and unpredictable
attacks, prior research has found mixed evidence on the predictability of terrorism. Krueger
and Laitin (2008) finds that wealthier countries are more likely to be targets of terrorism.
Similarly, Blomberg, Hess, and Orphanides (2004) and Tavares (2004) find that terrorism
is more common in higher income countries. In contrast, Abadie (2006) provides controls
for reverse causation and finds that economic conditions are unrelated to the incidence of
terrorism, a result confirmed by Gassebner and Luechinger (2011). Even when correlates
have been identified, these studies emphasize that the explanatory power of their models
is low. Nevertheless, there is still a concern that the location of terrorist attacks is not
completely random. By investigating the effect of attacks that occur in a foreign country,
I ensure that there is not a direct link between the economy of the local country and the
likelihood of a terrorist attack in a foreign country. For example, it is not likely that terrorist
attacks in Argentina are caused by GDP in Spain, where many Argentinians live.
  Second, using attacks that occur abroad controls for local institutional responses to terror-
ism, which could drive macroeconomic changes. As noted in the introduction, terrorist at-
tacks alter elections, shift political views, and contribute to regime changes. Direct responses
to terrorism by governments also affect economic outcomes through changes in immigration
and trade policies, as well as increased security measures (Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2004;
Gould and Stecklov, 2009; Draca, Machin, and Witt, 2011). Finally, terrorist attacks di-
rectly alter economic activity by influencing where people choose to work, conduct business,
and how they travel (Blunk, Clark, and McGibany, 2006, Rubin et al., 2005). These insti-
tutional changes make it difficult to separate the role of psychology on economic activity
from institutional effects. By using foreign attacks, I limit the likelihood that local govern-
ments respond to attacks in other countries. For instance, terrorist attacks in Argentina are
10                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



likely to have psychological effects on Argentinians living in Spain, but are unlikely to affect
Spanish institutions.
     It is possible that governments could respond to foreign terrorist attacks. For instance, a
terrorist attack in Ukraine could lead to institutional changes in Russia. A second concern
is that foreign terrorism could cause emigration to Europe. In this case, macroeconomic
outcomes would be the result of demography changes, rather than psychological changes. In
later robust tests, I account for both institutional spillover and migration.
     Finally, by using foreign attacks, I assume that expatriates are affected by terrorist attacks
in their home countries. There is strong evidence to believe that they are. Expatriates could
be affected by terrorist attacks through familial and personal connections with people in their
home countries. In addition, expatriates are exposed to news stories and images of attacks
in their home countries through foreign media sources. Empirical evidence is consistent with
these ideas. Following the 9/11 attacks in New York, increases in psychological disorders
were realized by people across the entire country (Seo and Torabi, 2004), as well as by U.S.
citizens living abroad (Speckhard, 2003). Ahern et al. (2002) and Collimore et al. (2008)
both find that greater media exposure to terrorism leads to stronger psychological reactions.
However, expatriates are likely to have weaker responses to terrorist attacks in their home
country than are people living closer to the attack. Expatriates do not directly experience
the attack, as do locals, and may have few personal relations remaining in the country.
Second, emigrates are self-selected, which means that expatriates are likely to have a weaker
attachment to their home country than people that do not go abroad. In either case, less
attachment will bias the impact of terrorist attacks on expatriates towards zero.
     In summary, the identification strategy rests on the claim that terrorist attacks impact the
psychology of those exposed and the assumption that terrorist attacks in foreign countries
are exogenous to local GDP and institutions. I next empirically test the claim that exposure
to terrorism impacts psychology.
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                              11



              III. The Impact of Terrorist Attacks on Psychology


  To test for an effect of terrorist attacks on psychology, I estimate the following model:
(1)
                                                                  X
P sychi,r,t = α+β(Post-Attackt ×Exposurei,r )+τt Post-Attackt +       ηr Regionr +Xi,r,t γ+εi,r,t ,
                                                                  r

where P sychi,r,t is a measure of the psychological state of individual i, residing in region
r, at time t. Post-Attackt is an indicator variable for the time period after a terrorist at-
tack. Regionr is a set of geographic location fixed effect variables, and Xi,r,t is a vector of
individual-level control variables. The region fixed effects account for time-invariant differ-
ences in attitudes and cultural values across different geographic regions. The post-attack
variable accounts for overall changes in psychological conditions for all people, independent
of their proximity to the attack. The treatment variable is Exposurei,r , a measure of the
intensity of exposure of the individual to the attack. I expect that individuals with greater
exposure to the attack will realize greater changes in psychology post-attack, than will people
with less exposure.



III.A. Measures of Exposure to Terrorism

  The empirical strategy requires data on terrorist attacks and measures of exposure to the
attack. First, I use the two most devastating terrorist attacks that occurred in Western
Europe by number killed or injured: the Madrid train bombing in 2004 and the London
metro attacks in 2005. During the morning rush hour of March 11th, 2004, a sequence of ten
coordinated bombs exploded on Madrid’s commuter system, killing 191 people and wounding
over 1,800 others. Though the Basque separatist group Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA) was
initially blamed, the Spanish Judiciary eventually determined that the perpetrators were part
of an Islamist extremist group (Hamilos, 2007). Though Spain had suffered prior terrorist
attacks, primarily from ETA, the prior attacks typically targeted judges and the number of
12                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



fatalities was limited to three to five people (National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism
and Responses to Terrorism, 2011). Thus, the scale of destruction in the Madrid train
bombing was unprecedented in Spain and in Western Europe overall.
     The second most deadly terrorist attack in Western Europe is the “7/7” bombing of the
London public transport system on July 7th, 2005. Four suicide bombers detonated bombs
in coordination on three different London Underground trains and one double-decker bus.
Fifty-two people were killed and over 700 people were wounded in the attacks. These attacks
were carried out by Islamist extremists, as well. Like Spain, Great Britain had experienced
less severe terrorist attacks by the Irish Republican Army (IRA) in the past, but the impact
of the 7/7 bombings was an order of magnitude larger than that of prior attacks.4
     Prior research finds that the Madrid and London terrorist attacks had significant effects on
psychological health. Gabriel et al. (2007) finds that following the Madrid attacks in 2004,
symptoms associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, agoraphobia,
anxiety, and panic disorders all increased. Importantly, the increases were not limited to
those physically injured by the attack, nor to people in Madrid. In particular, compared to
a baseline of 0.9%, the authors report an increase of 12.3% percentage points in symptoms
of PTSD in the city of Alcala, about 35 kilometers outside of Madrid. Muñoz, Crespo,
Pérez-Santos, and Vázquez (2004) finds similar results. The London attacks also led to
widespread increases in anxiety and stress in the UK (Rubin et al., 2005). In addition, Bux
and Coyne (2009) report that following the London attacks, retail sales fell by 8.9% and
subway ridership dropped by up to 15%.
     I measure the exposure of an individual to the terrorist attack in multiple ways. First,
I use indicator variables for individuals in Spain or Great Britain. The second measure of
exposure is the log of the the number of hours it takes to drive from the center of region r to
either Madrid or London, calculated using Google Maps online driving direction application.

4Inboth cases, to the extent that prior histories of terrorist attacks in Spain and Great Britain made people
more immune to psychological impact of terrorism, any results will be weakened.
                    THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                                      13



By calculating driving time, rather than simply using the great-circle distance calculated
from longitude and latitude, this measure accounts for natural barriers that have historically
separated geographic regions, such as mountain ranges or large bodies of water. Finally, I
use the language spoken by an individual as a third measure of exposure. I record dummy
variables equal to one if an individual speaks Spanish (or English). This measure of exposure
is likely to capture how closely connected an individual is to Spain or Great Britain as well
as the amount of media reports of either terrorist attack observed by the respondent. Both
language spoken and driving distance provide a measure of exposure to terrorist attacks
while allowing the individual to live outside of either Spain or Great Britain.


III.B. Measures of Psychological Characteristics

  I use data from the European Social Survey (ESS) to measure psychological variables.
The ESS is a large-scale repeated cross-sectional survey of political and cultural attitudes
of individuals in 29 European countries. I use data from five survey waves, centered on
the years 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, and 2010, with anonymized data reported at the person-
level.5 I record the log(age), gender, marital status, and education level (harmonized across
countries) as control variables. I also record the location of the respondent and the date
that the survey was completed. The ESS records a region code for each respondent that
typically corresponds to a nomenclature d’unités territoriales statistiques (NUTS) level I, II,
or III region code. In some cases, the NUTS level of the region code varies across survey
waves. In these cases, I record the most coarse level of aggregation across the survey waves,
to provide a consistent regional effect. In a few cases, the region code recorded by ESS does
not directly correspond to a NUTS level. In these cases, I match the region code to the
closest NUTS region code possible by visual inspection. The ESS also records the exact date

5The sampling procedure of the ESS is designed to provide a representative sample of the residents of a
country, independent of citizenship or language. Minor differences in sampling procedures occurred between
countries. Also, sample sizes are roughly equivalent across countries, regardless of total population. To
address these issues, I use the weights provided by the ESS to adjust for sampling methods in all of my tests.
14                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



of an individual’s response to the survey. This allows me to compare responses before and
after the 3/11/2004 Madrid attack or the 07/07/2005 London attack, at a daily level.
     To provide both predetermined and ex post survey responses, I require that a country par-
ticipated in the first survey wave in 2002 and at least one of the 2006, 2008, or 2010 surveys.
I exclude Israel from the sample because of its long history with terrorism and its geographic
separation. This leaves 21 countries in the sample. The large majority of European countries
are included, with the one notable exception of Italy, which only participated in the first two
rounds of the survey, and thus does not have ex post data available.
     The total number of survey responses in the sample is 172,048; the number of observations
per country is reported in Table I. In untabulated results, the average age of respondents is
46.5 years with a standard deviation of 18.5. Fifty-three percent of respondents are women
and 56.5% of respondents are married. Using the International Standard Classification of Ed-
ucation (ISCED), the highest level of education is lower secondary for 14.3% of respondents,
upper secondary vocational for 16.2%, and upper secondary general for 13.3%. Overall, the
sample is a good representation of the diversity of the population in Europe.
     To measure trust, I use answers to the question, “Generally speaking, would you say that
most people can be trusted, or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?” This
question has been used in other major surveys, including the World Values Survey and the
General Social Survey.
     Unlike trust, there is no standardized question to measure collectivism and egalitarianism.
Therefore, I use questions that reflect the overall idea of these dimensions. To measure
collectivism, I use a question that asks whether it is important to help other people and
care for their well-being. Egalitarianism is measured by responses to a question that asks
whether all people should be treated equally and given equal opportunities.
     I measure subjective well-being in two ways. First, I use the question that asks if a
longstanding illness, disability, or mental health problem hampers daily activities. Second, I
use the question commonly used to measure SWB, “Taking all things together, how happy
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                             15



would you say you are?” Krueger and Schkade (2008) shows that this question provides
reliable estimates of SWB, as long as sample sizes are not too small. Finally, I measure
attitudes consistent with free markets using three questions that ask the respondent to
indicate the importance of 1) creativity/originality, 2) being successful, and 3) freedom of
choice. The complete questions for all measures are reported in the Online Appendix.


III.C. Summary Statistics of Psychology Variables

  Table I presents averages and standard errors of survey responses for the psychology
variables, by country, over the entire sample period from 2002 to 2011. Measured on an
11-point scale from zero to 10, the average trustfulness across the 21 countries is 4.87.
Denmark scores the highest trust with an average of 6.92, and Greece scores the lowest
with an average of 3.80. Collectivism is measured on a 6-point scale, with the highest
response by people in Spain, and the lowest by people in the Czech Republic. Greece scores
the highest egalitarianism score and Estonia scores the lowest. Respondents in Spain and
Ireland report the fewest long-run health problems, whereas people in Slovenia report the
most. The happiest people in the sample are in Denmark (8.33 on a 0/10 scale), the least
happy are in Hungary (6.34), and the average is 7.34. Finally, for the attitudes toward free
market ideals, the importance of freedom (4.80 out of 6) is higher than the importance of
creativity (4.43) and the importance of success (3.69), on average.
  At a country-level, there are significant correlations between the psychology variables. In
untabulated results, I find a statistically significant correlation of 84.2% between trustfulness
and happiness. Trust and the importance of success are also positively related. Collectivism
is negatively related to health problems, but positively correlated with the importance of
creativity and freedom, which are also positively correlated with each other. Finally, happi-
ness is positively correlated with the importance of success (41.4%). There are also intuitive
correlations between countries. For example, responses from Finland more closely resemble
the responses from Norway and Sweden than responses from Portugal.
16                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



III.D. Empirical Evidence of the Effect of Terrorist Attacks on Psychology



     To give an overall sense of the geography and impact of terrorist attacks on psychology,
Figure II presents a map of the European regions in the sample. Darker regions correspond
to larger relative declines in happiness from before the 2004 Madrid bombing to afterward.
The map shows that across the regions in Spain, people suffered substantial decreases in
happiness. The map also reveals that national borders have a strong effect on changes in
psychology. While regions in Spain indicate declines in happiness, neighboring regions in
Portugal and France do not.
     Table II presents the results from the estimation of Equation 1. Each entry reports the
difference-in-difference coefficient from a separate regression. First, in Panel A, the London
attack led to a positive impact on generalized trust for people residing in Great Britain
and for English-speaking people overall, but there is no effect on trust using the travel time
to London. Second, the London attacks led to an increase in egalitarian values, using the
country dummy and travel time measures of exposure. The attacks also led to a substantial
decline in general happiness and the importance of success and an increase in the importance
of freedom.
     In Panel B, I exclude Great Britain from the analysis to check whether the previous
results are influenced by institutional changes in Great Britain following the attack. Using
only foreign populations, trust now shows a decline following the attacks and egalitarianism
is no longer significant. Second, the effects of the importance of success and freedom are
reversed when excluding Great Britain. For people close to London, but outside Great
Britain, success is more important and freedom is less important. In addition, there is an
indication that the terrorist attacks led to an increase in long-term health problems and less
importance of creativity. The contrasting results between Panels A and B are consistent
with an institutional influence on cultural values. In particular, the government’s response
may have led to increases in trust and the importance of equal opportunities.
                   THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                                    17



  Panels C and D repeat the analysis using the Madrid bombing. Focusing attention on
Panel D, which excludes Spain from the analysis, the results show a decrease in trust, consis-
tent with the London attack. Collectivism shows mixed results. Egalitarianism increased for
Spanish speaking populations. In addition, long-run health problems increased and general
happiness decreased as a result of the Madrid attack, whereas the importance of creativity
and freedom both decreased, consistent with the London attack.6
  The above results could be affected by pre-existing trends in the psychology of Europeans.
In particular, time trends in values may be correlated with proximity to London or Madrid,
which would cause a spurious relation between the timing of the terrorist attacks and changes
in psychology. To address this concern, in Table III, I divide the sample period into four
sub-periods: two before the attack and two after.7 In the regression results, the earliest
sub-period is the omitted baseline period.
  The results in Table III are largely consistent with a causal relationship of the attacks
on psychology. For the Madrid attack, there is no evidence of a pre-existing trend in the
outcome variables. For the London attack, the results on collectivism and egalitarianism
indicate a pre-existing trend, and thus can not be directly attributed to the terrorist attack.
However, the effects of the attack on trust, happiness, and the importance of creativity and
freedom are consistent with a causal interpretation. The presence of pre-existing trends for
the London attacks could reflect the earlier response to the Madrid attacks.
  Taken together, these results show that terrorist attacks have a meaningful effect on in-
dividual psychology. Consistent across both attacks is a decline in happiness and trust, a
greater incidence of health problems, and less importance placed on creativity and freedom.
The results outside of Great Britain and Spain show that institutions could have meaningful
6For robustness, I estimate these equations using ordered logit models to account for the ordinal nature of
survey responses and find similar results.
7The first period is from January 2002 to roughly a year prior to the attack, either in London or Madrid.
The second pre-attack period covers the year before the attack. The first post-attack period covers the
remainder of the attack year and the following year. The second post-attack period covers the rest of the
sample period through 2011. For Madrid, I extend the second pre-attack period three months further back
in time to create a more even sample size across the four sub-periods.
18                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



effects on psychology, which confound the interpretation of the role of psychology in macroe-
conomic changes. For instance, increased security measures and police presence following
terrorist attacks could be the cause for increased trust within Great Britain following the
London bombings.
     These tests reveal that multiple dimensions of psychology simultaneously change in re-
sponse to exposure to terrorism. While it would be ideal if only one dimension changed,
this is unrealistic in any setting. Even in a controlled experiment, it would be impossible to
selectively manipulate just one dimension of psychology, while holding all others constant.
Indeed, in cross-region tests, there are multiple strong correlations between the various di-
mensions, as reported above. This limitation means that though the first set of results shows
that psychology changes in response to terrorism, I am not able to draw a specific prediction
about the importance of each dimension of psychology for economic activity.



        IV. The Impact of Terrorist Attacks on Macroeconomic Activity


     In this part of the paper, I test whether terrorist attacks affect economic activity by
studying individuals who are affected by terrorist attacks, but who do not live where the
attack occurred. In particular, to measure variation in the exposure to terrorist attacks, I
use the fraction of foreign residents who have had a terrorist attack in their home country
in the same year, for each region of the countries in my sample. In particular, I estimate the
following model:

                              X                   X                  X
(2) Er,t = α + βAr,t +              τt Y eart +       ηr Regionr +       δr Regionr × Y ear + Xr,t γ + εr,t
                                t                 r                  r
                P
where Ar,t =        n   Attackt,n × F ractionn,r .
     Er,t is a measure of economic activity in region r at time t, Regionr and Y eart are a set
of location and year fixed effect variables, Regionr × Y ear are region-specific linear time
trends, and Xr,t is a vector of region-level control variables. The region fixed effects capture
                     THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                          19



any time-invariant characteristics that affect economic activity, such as political and legal
institutions, natural resources, and predetermined cultural values and beliefs. The region-
specific time trends capture variation in cross-sectional growth rates across the regions.
  Attackt,n is an indicator variable for a terrorist attack at time t in nation n and F ractionn,r
is the fraction of the population in region r that is a citizen of nation n. Therefore, the
variable Ar,t captures the total fraction of a region’s population that is affected by a terrorist
attack in a foreign nation. This variable is designed to proxy for temporal changes in a
region’s psychological condition, orthogonal to possible changes in the region’s institutions.
Since the separate effect of Attackt,n is equal across all regions, its effect is captured by the
year dummies. Likewise, since F ractionn,r is time-invariant, its effect is captured by the
region fixed effects.
  Data on economic activity are from Eurostat’s Regional statistics database from 1995
through 2008, at NUTS II level (roughly one to three million inhabitants). Economic activity
is measured using the growth rate of gross domestic product (GDP) and GDP per capita
expressed in purchasing power standards (PPS). I also analyze two measures of income:
yearly total compensation of employees (measured at the region level in billions of euros)8,
and yearly total household income (measured at the region level in billions of PPS). Next, I
record the gross fixed capital formation (in billions of euro) by region. Finally, I calculate the
unemployment rate at the region level as the number of unemployed people divided by the
size of the economically-active population. These variables are designed to provide measures
of a broad range of economic activity at a detailed sub-national level.
  In the first section of the paper, I focused on two large terrorist attacks in Europe. In
this section, I broaden my approach to include terrorist attacks from around the world.
This provides greater power to identify exposure to terrorism, since there are relatively few
terrorist attacks that occur in Europe.


8This   variable is not reported in PPS by Eurostat.
20                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



     First, to measure the variable of interest, Ar,t , I require detailed data on the nationality of
residents at the region-level. I use data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series - In-
ternational (IPUMS-I).9 IPUMS-I collects and harmonizes microdata from national censuses
from 62 countries, providing anonymized microdata at the individual level. I collect data
from all of the available European countries in IPUMS-I that record both detailed nationality
or country of birth and current location of the census respondent at NUTS-level II.10 These
filters yield the following censuses: Austria (2001), Germany (1987), Greece (2001), Ireland
(2002), Italy (2001), Portugal (2001), Romania (2002), Slovenia (2002), and Spain (2001).
The microdata are either 5% or 10% unweighted samples of the complete census records,
which provides a total sample size of 13,267,905 individuals.
     IPUMS-I reports nationality and birthplace for 167 countries. For each region, I calculate
the percentage of individuals that are citizens of each of these countries (or were born in each
country for the Romania census). Across the regions, 94.5% of the population are citizens
of the country where the region is located, on average. The median is 96.6%. To illustrate
the level of detail in the data, Table A.1 in the Online Appendix presents an example of
citizenship data for NUTS region GR12 Kentriki Makedonia (Central Macedonia) in Greece.
     One concern is that most of the census data are not recorded prior to 1995, the start of
the economic activity data series. If economic activity leads to demographic changes in the
population’s citizenship, I could misinterpret the results. For example, if income is low and
terrorism is high in Mali, and income is high and terrorism is low in Portugal, then there
may be a positive migration from Mali to Portugal. This would lead to an increase in the
fraction of Portugal’s population affected by terrorism. Thus, I could attribute changes in
economic activity to the fraction of the population exposed to terrorism, when in fact the
fraction of the population exposed to terrorism is driven by economic activity. By including
9Minnesota   Population Center. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International: Version 6.1 [Machine-
readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2011. Original data are from the national
statistical offices of Austria, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, and Romania.
10Germany only records NUTS region level I, but it is included as well. A number of countries with microdata
on IPUMS-I have to be excluded due to missing data, including France and the UK.
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                           21



region-specific time trends, I account for any long-run changes in demographics. In addition,
I test for changes in migration in later robustness tests. Second, one may be concerned that
the variation in the diversity of national origin across regions may drive my results. However,
the region fixed effects account for the majority of the impact of diversity, since diversity
does not change rapidly over time.
  Next, I expand the data to include terrorist attacks around the world, using data from the
Global Terrorism Database (GTD). This database contains data on almost 100,000 terrorist
attacks from 1970 to 2010 and is the most complete source of data on terrorist attacks
currently available. Because the definition of a terrorist attack is debatable, the GTD has
established the following criteria for a terrorist act to be included in the database: the act
must be intentional, the act must entail violence or threat of violence, and the perpetrators
must be sub-national actors. In addition, I only include attacks in my sample that meet the
three following additional criteria as specified in the GTD guidebook: 1) the act must be
aimed at attaining a political, economic, religious, or social goal; 2) there must be evidence
that the act had an intention to coerce, intimidate, or convey some other message to a
larger audience than the immediate victims; and 3) the act must be outside the context of
legitimate warfare activities. Finally, I only include incidents where at least one person was
killed. This leaves a sample of 12,118 terrorist attacks from 1995 to 2008. Combining all
these data and omitting observations with missing data leads to a sample of 1,270 region-year
observations in 91 different European regions.
  When quantifying the psychological impact of these attacks, it is important to account
for the ways in which people cope with violence. Becker and Rubinstein (2011) argue that
people rationally overcome fear. They show that during the Al Aqsa Intifada in Israel, where
buses were often targeted by terrorists, regular bus riders didn’t reduce their usage of buses
as much as irregular bus riders. Second, research in psychology provides a theory of resilience
to trauma, where people overcome the negative psychological impacts of traumatic episodes
(Fredrickson, Tugade, Waugh, and Larkin, 2003; Bonanno, 2004).
22                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



     These theories suggest that the impact of terrorist attacks depends upon the expectations
of violence that have been formed from past experience. Therefore, to measure unexpected
terrorist attacks, I construct a dummy variable equal to one if the total number of people
killed in terrorist attacks in country n in year t is greater than the median number of people
killed in the country over years t − 5 to t − 1. I normalize the number of fatalities by
the country population, but since the variable is formed by a within-country comparison,
it makes little difference. Thus, this variable captures abnormally high levels of terrorist
attacks, using a measure of country-specific expected violence.
     If there is only one fatality in a terrorist attack, it may not have a strong effect on a
nation’s psychology. Therefore, I also calculate two analogous measures, using only attacks
with at least 50 or 100 fatalities. I compute these measures as before, comparing the number
of fatalities in a given year to the median of the previous five years, but I restrict the sample
to only include attacks with at least 50 or 100 fatalities. Compared to the 12,118 attacks
with at least one fatality, there are 175 attacks with at least 50 fatalities, and 58 attacks
with at least 100 fatalities. Thus, the rarity of such severe attacks makes them more likely
to have larger psychological impacts.



IV.A. Summary Statistics of Global Terrorism Incidents and Regional Economics

     Figure III presents the time series of abnormal terrorism from 1995 to 2008, using attacks
with at least one fatality. Of a total of 170 countries represented in the GTD, 32 experienced
unusually high levels of terrorist fatalities in 1995, rising to a peak in 1997 with 52 countries,
and falling to a minimum of 12 countries the following year. Normalizing the counts of
terrorism by the numbers of countries in each region shows that countries in the Middle East
experienced the largest number of years with abnormal violence, with 23.8% of countries
experiencing abnormal violence in an average year. This is followed by Asia with 20.0%,
Africa with 18.0%, the Americas with 11.4%, and Oceania with 2.4%.
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                            23



  Figure III does not reveal a clear time pattern in the the global incidence of terrorism.
However, there do appear to be waves of terrorism where multiple countries around the
globe experience greater levels of violence concurrently. Indeed, in untabulated tests, the
time series of abnormal terrorism for countries in Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Europe
are positively and significantly correlated.
  These data reveal that the location and timing of terrorist attacks exhibit wide variation.
This is important for my identification strategy because it means that the population of
European residents affected by terrorism in their home countries is not dominated by people
from one particular world region, but rather, all populations of foreigners in Europe are likely
to be affected by terrorism in any given year. In addition, the year effects in the empirical
model captures the time-series variation in worldwide waves.
  Summary statistics of the terrorist attack and economic activity variables are presented in
Table IV. First, 0.70% of the population is affected by terrorist attacks abroad, on average,
across the 1,270 region-year observations. Using the less common, but more severe attacks
which killed at least 50 or 100 people, the average fraction of population affected is 0.08% and
0.04%. There is significant variation across these measures, compared to their means, with
standard deviations of 1.200%, 0.165% and 0.126%. I also calculate a dummy variable for
local terrorist attacks in the 91 European regions. Across all region-years, 16.1% experienced
a terrorist attack with at least one fatality. I do not calculate a dummy based on more severe
attacks because they are very rare in Europe during this time period.
  It is important to acknowledge that the fractions of the total population affected by
terrorism abroad are small. This means that the absolute level of the effect of terrorism
on the region’s economic activity is expected to be small as well. This does not invalidate
the approach, and if anything, makes finding any significant results less likely.
  Panel B of Table IV presents summary statistics for the economic activity variables. GDP
per capita, measured in PPS, is 19,481 on average, with a median of 19,250. GDP growth
is roughly 4.9% on average and 4.8% at the median and the unemployment rate is 8.4%, on
24                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



average. Compensation at the region-level is about 23.7 billion euros and income is about
37 billion euros, on average. Investment in fixed capital is roughly 10.5 billion euros in an
average region-year. Finally, the population of an average region is 2.5 million people.


IV.B. Empirical Evidence of the Effects of Foreign Terrorism on Macroeconomic Activity

     Table V presents estimates of Equation 2. In Panel A, I first verify that local terrorist
attacks have an effect on economic activity, following prior research. Regressions results
using just region fixed effects and results using region fixed effects plus region-specific trends
are reported. Consistent with prior literature (Eckstein and Tsiddon, 2004; Blomberg, Hess,
and Orphanides, 2004), I find that the occurrence of a terrorist attack in one of the 91
European regions leads to a significant decline in GDP per capita and GDP growth. GDP
per capita falls by 148 PPS units, or about 0.7% of the regional average. GDP growth
falls by a larger amount, 1.1% compared to the average of 4.9%. At the same time, I find
that compensation of employees increases and the unemployment rate falls. These results
are consistent with the theory presented in Eckstein and Tsiddon (2004), where the overall
output falls, but government spending increases.
     I next estimate the effect of terrorism, excluding local terrorist attacks to control for
possible endogenous institutional changes. Since attacks are foreign, I use the most severe
measure of terrorist attacks, calculating the dummy variable for terrorism by only including
attacks where at least 100 people were killed. I find that foreign terrorist attacks have a
strikingly different impact on economic outcomes. In contrast to the local effects of terrorism,
I find that GDP per capita and GDP growth both increase when a larger fraction of the
foreign population is affected by terrorism. The regression estimates imply that if 1% of the
population were affected by terrorism, GDP per capita would rise by 250 PPS units, or 1.3%
of the average GDP, and GDP growth would increase. Aggregate household income rises
by 727 million, or 2.0% of the average, when 1% of the population is affected by terrorist
attacks. Compensation of employees and gross fixed capital formation both rise, but they
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                             25



are insignificant once region-specific time trends are included. Finally, unemployment rates
are unaffected. The results presented here are large and meaningful, though I place more
weight on the sign of the effect, than on the exact magnitude, given that the fraction of the
population affected is small.
  These results provide causal evidence that terrorism aboard affects economic activity. Be-
cause the research design controls for institutional changes, psychological changes are the
most likely cause. This means that psychological traits, such as cultural values, subjec-
tive well being, and attitudes towards capitalism, have direct effects on economic outcomes.
These results also highlight the difference between the psychological and non-psychological
effects of terrorism on economic activity. In particular, the non-psychological effects, in-
cluding governmental responses, lead to negative outcomes, consistent with Eckstein and
Tsiddon (2004). In contrast, the psychological effects lead to positive outcomes. After next
presenting additional robustness tests, I discuss potential explanations for these positive
outcomes in more detail.


IV.C. Robustness Tests

  As argued above, because I use foreign terrorist attacks, it is unlikely that my main results
are explained by reverse causation. I next empirically test this argument. First, in Panel A of
Table VI, I include one-year leads and lags of the treatment variable in tests on local terrorist
attacks, where reverse causation is more likely. I find that economic outcome variables are
significantly related to future local terrorist attacks. These results show that endogeneity
confounds the interpretation of the effects of terrorist attacks on local economic outcomes.
  In Panel B, I perform the same analysis, but exclude local terrorist attacks. For all
economic activity variables, the leading term is highly insignificant, while the current or
lagged terrorism variable is significant for GDP per capita, GDP growth, household income,
and unemployment rate. These results show that economic outcomes do not determine
the fraction of those exposed to foreign attacks and reverse causation does not explain the
26                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



results. These results also indicate that the results are temporary, only impacting economic
outcomes in the same year as the foreign attacks. This may reflect that people quickly revert
to the status quo, especially when the traumatic episode is distant.
     A second potential concern with the main results is that though I include region-level
fixed effects, the fraction of foreigners affected by terrorist attacks may proxy for some other
region-level variable. To provide further evidence that the effects I document are directly
related to terrorist attacks, I provide estimates using variation in the number of fatalities
caused by terrorism. Even if terrorist attacks do not occur randomly across countries, the
number of fatalities is more likely to be a random outcome. Since attacks with greater
numbers of fatalities are likely to have a bigger effect on psychology, this provides additional
exogenous variation in the effect of terrorism on economic outcomes.
     The coefficient estimates reported in Table A.2 in the Online Appendix, provide evidence
that the exposure to terrorism variable is directly related to terrorist attacks. Comparing
the results of these tests to the main results in Table V, I find that greater fatalities leads
to larger effects. The point estimate of the impact of exposure to terrorism on household
income is 0.727 when there are at least 100 fatalities in the main results, 0.544 when there
are at least 50 fatalities, and an insignificant -0.042 when there is at least one fatality. There
is a similar pattern for GDP growth and GDP per capita.
     Next, I run tests to account for the possibility of institutional spillover. If institutional
responses spread from one country to another, they are more likely to spread to countries
that are geographically close. To account for this possibility, I run identical tests as in
Table V and Table VI but only include attacks that are in distant countries.11 These results
are qualitatively unchanged from the main results.



11Distance is measured using data from Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales
(CEPII). Distant countries are those that are greater than 3,363 kilometers away, the distance between
Portugal and Finland, which is the greatest distance between any two countries in the European Union in
2001.
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                             27



  Finally, I test whether terrorist attacks lead to migration to European countries. Yearly
data on a region’s population by country-of-origin is unavailable, so I use yearly nation-level
data on population demographics from Eurostat. I record population data for country-pair
years, where pairs are formed by a European host country and a worldwide country of
origin. I run lagged dependent variable fixed effects GMM regressions, as in Arellano and
Bond (1991), where the dependent variable is the logged population of each country-pair and
the fixed effects are at the country-pair level. I also include host country-specific time trends
and year effects. The key explanatory variable is the lagged incidence of abnormal terrorist
attacks in the origin country. I find no effect on immigration to Europe following attacks,
using attack dummies based on the occurrence of at least one fatality, more than 50, and more
than 100 fatalities, and also including an interaction with geographic distance to account
for the difficulty of immigration. These results indicate that the effects on macroeconomic
outcomes are not driven by changes in demographics induced by foreign terrorist attacks.
Table A.3 in the Online Appendix reports these results.



          V. Psychological Mechanisms on Macroeconomic Outcomes


  The results presented above are provocative. They suggest that exposure to foreign ter-
rorist attacks has a positive effect on important macroeconomic outcomes. In this section,
I present arguments and empirical evidence to try to better understand how exposure to
terrorism can lead to these outcomes.
  Prior research provides possible explanations for the increase in output and income. In par-
ticular, psychology studies find that a decrease in positive affect makes people less patient
(Ifcher and Zarghamee, 2011) and more reciprocal in experimental gift exchanges (Kirch-
steiger, Rigotti, and Rustichini, 2006). A number of psychology studies argue that though
trauma has serious negative consequences, it also has the potential for offsetting positive
cognitive processes, such as positive changes in the quality of interpersonal relationships and
28                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



self-determination (Tedeschi and Calhoun, 2004; Fredrickson, Tugade, Waugh, and Larkin,
2003; Bonanno, 2004).
     Economics research finds similar results. Voors et al. (2012) find that exposure to political
and military conflict leads to greater risk-seeking behavior and less patience. Blattman
(2009) finds that greater exposure to violence in Uganda led to greater civic participation
and community leadership. Bellows and Miguel (2009) shows that exposure to violence in
Sierra Leone led to greater community activism, but finds no long-run effect on socioeconomic
status, consistent with the temporary effects I find. Bauer, Cassar, Chytilová, and Henrich
(2014) runs experiments in Georgia and Sierra Leone and find that exposure to violence
led people to become more egalitarian and more willing to share, consistent with greater
community activism. Finally, Gilligan, Pasquale, and Samii (2011) shows that in experiments
in Nepal, greater exposure to violence leads to greater community activism.
     These papers’ results provide a consistent theme. Though exposure to violence has nega-
tive effects on well-being, people respond by increasing social capital. Though the effect of
social capital on macroeconomic outcomes is debatable (see Sobel (2002) for a discussion),
this is one potential mechanism through which terrorism affects economic outcomes. More
broadly, this also implies that the importance of terrorism is traced to changes in one’s views
towards others, manifested as community involvement, rather than views towards one’s self,
such as well-being. I next present tests to try to better understand this dichotomy.


V.A. Empirical Evidence of the Effect of Natural and Technological Disasters

     In this section of the paper, I compare terrorist attacks to other traumatic episodes.
Natural and technological disasters, such as earthquakes and factory explosions, share many
similarities with terrorist attacks. Both terrorist attacks and disasters involve a traumatic
and unexpected loss of life, both lead to government responses, and both have psychological
impacts (Galea, Nandi, and Vlahov, 2005). However, one key difference is that terrorist
attacks are purposeful destruction committed by others, whereas disasters are not. This
                   THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                                      29



difference is likely to affect the psychological impact of terrorism and disasters. In particular,
since terrorist attacks are intentional destruction, it is reasonable that people affected by
terrorism may change their attitudes towards other people and their beliefs about human
nature. In contrast, people affected by accidental or natural disasters are less likely to change
their views about other people in the same way.
  I collect data on natural and technological disasters from the EM-DAT International Dis-
aster Database, maintained by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Centre for
Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED). The database collects information on
over 18,000 mass disasters from 1900 to the present. For a disaster to be recorded in the
database, at least one of the following criteria must be met: 1) at least ten fatalities are re-
ported; 2) at least 100 people are affected; 3) there is a declaration of a state of emergency;
or 4) there is a call for international assistance. The data include the number of fatalities,
the location, date, and a classification of disasters by type.12
  Compared to terrorist attacks, natural disasters are much deadlier. From 1995 to 2010,
there were 85,900 fatalities from natural disasters in an average year, compared to 5,278
fatalities from terrorist attacks. Technological accidents are also more deadly than terrorist
attacks, with 9,068 fatalities in an average year. These comparisons hold if I only include
data of the deadliest incidents, with at least 100 fatalities. Thus, based solely on the average
destructive outcome of natural and technological disasters and terrorist attacks, I expect
that natural disasters will have greater effects on economic outcomes.
  Using worldwide natural and technological accidents, I calculate the exposure to disasters
in the home country of foreign residents in Europe, analogous to the measure of exposure to
terrorism. As before, I control for within-country norms of fatalities in the prior five years.
Using these variables, I estimate the same empirical model as before, but include all three

12Natural  disasters include earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, avalanches, landslides, storms, floods, extreme
temperatures, droughts, wildfires, health epidemics, and insect infestations. Technological disasters include
industrial accidents such as chemical spills or factory explosions and transportation accidents such as plane
crashes or train accidents.
30                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



variables for terrorism and disasters in the same model. This is important because terrorist
attacks often follow natural disasters. Similar to evidence in Cavallo, Galiani, Noy, and
Pantano (2013), in unreported tests I find that the likelihood that a region-year experiences
a terrorist attack is positively related to the occurrence of a natural disaster in the same year
and in the prior year. The opposite relation does not hold, which verifies that the natural
disasters identified in the data are truly random.
     Table VII shows that the local effects of natural disasters include a decrease in GDP
growth and unemployment rates and an increase in compensation, income, and investment.
Technology disasters are associated with increases in GDP per capita, income, and invest-
ment, and decreases in GDP growth and the unemployment rate. The effects of terrorist
attacks are unchanged from the prior results.
     As with terrorist attacks, endogeneity makes interpreting the coefficient estimates for
technology disasters difficult. Technology disasters may occur more frequently in wealthier
regions, consistent with a positive relationship between GDP per capita, household income,
and the occurrence of a technology disaster, such as a plane crash or factory explosion.
In addition, the government response to the disaster will also confound the local effects of
disasters on economic outcomes.
     In Panel B, I use the impact of disasters on foreign populations to overcome these en-
dogeneity problems. First, the impact of terrorism remains the same as in prior results.
GDP per capita, GDP growth, and household income all rise, with point-estimates nearly
identical to the main results. The estimates for exposure to natural disasters have a similar
effect as terrorist attacks, though with a smaller magnitude of impact. GDP per capita,
GDP growth, and household income all rise, while the unemployment rate falls. Compared
to an increase of 268 PPS units of GDP per capita when 1% of the population is affected
by terrorist attacks, natural disasters only lead to an increase of 56 PPS units. Similarly,
the effect on GDP growth for terrorism is 2.7% and household income is 738 million PPS,
                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                           31



compared to 0.3% and 121 million for natural disasters. Each of these differences is statis-
tically significant at conventional levels. In contrast, technology disasters have no effect on
the outcome variables except a small positive effect on employee compensation.
  These results are interesting for a number of reasons. First, though natural disasters kill
16 times as many people as terrorist attacks in an average year, their impact on economic
outcomes via foreigners living abroad is estimated to be roughly one-fifth the magnitude
of terrorist attacks. In addition, terrorist attacks have stronger impacts than technological
disasters which are similar to terrorist attacks in many ways. These results suggest that
the psychological impact of terrorist attacks is greater than the impact of the much deadlier
natural and technological disasters.
  Second, these results shed some light on which dimensions of psychology affect economic
outcomes. Compared to disasters, terrorist attacks are more likely to affect psychological
views towards others, such as trust and collectivism, than they are to affect views towards
one’s self, such as subjective well-being. Because terrorist attacks have a larger impact than
disasters, we can infer that views towards others are more important for economic activity,
than views towards one’s self. This is consistent, for example, with the role of trust as
a facilitator of trade (Arrow, 1972) and the importance of social interaction for economic
activity (Manski, 2000).



                                       VI. Conclusion


  This paper provides new evidence on the effect of terrorism on individual psychology and
macroeconomic activity, controlling for reverse causation and the endogenous response of
institutions to terrorism. First, I find that terrorist attacks have substantial impacts on
multiple dimensions of psychology. Controlling for demographics and sub-national region
fixed effects, I find that trust, subjective well-being, and the importance of creativity and
freedom significantly decline following the 2004 Madrid train bombings and the 2005 London
32                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



metro terrorist attacks. Second, I find that local terrorist attacks have a negative impact on
GDP and income. However, exposure to foreign attacks has a positive impact on GDP and
income. The results are robust to tests of migration and institutional spillover effects.
     These results are most consistent with a psychological influence on macroeconomic results.
Though the positive effect of terrorism on macroeconomic outcomes is counter-intuitive, it is
consistent with a wide range of recent papers showing that exposure to violence and trauma
leads to increases in social capital. To better understand which psychological characteristics
drive economic activity, I compare terrorist attacks to natural and technological disasters.
I find that terrorist attacks have much larger effects than either natural or technological
disasters, even though terrorist attacks involve a smaller loss of life. This result suggests
that psychological attitudes towards others, such as trust, are more important for economic
outcomes than attitudes towards one’s self, such as subjective well-being.
     Psychological effects are ubiquitous in our daily lives, but often ignored when studying
the aggregate consequences of economic decision-making. In his 2007 Presidential Address,
George Akerlof argues that accounting for social norms and customs is important for un-
derstanding macroeconomic activity. The results in this paper validate Akerlof’s assertion
and suggest that changes in psychology cause meaningful changes in important economic
outcomes.
                THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                        33



                                      References



Abadie, Alberto, “Poverty, Political Freedom, and the Roots of Terrorism,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 96 (2006), 50–56.
       , and Javie Gardeazabal, “The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the
  Basque Country,” American Economic Review, 93 (2003), 113–132.
Aghion, Philippe, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi, “Endogenous Political Institu-
  tions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 565–611.
Ahern, Jennifer, Sandro Galea, Heidi Resnick, Dean Kilpatrick, Michael Bucuvalas, Joel
  Gold, and David Vlahov, “Television Images and Psychological Symptoms after the Sep-
  tember 11 Terrorist Attacks,” Psychiatry, 65 (2002), 289–300.
Ahern, Kenneth R., Daniele Daminelli, and Cesare Fracassi, “Lost in Translation? The effect
  of cultural values on mergers around the world,” Journal of Financial Economics,, 117
  (2015), 165–189.
Akerlof, George A., “The Missing Motivation in Macroeconomics,” American Economic
  Review, 97 (2007), 5–36.
Algan, Yann, and Pierre Cahuc, “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic Review,
  100 (2010), 2060–2092.
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
  Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 58 (1991), 277–297.
Arrow, Kenneth J., “Gifts and Exchanges,” Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1 (1972), 343–362.
Barro, Robert J., and Rachel M. McCleary, “Religion and Economic Growth across Coun-
  tries,” American Sociological Review, 68 (2003), 760–781.
Bartling, Björn, Ernst Fehr, Michel André Maréchal, and Daniel Schunk, “Egalitarianism
  and Competitiveness,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99 (2009),
  93–98.
34                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



Bauer, Michal, Alessandra Cassar, Julie Chytilová, and Joseph Henrich, “Wars Enduring
     Effects on the Development of Egalitarian Motivations and In-Group Biases,” Psychological
     Science, 25 (2014), 47–57.
Becker, Gary S., and Yona Rubinstein, “Fear and the Response to Terrorism: An Economic
     Analysis,” University of Chicago and Brown University Working Paper, (2011).
Bellows, John, and Edward Miguel, “War and Local Collective Action in Sierra Leone,”
     Journal of Public Economics, 93 (2009), 1144–1157.
Blattman, Christopher, “From Violence to Voting: War and Political Participation in
     Uganda,” American Political Science Review, 103 (2009), 231–247.
Blomberg, S. Brock, and Gregory D. Hess, “How Much Does Violence Tax Trade?,” The
     Review of Economics and Statistics, 88 (2006), 599–612.
            , and Athanasios Orphanides, “The Macroeconomic Consequences of Terrorism,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 51 (2004), 1007–1032.
Blunk, Scott S., David E. Clark, and James M. McGibany, “Evaluating the long-run impacts
     of the 9/11 terrorist attacks on US domestic airline travel,” Applied Economics, 38 (2006),
     363–370.
Bonanno, George A., “Loss, Trauma, and Human Resilience: Have We Underestimated the
     Human Capacity to Thrive After Extremely Aversive Events?,” American Psychologist,
     59 (2004), 20–29.
            , and John T. Jost, “Conservative Shift Among High-Exposure Survivors of the
     September 11th Terrorist Attacks,” Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 28 (2006), 311–
     323.
Brett, Jeanne M., “Culture and Negotiation,” International Journal of Psychology, 35 (2000),
     97–104.
Brück, Tilman, Fernanda Llussá, and José A. Tavares, “Entrepreneurship: The Role of
     Extreme Events,” European Journal of Political Economy, 27 (2011), S78–S88.
                THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                         35



Bux, Shahid M., and Sarah M. Coyne, “The Effects of Terrorism: The Aftermath of the
  London Terror Attacks,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39 (2009), 2936–2966.
Carmen, Elaine H., Patricia P. Rieker, and Trudy Mills, “Victims of Violence and Psychiatric
  Illness,” The American Journal of Psychiatry, 141 (1984), 378–383.
Cavallo, Eduardo, Sebastian Galiani, Ilan Noy, and Juan Pantano, “Catastrophic Natural
  Disasters and Economic Growth,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95 (2013), 1549–
  1561.
Collimore, Kelsey C., Randi E. McCabe, R. Nicholas Carleton, and Gordon J.G. Asmund-
  son, “Media exposure and dimensions of anxiety sensitivity: Differential associations with
  PTSD symptom clusters,” Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22 (2008), 1021–1028.
Di Tella, Rafael, Sebastian Galiani, and Ernesto Schargrodsky, “The Formation of Beliefs:
  Evidence from the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters,” Quarterly Journal of Econom-
  ics, 122 (2007), 209–241.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Robert MacCulloch, “Some Uses of Happiness Data in Economics,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20 (2006), 25–46.
Di Tella, Rafael, Robert J. MacCulloch, and Andrew J. Oswald, “Preferences over Inflation
  and Unemployment: Evidence from Surveys of Happiness,” American Economic Review,
  91 (2001), 335–341.
       , “The Macroeconomics of Happiness,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85 (2003),
  809–827.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky, “Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates Using
  the Allocation of Police Forces After a Terrorist Attack,” American Economic Review, 94
  (2004), 115–133.
Dolan, Paul, Tessa Peasgood, and Mathew White, “Do we really know what makes us happy?
  A review of the economic literature on the factors associated with subjective well-being,”
  Journal of Economic Psychology, 29 (2008), 94–122.
36                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



Draca, Mirko, Stephen Machin, and Robert Witt, “Panic on the Streets of London: Police,
     Crime, and the July 2005 Terror Attacks,” American Economic Review, 101 (2011), 2157–
     2181.
Easterlin, Richard A., “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empirical
     Evidence,” in Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses
     Abramowitz, Paul A. David and Melvin W. Reder, eds. (Academic Press, 1974).
Eckstein, Zvi, and Daniel Tsiddon, “Macroeconomic Consequences of Terror: Theory and
     the case of Israel,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51 (2004), 971–1002.
Fiske, Alan P., Structures of Social Life: The Four Elementary Forms of Human Relations
     (New York: Free Press (Macmillan), 1991).
Fredrickson, Barbara L., Michele M. Tugade, Christian F. Waugh, and Gregory R. Larkin,
     “What Good Are Positive Emotions in Crises? A Prospective Study of Resilience and
     Emotions Following the Terrorist Attacks on the United States on September 11th, 2001,”
     Journal of Personal and Social Psychology, 84 (2003), 365–376.
Frey, Bruno S., Simon Luechinger, and Alois Stutzer, “The life satisfaction approach to
     valuing public goods: The case of terrorism,” Public Choice, 138 (2009), 317–345.
Gabriel, Rafael, Laura Ferrando, Enrique Sainz Cortón, Carlos Mingote, Eduardo Garcı́a-
     Camba, Alberto Fernández Liria, and Sandro Galea, “Psychopathological consequences
     after a terrorist attack: An epidemiological study among victims, the general population,
     and police officers,” European Psychiatry, 22 (2007), 339–346.
Galea, Sandro, Jennifer Ahern, Heidi Resnick, Dean Kilpatrick, Michael Bucuvalas, Joel
     Gold, and David Vlahov, “Psychological Sequelae of the September 11 Terrorist Attacks
     in New York City,” New England Journal of Medicine, 346 (2002), 982–987.
Galea, Sandro, Arijit Nandi, and David Vlahov, “The Epidemiology of Post-Traumatic Stress
     Disorder after Disasters,” Epidemiologic Reviews, 27 (2005), 78–91.
Gassebner, Martin, Richard Jong-A-Pin, and Jochen O. Mierau, “Terrorism and Electoral
     Accountability: One Strike, You’re Out!,” Economics Letters, 100 (2008), 126–129.
                THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                        37



Gassebner, Martin, and Simon Luechinger, “Lock, stock, and barrel: A comprehensive as-
  sessment of the determinants of terror,” Public Choice, 149 (2011), 235–261.
Gilligan, Michael J., Benjamin J. Pasquale, and Cyrus D. Samii, “Civil War and Social
  Capital: Behavioral-Game Evidence from Nepal,” New York University Working Paper,
  (2011).
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Gerard Roland, “Culture, Institutions, and the Wealth of Na-
  tions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 99 (2017), 402–416.
Gould, Eric D., and Esteban F. Klor, “Does Terrorism Work?,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 125 (2010), 1459–1510.
Gould, Eric D., and Guy Stecklov, “Terror and the Costs of Crime,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 93 (2009), 1175–1188.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Does Culture Affect Economic Out-
  comes?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20 (2006), 23–48.
       , “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124
  (2009), 1095–1131.
Hamilos, Paul, “After four-month court case, Spain is braced for verdicts in train bombings
  that killed 191,” The Guardian, October 31 (2007), 16.
Hofstede, Geert, Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-Related Values
  (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, Inc., 1980).
       , Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions, and Organi-
  zations Across Nations, Second ed (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2001).
Ifcher, John, and Homa Zarghamee, “Happiness and Time Preference: The Effect of Positive
  Affect in a Random-Assignment Experiment,” American Economic Review, 101 (2011),
  3109–3129.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Richard Thaler, “Economic Analysis and the Psychology of Utility:
  Applications to Compensation Policy,” American Economic Review, 81 (1991), 341–346.
38                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



Kahneman, Daniel, Peter Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin, “Back to Bentham? Explorations of
     Experienced Utility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (1997), 375–406.
Kirchsteiger, Georg, Luca Rigotti, and Aldo Rustichini, “Your Morals Might Be Your
     Moods,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 59 (2006), 155–172.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A
     Cross-Country Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (1997), 1251–1288.
Krueger, Alan B., and David D. Laitin, “ in Kto Kogo?: A Cross-Country Study of the
     Origins and Targets of Terrorism, Philip Keefer and Norman Loayza, eds. (Cambridge
     University Press, 2008).
Krueger, Alan B., and David A. Schkade, “The reliability of subjective well-being measures,”
     Journal of Public Economics, 92 (2008), 1833–1845.
Llussá, Fernanda, and José Tavares, “Which Terror at Which Cost? On the Economic
     Consequences of Terrorist Attacks,” Economics Letters, 110 (2011), 52–55.
Manski, Charles F., “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions,” Journal of Economic Per-
     spectives, 114 (2000), 115–136.
Margolin, Gayla, and Elana B. Gordis, “The Effects of Family and Community Violence on
     Children,” Annual Review of Psychology, 51 (2000), 445–479.
Montalvo, José G., “Voting After the Bombings: A Natural Experiment on the Effect of Ter-
     rorist Attacks on Democratic Elections,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (2011),
     1146–1154.
Muñoz, Manuel, Marı́a Crespo, Eloı́sa Pérez-Santos, and José Juan Vázquez, “We Were All
     Wounded on March 11 in Madrid: Immediate Psychological Effects and Interventions,”
     European Psychologist, 9 (2004), 278–280.
Murphy, Edward F., John D. Gordon, and Aleta Mullen, “A Preliminary Study Exploring the
     Value Changes Taking Place in the United States since the September 11, 2001 Terrorist
     Attack on the World Trade Center in New York,” Journal of Business Ethics, 50 (2004),
     81–96.
                   THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                     39



National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, 2011, “Global
  Terrorism Database [Data file],” Retrieved from http://www.start.umd.edu/gtd.
Rubin, G. James, Chris R. Brewin, Neil Greenberg, John Simpson, and Simon Wessely,
  “Psychological and behavioural reactions to the bombings in London on 7 July 2005:
  Cross sectional survey of a representative sample of Londoners,” British Medical Journal,
  331 (2005), 1–7.
Schlenger, William E., Juesta M. Caddell, Lori Ebert, B. Kathleen Jordan, Kathryn M.
  Rourke, David Wilson, Lisa Thalji, J. Michael Dennis, John A. Fairbank, and Richard A.
  Kulka, “Psychological Reactions to Terrorist Attacks: Findings From the National Study
  of Americans’ Reactions to September 11,” Journal of the American Medical Association,
  288 (2002), 581–588.
Schuster, Mark A., Bradley D. Stein, Lisa H. Jaycox, Rebecca L. Collins, Grant N. Marshall,
  Marc N. Elliott, Annie J. Zhou, David E. Kanouse, Janina L. Morrison, and Sandra H.
  Berry, “A National Survey of Stress Reactions After the September 11, 2001 Terrorist
  Attacks,” New England Journal of Medicine, 345 (2001), 1507–1512.
Schwartz, Shalom, “Beyond individualism/collectivism: New cultural dimensions of values,”
  in Individualism and Collectivism: Theory, Method and Applications., U. Kim H. C. Trian-
  dis C. Kagitcibasi S. C. Choi and G. Yoon, eds. (Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications,
  Inc., 1994).
Seo, Dong-Chul, and Mohammad R. Torabi, “National Study of Emotional and Perceptional
  Changes Since September 11,” American Journal of Health Education, 35 (2004), 37–45.
Siegel, Jordan I., Amir N. Licht, and Shalom H. Schwartz, “Egalitarianism and International
  Investment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 102 (2011), 621–642.
Smith, Tom W., Kenneth A. Rasinski, and Marianna Toce, “America Rebounds: A National
  Study of Public Response to the September 11th Terrorist Attacks,” NORC Working
  Paper, (2001).
40                 THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



Sobel, Joel, “Can We Trust Social Capital?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 40 (2002),
     139–154.
Speckhard, Anne, “Acute Stress Disorder in Diplomats, Military, and Civilian Americans
     Living Abroad Following the September 11 Terrorist Attacks on America,” Professional
     Psychology: Research and Practice, 34 (2003), 151–158.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg, “The Diffusion of Development,” The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 124 (2009), 469–529.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, “Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being: Re-
     assessing the Easterlin Paradox,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (2008), 1–87.
Tabellini, Guido, “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” The Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 123 (2008), 905–950.
          , “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Europe,”
     Journal of the European Economic Association, 8 (2010), 677–716.
Tavares, José, “The Open Society Addresses Its Enemies: Shocks, Disasters, and Terrorist
     Attacks,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51 (2004), 1039–1070.
Tedeschi, Richard F., and Lawrence G. Calhoun, “Posttraumatic Growth: Conceptual Foun-
     dations and Empirical Evidence,” Psychological Inquiry, 15 (2004), 1–18.
Trompenaars, Fons, Riding the Wave of Culture (London: The Economist Books, 1993).
Voors, Maarten J., Eleonora E. M. Nillesen, Philip Verwimp, Erwin H. Bulte, Robert
     Lensink, and Daan P. Van Soest, “Violent Conflict and Behavior: A Field Experiment
     in Burundi,” American Economic Review, 102 (2012), 941–964.
Zak, Paul J., and Stephen Knack, “Trust and Growth,” Economic Journal, 111 (2001),
     295–321.
                                                  THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                               41




                              16,000


                              14,000
Number of Terrorist Attacks




                              12,000


                              10,000


                               8,000


                               6,000


                               4,000


                               2,000



                                       1970    1975     1980     1985     1990     1995     2000     2005     2010     2015




                                                                              Figure I
                                                Terrorist Attacks Across the World from 1970 to 2016
                                       Data are from the Global Terrorism Database (GTD). A terrorist attack is defined
                                       by GTD as “the threatened or actual use of illegal force and violence by a non-state
                                       actor to attain a political, economic, religious, or social goal through fear, coercion,
                                       or intimidation.”
42              THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




                                            Figure II
       Changes in Happiness Following the 2004 Madrid Terrorist Attacks
     This figure represents the change in happiness from before the March 11, 2004
     Madrid train bombing to after. Darker colors represent greater relative decreases
     in happiness. Data are from the European Social Survey 2002–2011. Regions with
     horizontal lines are not included in the sample, and the regions of Bosnia and Herze-
     govina, Montenegro, and Macedonia are not available. Copyright EuroGeographics
     for the administrative boundaries.
                                THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                             43




                                                         Oceania

                       50                                Middle East

                                                         Americas

                       40                                Europe
Number of Countries




                                                         Asia

                       30                                Africa




                       20




                       10




                        1995                          2000                         2005




                                                           Figure III
                         Number of Countries Experiencing Abnormal Levels of Terrorism
                      This figure presents the time series of abnormal levels of terrorist attacks for 170
                      countries from 1995 to 2008. A country is recorded as having an abnormal level of
                      terrorist attacks in a given year if the number of fatalities from terrorist attacks,
                      normalized by population, exceeds the median number of fatalities over the prior
                      five years. Only attacks with at least one fatality are included in the sample. Data
                      are from the Global Terrorism Database. Countries are grouped according to the
                      United Nations Country Groups. There are 46 countries in Africa, 37 countries
                      in the Americas, 30 countries in Asia, 39 countries in Europe, 12 countries in the
                      Middle East, and 6 countries in Oceania.
                                                                                                             Table I
                                                                                             Psychology Measures by Country, 2002–2011
                                                                                                                    Health                   Importance:    Importance:    Importance:
                                                                          Trust      Collectivism    Egalitarian                Happiness                                                 Observations
                                                                                                                   Problems                   Creativity      Success       Freedom
                                                    Scale                 0/10            1/6            1/6          1/3         0/10           1/6             1/6            1/6
                                                    Austria                5.16           4.73           4.94         1.23         7.63          4.61           4.17            4.99          6,501
                                                                          (.033)         (.013)         (.014)       (.006)       (.026)        (.016)         (.017)          (.014)
                                                    Belgium                4.97           4.87           4.99         1.26         7.73          4.34           3.78            4.85          8,733
                                                                          (.024)         (.009)         (.009)       (.006)       (.017)        (.013)         (.014)          (.011)
                                                    Switzerland            5.69           4.94           5.06         1.21         8.07          4.67           3.80            5.17          7,609
THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




                                                                          (.025)         (.010)         (.011)       (.005)       (.017)        (.013)         (.015)          (.010)
                                                    Czech Republic         4.51           4.32           4.75         1.35         6.90          4.48           3.82            4.66          7,370
                                                                          (.033)         (.014)         (.014)       (.008)       (.025)        (.016)         (.018)          (.015)
                                                    Germany                4.80           4.78           4.88         1.32         7.23          4.49           4.01            4.99          6,603
                                                                          (.021)         (.009)         (.009)       (.005)       (.017)        (.011)         (.011)          (.008)
                                                    Denmark                6.92           4.90           4.70         1.29         8.33          4.63           3.75            4.85          8,517
                                                                          (.024)         (.011)         (.014)       (.006)       (.016)        (.014)         (.015)          (.013)
                                                    Estonia                5.42           4.49           4.55         1.35         6.70          3.98           3.72            4.74          8,700
                                                                          (.028)         (.012)         (.014)       (.008)       (.024)        (.015)         (.016)          (.013)
                                                    Spain                  5.00           5.11           5.22         1.19         7.56          4.47           3.55            4.87         13,976
                                                                          (.023)         (.010)         (.010)       (.005)       (.018)        (.013)         (.015)          (.012)
                                                    Finland                6.54           4.60           4.95         1.37         8.04          4.32           3.47            4.77          6,913
                                                                          (.020)         (.010)         (.011)       (.007)       (.015)        (.012)         (.014)          (.011)
                                                    France                 4.45           4.59           5.19         1.27         7.24          4.45           2.95            4.46          7,252
                                                                          (.025)         (.013)         (.012)       (.006)       (.020)        (.015)         (.016)          (.016)
                                                    United Kingdom         5.27           4.89           4.82         1.31         7.53          4.39           3.66            4.80          6,182
                                                                          (.023)         (.010)         (.012)       (.006)       (.019)        (.013)         (.015)          (.012)
                                                    Greece                 3.80           5.06           5.22         1.20         6.73          4.67           4.27            4.96          9,444
                                                                          (.032)         (.012)         (.012)       (.006)       (.027)        (.015)         (.017)          (.013)
                                                    Hungary                4.23           4.73           4.93         1.37         6.34          4.57           4.03            4.96          7,755
                                                                          (.032)         (.014)         (.016)       (.008)       (.033)        (.018)         (.018)          (.014)
                                                    Ireland                5.49           4.91           5.07         1.19         7.77          4.56           3.79            4.86          8,369
                                                                          (.033)         (.014)         (.014)       (.007)       (.025)        (.017)         (.021)          (.015)
                                                    Netherlands            5.87           4.76           4.91         1.31         7.82          4.54           3.74            4.89          9,867
                                                                          (.023)         (.010)         (.010)       (.006)       (.014)        (.012)         (.013)          (.011)
                                                    Norway                 6.71           4.66           4.74         1.29         7.96          4.42           3.62            4.45          4,718
                                                                          (.021)         (.011)         (.012)       (.006)       (.017)        (.013)         (.014)          (.014)
                                                    Poland                 3.99           4.67           5.03         1.32         6.95          4.18           4.07            4.84          6,823
                                                                          (.026)         (.010)         (.010)       (.007)       (.024)        (.014)         (.014)          (.011)
                                                    Portugal               3.90           4.59           4.73         1.21         6.69          4.19           3.94            4.42          9,382
                                                                          (.028)         (.012)         (.012)       (.006)       (.022)        (.013)         (.014)          (.013)
                                                    Sweden                 6.28           4.63           4.91         1.33         7.89          4.38           3.14            4.61          7,842
                                                                          (.024)         (.011)         (.011)       (.007)       (.018)        (.013)         (.015)          (.013)
                                                    Slovenia               4.09           4.85           5.04         1.41         7.19          4.48           4.33            4.98          8,957
                                                                          (.030)         (.011)         (.011)       (.008)       (.024)        (.014)         (.014)          (.012)
                                                    Slovakia               4.17           4.60           5.00         1.25         6.56          4.36           3.98            4.61         10,535
                                                                          (.040)         (.015)         (.014)       (.008)       (.034)        (.020)         (.020)          (.017)
44                                                  All                    4.87           4.78           4.98         1.29         7.34          4.43           3.69            4.80         172,048
                                                                          (.008)         (.004)         (.004)       (.002)       (.007)        (.004)         (.005)          (.004)
                                                       Average scores for psychology measures by country. Averages are adjusted for sample-weights. Linearized standard errors adjusted for
                                                    sample-weights are in parentheses. Scale refers to the survey response scale used for each variable. Data from European Social Survey, 2002–2011.
                                                   Table II
                   Reduced-Form Estimates of the Effect of Terrorist Attacks on Psychology

                                                                             Health                   Importance:    Importance:      Importance:
                                   Trust      Collectivism    Egalitarian                Happiness
                                                                            Problems                   Creativity      Success         Freedom
Panel A: London Attack Using All Regions
Post-London Attack ×               0.121∗∗        0.016          0.047∗     −0.002       −0.123∗∗∗      −0.036         −0.092∗∗∗          0.043∗
   × Great Britain Dummy          (0.052)        (0.023)        (0.027)     (0.013)       (0.043)        (0.030)        (0.032)          (0.026)
Post-London Attack               −0.006         −0.003         −0.022∗∗     −0.003         0.050∗∗∗       0.010          0.015          −0.002
   × Travel Time to London       (0.018)         (0.008)        (0.009)     (0.004)       (0.015)        (0.010)        (0.011)          (0.009)
Post-London Attack                 0.092∗∗        0.018          0.034        0.013      −0.146∗∗∗      −0.044         −0.061∗∗           0.017
   × Speak English                (0.047)        (0.021)        (0.024)      (0.012)      (0.039)        (0.027)        (0.029)          (0.023)
Observations                      163,552        157,457        157,387      163,612      163,385       157,147         157,099         157,357
Panel B: London Attack Excluding Great Britain
Post-London Attack                 0.188∗∗∗       0.011        −0.005       −0.015∗        0.194∗∗∗       0.035∗       −0.096∗∗∗          0.054∗∗∗
   × Travel Time to London        (0.033)        (0.014)        (0.015)     (0.008)       (0.027)        (0.018)        (0.019)          (0.015)
Post-London Attack               −0.058           0.045        −0.001         0.050∗∗∗   −0.189∗∗∗      −0.078∗          0.063          −0.084∗∗
   × Speak English                (0.082)        (0.038)        (0.042)      (0.019)      (0.071)        (0.041)        (0.051)          (0.037)
Observations                      153,548        147,770        147,731      153,595      153,367       147,474         147,444         147,677
Panel C: Madrid Attack Using All Regions
Post-Madrid Attack               −0.061           0.025          0.014      −0.032∗∗       0.065        −0.175∗∗∗      −0.341∗∗∗        −0.035
   × Spain Dummy                  (0.070)        (0.029)        (0.030)     (0.015)       (0.052)        (0.036)        (0.041)          (0.033)
Post-Madrid Attack               −0.004           0.026∗∗∗       0.010        0.010∗∗      0.009          0.045∗∗∗       0.078∗∗∗         0.051∗∗∗
   × Travel Time to Madrid        (0.019)        (0.007)        (0.009)      (0.004)      (0.014)        (0.010)        (0.012)          (0.008)
Post-Madrid Attack               −0.071           0.020          0.001      −0.032∗∗       0.030        −0.179∗∗∗      −0.312∗∗∗        −0.039
   × Speak Spanish               (0.073)         (0.030)        (0.030)     (0.015)       (0.054)        (0.037)        (0.043)          (0.034)
Observations                      163,552        157,457        157,387      163,612      163,385       157,147         157,099         157,357
Panel D: Madrid Attack Excluding Spain
                                                                                                                                                        THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




Post-Madrid Attack                 0.269∗∗∗       0.098∗∗∗       0.014      −0.020∗        0.396∗∗∗       0.063∗∗        0.003            0.057∗∗
   × Travel Time to Madrid        (0.051)        (0.021)        (0.021)     (0.011)       (0.041)        (0.026)        (0.026)          (0.023)
Post-Madrid Attack               −0.430           0.358∗         0.287∗       0.109      −0.576∗∗         0.047          0.158            0.104
   × Speak Spanish               (0.402)         (0.188)        (0.162)      (0.068)      (0.250)        (0.228)        (0.264)          (0.212)
Observations                      154,735        148,643        148,584      154,761      154,562       148,388         148,328         148,563

     Reduced-form regressions where dependent variables are listed at the top of each column. Each entry is from a separate regression. All
                                                                                                                                                        45




regressions include dummy variables for geographic region, gender, marital status, education, and ln(age), as well as main effects of post-attack and
language spoken variables. The London attack occurred on 07/07/2005. The Madrid attack occurred on 03/11/2004. Data from European Social
Survey, 2002–2011. Linearized standard errors adjusted for sample weights are reported in parentheses. ∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ at 5%; ∗∗∗ at 1%.
                                                                                                            Table III
                                                                                           Tests of Pre-Existing Trends in Psychology
                                                                                                                       Health                     Importance:     Importance:      Importance:
                                                                             Trust     Collectivism    Egalitarian                  Happiness
                                                                                                                      Problems                     Creativity       Success         Freedom
THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




                                                    Panel A: London Attack
                                                    Pre-London Attack−1      0.105        0.180∗∗∗        0.085∗∗       0.002       −0.062          −0.068          −0.011            0.054
                                                       ×Speak English       (0.073)      (0.034)         (0.038)       (0.019)      (0.060)          (0.042)        (0.046)          (0.037)
                                                    Post-London Attack1      0.162∗∗      0.082∗∗         0.067∗        0.03        −0.141∗∗        −0.091∗∗        −0.026            0.014
                                                       ×Speak English       (0.072)      (0.034)         (0.037)       (0.019)      (0.060)          (0.042)        (0.045)          (0.036)
                                                    Post-London Attack>1     0.131∗∗      0.133∗∗∗        0.083∗∗∗      0.005       −0.193∗∗∗       −0.066∗         −0.087∗∗          0.062∗∗
                                                       ×Speak English       (0.062)      (0.029)         (0.032)       (0.016)      (0.051)          (0.036)        (0.040)          (0.031)
                                                    Observations            163,552      157,457         157,387       163,612       163,385        157,147          157,099         157,357
                                                    Panel B: Madrid Attack
                                                    Pre-Madrid Attack−1    −0.269       −0.003            0.011        −0.041       −0.125            0.128           0.221∗∗         0.053
                                                       ×Speak Spanish      (0.183)      (0.073)          (0.074)       (0.036)      (0.123)          (0.088)         (0.106)         (0.081)
                                                    Post-Madrid Attack1    −0.140       −0.132∗∗∗       −0.094∗∗       −0.047∗∗     −0.144∗∗        −0.168∗∗∗       −0.127∗∗        −0.111∗∗
                                                       ×Speak Spanish      (0.096)      (0.041)          (0.041)       (0.020)      (0.073)          (0.050)        (0.058)         (0.047)
                                                    Post-Madrid Attack>1 −0.105           0.071∗∗         0.026        −0.03∗         0.025         −0.17∗∗∗        −0.322∗∗∗       −0.017
                                                       ×Speak Spanish    (0.080)         (0.033)         (0.033)       (0.017)       (0.060)         (0.041)        (0.047)         (0.038)
                                                    Observations            163,552      157,457         157,387       163,612       163,385        157,147          157,099         157,357
                                                        Reduced-form regressions where dependent variables are listed at the top of each column. Each entry is from a separate regression.
                                                    All regressions include dummy variables for geographic region, gender, marital status, education, and ln(age), as well as the main effect of
                                                    language spoken. The London attack occurred on 07/07/2005. The Madrid attack occurred on 03/11/2004. Time periods are divided into
                                                    four periods for each attack: Pre-London Attack<−1 (1/1/2002–7/6/2004); Pre-London Attack−1 (7/7/2004–7/6/2005); Post-London Attack1
                                                    (7/7/2005–12/31/2006); Post-London Attack>1 (1/1/2007–12/31/2011); Pre-Madrid Attack<−1 (1/1/2002–12/31/2002); Pre-Madrid Attack−1
                                                    (1/1/2003–3/10/2004); Post-Madrid Attack1 (3/11/2004–12/31/2005); Post-Madrid Attack>1 (1/1/2006–12/31/2011). Pre-London Attack<−1
                                                    and Pre-Madrid Attack<−1 are the omitted periods. Data from European Social Survey, 2002–2011. Linearized standard errors adjusted for
                                                    sample weights are reported in parentheses. ∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ at 5%; ∗∗∗ at 1%.
46
                                                  Table IV
                  Summary Statistics of Terrorist Attacks and Economic Activity Variables


                                                                                                            Percentiles
                                                                                Standard
                                                                      Mean                         25th          50th             75th
                                                                                deviation
Panel A: Terrorist Attacks Variables
Population (%) Affected by Terrorism (At least one fatality)           0.697         1.200         0.000         0.212           0.843
Population (%) Affected by Terrorism (At least 50 fatalities)          0.078         0.165         0.000         0.002           0.070
Population (%) Affected by Terrorism (At least 100 fatalities)         0.042         0.126         0.000         0.000           0.018
Terrorist Attack Dummy                                                 0.161         0.367         0.000         0.000           0.000
Panel B: Economic Activity Variables
GDP per capita (thousands of PPS)                                     19.481         7.446       14.500         19.250          24.300
GDP growth (%)                                                         4.891         3.907        2.684          4.824           6.824
Compensation of Employees (billions of euros)                         23.715        39.868        2.785          9.458          28.401
Income (billions of PPS)                                              37.050        56.790        7.190         15.385          41.849
Unemployment rate (%)                                                  8.374         4.571        5.015          7.491          10.403
Gross Fixed Capital Formation (billions of euros)                     10.506        15.217        1.926          4.757          12.355
Population                                                         2,462,379     2,877,939      593,378      1,540,146       3,416,255

    Statistics are from 1,270 region-year observations from 1995 to 2008 at the NUTS II-level region with NUTS I-level regions for
Germany. Countries included are Austria, Germany, Spain, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Romania, and Slovenia. ‘Population (%)
Affected by Terrorism’ is the fraction of a region’s foreign-national/foreign-born population that come from a country that experienced
a terrorist attack in year t. ‘Terrorist Attack Dummy’ is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in region-years where the region
                                                                                                                                          THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




experienced a terrorist attack with at least one fatality. ‘PPS’ is purchasing power standard. Data are from the Global Terrorism
Database and Eurostat.
                                                                                                                                          47
                                                                                                              Table V
                                                                                        The Effect of Terrorist Attacks on Economic Activity
THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




                                                                                                                                                                                      Gross fixed
                                                                                                        GDP per        GDP         Compensation      Income of     Unemployment
                                                                                                                                                                                        capital
                                                                                                         capita     growth (%)      of employees     households      rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                      formation
                                                    Panel A: Impact on Native Population
                                                    Terrorist Attack Dummy                              −0.105        −1.078∗∗∗         0.491∗∗       −0.608          −0.142             0.726∗∗∗
                                                        includes region fixed effects                   (0.091)        (0.244)         (0.188)         (0.482)         (0.168)          (0.186)
                                                    Terrorist Attack Dummy                            −0.148∗∗∗       −1.112∗∗∗         0.144∗∗∗      −0.131∗         −0.534∗∗∗          0.152
                                                        includes region fixed effects & region trends (0.049)          (0.236)         (0.053)         (0.074)         (0.131)          (0.095)
                                                    Panel B: Impact on Foreign Population
                                                    Population (%) Affected by Terrorism                −0.233         2.711∗∗∗         2.157∗∗∗        4.492∗∗∗      −0.143             0.617∗
                                                       includes region fixed effects                    (0.330)       (0.958)          (0.461)         (1.070)         (0.597)          (0.341)
                                                    Population (%) Affected by Terrorism                  0.250∗∗      2.653∗∗        −0.002            0.727∗∗         0.795          −0.148
                                                       includes region fixed effects & region trends     (0.116)      (1.042)          (0.173)         (0.320)         (0.577)         (0.281)
                                                    Observations                                          1,270        1,181            1,262           1,252           1,158            1,072
                                                        Reduced-form regressions where dependent variables at the NUTS region level II are listed at the top of each column. Each coefficient
                                                    entry is from a separate regression. All regressions include yearly region-level population counts and year dummies. All regressions include
                                                    either region fixed effects or region fixed effects and region-specific time trends, as indicated in the variable description column. In Panel
                                                    A, ‘Terrorist Attack Dummy’ is an indicator equal to one if a region had a terrorist attack in year t. In Panel B, ‘Population (%) Affected
                                                    by Terrorism’ is the fraction of a region’s foreign-national/foreign-born population that come from a country that experienced a terrorist
                                                    attack in year t. In Panel B, terrorist attacks include all attacks where at least 100 people are killed. Data cover the period 1995 to 2008.
                                                    Data are from the Global Terrorism Database and Eurostat. Standard errors clustered at the region-level are reported in parentheses.
                                                    ∗
                                                      Significant at 10%; ∗∗ at 5%; ∗∗∗ at 1%.
48
                                                        Table VI
                                   Tests of Pre-Existing Trends in Economic Activity


                                                                                                                            Gross fixed
                                            GDP per        GDP         Compensation      Income of     Unemployment
                                                                                                                              capital
                                             capitat    growth (%)t    of employeest    householdst      rate (%)t
                                                                                                                            formationt
Panel A: Impact on Native Population
Terrorist Attack Dummyt+1                     0.001      −0.458∗∗         −0.126          −0.207∗         −0.018              −0.180
                                             (0.074)      (0.226)          (0.083)         (0.115)         (0.187)            (0.128)
Terrorist Attack Dummyt                     −0.203∗∗∗    −1.226∗∗∗        −0.049          −0.212∗         −0.836∗∗∗           −0.019
                                            (0.067)       (0.258)          (0.064)         (0.115)         (0.196)            (0.130)
Terrorist Attack Dummyt−1                   −0.151∗∗     −0.191             0.047         −0.041          −1.179∗∗∗           −0.222∗∗
                                            (0.064)       (0.238)          (0.062)         (0.098)         (0.274)            (0.110)
Panel B: Impact on Foreign Population
Population (%) Affected by Terrorismt+1     −0.086       −0.144           −0.317          −0.367          −0.295               0.135
                                             (0.229)      (1.355)          (0.194)         (0.396)         (0.720)            (0.413)
Population (%) Affected by Terrorismt         0.326∗       2.601∗∗∗       −0.247            0.655∗∗∗        1.737∗            −0.283
                                             (0.165)      (0.770)          (0.196)         (0.238)         (0.985)            (0.444)
Population (%) Affected by Terrorismt−1       0.211      −0.060           −0.110          −0.080            1.769∗∗           −0.319
                                             (0.175)      (0.765)          (0.223)         (0.321)         (0.676)            (0.418)
Observations                                  1,181        1,181            1,175           1,167           1,060               995

     Reduced-form regressions where dependent variables at the NUTS region level II are listed at the top of each column. All regressions
include yearly region-level population counts, year dummies, region fixed effects, and region-specific time trends. In Panel A, ‘Terrorist
                                                                                                                                               THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




Attack Dummy’ is an indicator equal to one if a region had a terrorist attack in year t. In Panel B, ‘Population (%) Affected by Terrorism’
is the fraction of a region’s foreign-national/foreign-born population that come from a country that experienced a terrorist attack in year
t. Data cover the period 1995 to 2008. In Panel B, terrorist attacks include all attacks where at least 100 people are killed. Data are from
the Global Terrorism Database and Eurostat. Standard errors clustered at the region-level are reported in parentheses. ∗ Significant at
10%; ∗∗ at 5%; ∗∗∗ at 1%.
                                                                                                                                               49
                                                                                                         Table VII
                                                                                     The Effects of Natural and Technological Disasters
                                                                                                                                                                                  Gross fixed
                                                                                                     GDP per         GDP        Compensation     Income of     Unemployment
                                                                                                                                                                                    capital
                                                                                                      capita      growth (%)     of employees    households      rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                  formation
THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




                                                    Panel A: Impact on Native Population
                                                    Terrorist Attack Dummy                           −0.221∗∗∗     −0.863∗∗∗        0.113∗        −0.221∗∗∗        −0.384∗∗∗         0.035
                                                                                                      (0.055)       (0.251)        (0.062)         (0.079)          (0.142)         (0.091)
                                                    Natural Disaster Dummy                             0.057       −0.431∗∗∗        0.106∗∗∗        0.140∗∗        −0.155∗           0.149∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.037)       (0.150)        (0.036)         (0.060)          (0.085)         (0.067)
                                                    Technology Disaster Dummy                          0.214∗∗∗    −0.396∗         −0.003           0.182∗∗        −0.420∗∗∗         0.248∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.030)       (0.237)         (0.046)        (0.070)          (0.128)         (0.097)
                                                    Panel B: Impact on Foreign Population
                                                    Population (%) Affected by Terrorism               0.268∗∗      2.658∗∗        −0.072           0.738∗∗         0.843          −0.086
                                                                                                      (0.119)      (1.060)          (0.197)        (0.325)         (0.572)         (0.282)
                                                    Population (%) Affected by Natural Disasters       0.056∗∗∗     0.300∗∗∗       −0.023           0.121∗∗∗       −0.349∗∗          0.063
                                                                                                      (0.019)      (0.082)          (0.043)        (0.032)          (0.136)         (0.075)
                                                    Population (%) Affected by Tech. Disasters       −0.008         0.074           0.076∗          0.008          −0.009          −0.057
                                                                                                      (0.016)      (0.116)         (0.040)         (0.029)          (0.067)        (0.041)
                                                    Observations                                       1,270        1,181           1,262           1,252           1,158            1,072
                                                        Reduced-form regressions where dependent variables at the NUTS region level II are listed at the top of each column. All regressions
                                                    include yearly region-level population counts, year dummies, region fixed effects, and region-specific time trends. Each of the main
                                                    variables of interest for terrorist attacks, natural disasters, and technology disasters are included in the same regression. In Panel A,
                                                    ‘Terrorist Attack (Natural Disaster or Technology Disaster) Dummy’ is an indicator equal to one if a region had a terrorist attack
                                                    (natural disaster or technology disaster) in year t where at least one person was killed. ‘Population (%) Affected by Terrorism (Natural
                                                    Disasters or Technology Disasters)’ is the fraction of a region’s foreign-national/foreign-born population that come from a country that
                                                    experienced a terrorist attack (natural disaster or technology disaster) in year t. In Panel B, terrorist attacks include all attacks where
                                                    at least 100 people are killed. Data cover the period 1995 to 2008. Data are from the Global Terrorism Database, The Emergency
                                                    Events Database (EM-DAT), and Eurostat. Standard errors clustered at the region-level are reported in parentheses. ∗ Significant at
                                                    10%; ∗∗ at 5%; ∗∗∗ at 1%.
50
                                    For Online Publication:
                                   Supplementary Material for

       “The Importance of Psychology in Economic Activity:
                Evidence from Terrorist Attacks”

This Online Appendix provides more detail on data sources and presents additional tests discussed
in the paper.




                                   I. Principle Survey Questions


  The following lists the questions from the European Social Survey (ESS) used to measure psy-
chological traits. In some cases, I reversed the ordering of responses (‘Not like me at all,’ . . . , ‘Very
much like me’) from the original data in the ESS to make all variables have response scales that
are increasing in the particular trait.


     Trust: Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted, or that you can’t
        be too careful in dealing with people?
           0. You can’t be too careful
                to
         10. Most people can be trusted
     Collectivism: Please tell me how much this person is or is not like you. It’s very important
        to her/him to help the people around her/him. She/he wants to care for their well-being.
           1. Not like me at all
           2. Not like me
           3. A little like me
           4. Somewhat like me
           5. Like me
           6. Very much like me
2               THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



    Egalitarianism: Please tell me how much each person is or is not like you. She/he thinks
      it is important that every person in the world should be treated equally. She/he believes
      everyone should have equal opportunities in life.
        1. Not like me at all
        2. Not like me
        3. A little like me
        4. Somewhat like me
        5. Like me
        6. Very much like me
    Health Problems: Are you hampered in your daily activities in any way by any longstanding
      illness, or disability, infirmity or mental health problem?
        1. No
        2. Yes to some extent
        3. Yes a lot
    Happiness: Taking all things together, how happy would you say you are?
        0. Extremely unhappy
           to
       10. Extremely happy
    Importance: Creativity: Please tell me how much this person is or is not like you. Think-
      ing up new ideas and being creative is important to her/him. She/he likes to do things in
      her/his own original way.
        1. Not like me at all
        2. Not like me
        3. A little like me
        4. Somewhat like me
        5. Like me
        6. Very much like me
            THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY                            3



Importance: Success: Please tell me how much this person is or is not like you. Being very
  successful is important to her/him. She/he hopes people will recognize her/his achieve-
  ments.
    1. Not like me at all
    2. Not like me
    3. A little like me
    4. Somewhat like me
    5. Like me
    6. Very much like me
Importance: Freedom: Please tell me how much this person is or is not like you. It is
  important to her/him to make her/his own decisions about what she/he does. She/he likes
  to be free and not depend on others.
    1. Not like me at all
    2. Not like me
    3. A little like me
    4. Somewhat like me
    5. Like me
    6. Very much like me
4         THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



                                  Table A.1
                     Citizenship of Central Macedonia


    Greece                 93.9740       Spain                    0.0107
    Albania                 2.6382       Philippines              0.0096
    Georgia                 1.0543       Lebanon                  0.0096
    Russia                  0.4666       Syria                    0.0096
    Bulgaria                0.2629       Jordan                   0.0090
    Armenia                 0.1841       Switzerland              0.0079
    Germany                 0.1796       Belarus                  0.0073
    Cyprus                  0.1610       Egypt                    0.0062
    Australia               0.1362       Slovakia                 0.0062
    USA                     0.0918       Bosnia and Herzegovina   0.0056
    Yugoslavia              0.0777       South Africa             0.0045
    Ukraine                 0.0749       Portugal                 0.0039
    Sweden                  0.0642       Venezuela                0.0028
    Italy                   0.0569       Denmark                  0.0028
    Romania                 0.0563       Brazil                   0.0023
    United Kingdom          0.0552       China                    0.0023
    Kazakhstan              0.0467       Finland                  0.0023
    Canada                  0.0372       Pakistan                 0.0017
    Czech Republic          0.0321       Ghana                    0.0011
    Turkey                  0.0315       Dominica                 0.0011
    Poland                  0.0304       Colombia                 0.0011
    Uzbekistan              0.0225       India                    0.0011
    France                  0.0214       Sri Lanka                0.0011
    Netherlands             0.0203       Norway                   0.0011
    Austria                 0.0163       New Zealand              0.0011
    Hungary                 0.0158       Morocco                  0.0006
    Belgium                 0.0158       Iran                     0.0006
    Moldova                 0.0141       Iraq                     0.0006
    Nigeria                 0.0124       Ireland                  0.0006
        Percentage of individuals by citizenship in the NUTS Level II
    region of Central Macedonia (GR12 Kentriki Makedonia). Data are
    from the 2001 sample of the Greek Census from IPUMS-I.
                                              Table A.2
         The Relationship Between the Magnitude of Fatalities and Economic Activity for Foreign
                                             Populations


                                                                                                                                  Gross fixed
                                                    GDP per        GDP         Compensation      Income of     Unemployment
                                                                                                                                    capital
                                                     capita     growth (%)      of employees     households      rate (%)
                                                                                                                                  formation
Panel A: Attacks With at Least One Fatality
Population (%) Affected by Terrorism                −0.013         0.212∗∗          0.229∗          0.941∗∗         0.036          −0.022
   includes region fixed effects                    (0.051)       (0.083)          (0.129)         (0.400)         (0.061)         (0.078)
Population (%) Affected by Terrorism                  0.014        0.097          −0.039∗         −0.042            0.096          −0.047
   includes region fixed effects & region trends     (0.016)      (0.073)          (0.021)         (0.033)         (0.073)         (0.042)
Panel B: Attacks With at Least 50 Fatalities
Population (%) Affected by Terrorism                  0.234        1.916∗∗          2.798∗∗∗        6.719∗∗∗        0.211            1.575∗∗∗
   includes region fixed effects                     (0.349)      (0.786)          (0.691)         (2.150)         (0.539)          (0.425)
Population (%) Affected by Terrorism                  0.271∗       2.481∗∗∗         0.004           0.544∗∗         1.616∗∗          0.433
   includes region fixed effects & region trends     (0.155)      (0.855)          (0.197)         (0.243)         (0.629)          (0.380)
Observations                                          1,270        1,181            1,262           1,252           1,158            1,072

    Reduced-form regressions where dependent variables at the NUTS region level II are listed at the top of each column. Each coefficient
entry is from a separate regression. All regressions include yearly region-level population counts and year dummies. All regressions
include either region fixed effects or region fixed effects and region-specific time trends, as indicated in the variable description column.
‘Population (%) Affected by Terrorism’ is the fraction of a region’s foreign-national/foreign-born population that come from a country
that experienced a terrorist attack in year t. In Panel A, terrorist attacks include all attacks where at least one person is killed. In
                                                                                                                                                THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




Panel B, terrorist attacks include all attacks where at least 50 people are killed. Data cover the period 1995 to 2008. Data are from
the Global Terrorism Database and Eurostat. Standard errors clustered at the region-level are reported in parentheses. ∗ Significant at
10%; ∗∗ at 5%; ∗∗∗ at 1%.
                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                            Table A.3
                                                                     The Effect of Terrorist Attacks on Migration to Europe
                                                                                           Dependent Variable: ln(1+Population)t
                                                    Terrorist attack (> 0 fatalities)t−1                   −0.027 −0.574
THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHOLOGY IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




                                                                                                            (0.029) (0.358)
                                                    Terrorist attack (> 0 fatalities)t−1 ×ln(distance)                0.066
                                                                                                                     (0.042)
                                                    Terrorist attack (≥50 fatalities)t−1                                        0.006     0.696
                                                                                                                               (0.068)   (0.973)
                                                    Terrorist attack (≥ 50 fatalities)t−1 ×ln(distance)                                  −0.082
                                                                                                                                         (0.114)
                                                    Terrorist attack (≥ 100 fatalities)t−1                                                         −0.018      0.917
                                                                                                                                                   (0.093)    (2.209)
                                                    Terrorist attack (≥ 100 fatalities)t−1 ×ln(distance)                                                     −0.110
                                                                                                                                                              (0.255)
                                                    Observations                                            49,599   49,005    49,599     49,005    49,599    49,005
                                                         The dependent variables is the log of the population in 27 European countries by birth from 244 origin
                                                    countries in year t, with data from 1998 to 2010. Observations are at the host country-origin country pair-year
                                                    level. All regressions include host country-origin country pairs fixed effects, host country-specific time trends,
                                                    year fixed effects, and one-year lagged log population (dependent variable), omitted for brevity. ‘Terrorist
                                                    attack (> 0) fatalities)t−1 ’ is a dummy variable equal to one in years when an origin country experienced
                                                    an abnormal level of terrorist attacks, restricting attention to only attacks with at least one fatality. Other
                                                    variables defined analogously. Abnormal levels of terrorist attacks are defined by years in which the number
                                                    of fatalities in a country is greater than the country’s median number of terrorism-related fatalities over the
                                                    prior five years. ‘ln(distance)’ is the geographic distance between the origin and host countries. Population
                                                    data are from Eurostat, distance data are from Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales
                                                    (CEPII), and terrorist attack data are from the Global Terrorism Database (GTD). Coefficient estimates are
                                                    from Arellano and Bond (1991) GMM regressions, to account for endogenous lagged dependent variables in
                                                    fixed effects models. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors that are robust to general cross-section and
                                                    time-series heteroskedasticity and within-group autocorrelation. ∗ Significant at 10%; ∗∗ at 5%; ∗∗∗ at 1%.
6
