                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PROMOTIONS AND THE PETER PRINCIPLE

                                          Alan Benson
                                          Danielle Li
                                           Kelly Shue

                                      Working Paper 24343
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24343


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




We thank Lisa Kahn, Steve Kaplan, Eddie Lazear, Inessa Liskovich (discussant), Vladimir
Mukharlyamov (discussant), Paige Ouimet (discussant), Michaela Pagel (discussant), Amanda
Pallais, Brian Phelan, Thomas Peeters, Lamar Pierce, Felipe Severino (discussant), Kathryn Shaw
(discussant), Mike Waldman, and seminar participants at CUHK, FOM Conference, GSU CEAR,
Gerzensee ESSFM, Harvard Business School, HKUST, Hong Kong U., ITAM, Melbourne
FIRCG, MIT Sloan, Midwest Economics Association Meetings, Nanjing U., NBER (Corporate
Finance, Personnel Economics, and Organizational Economics), Purdue, SOLE, Tsinghua PBC,
U. of Chicago, U. of Hong Kong, U. of Miami, U. of Minnesota Carlson, Wharton People
Analytics Conference, Wharton People \& Organizations conference, and Yale Junior Finance
Conference for helpful comments. We thank Menaka Hamplole and Leland Bybee for excellent
research assistance. This research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets and the
Fama Miller Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Alan Benson, Danielle Li, and Kelly Shue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Promotions and the Peter Principle
Alan Benson, Danielle Li, and Kelly Shue
NBER Working Paper No. 24343
February 2018
JEL No. J01,M5,M51

                                         ABSTRACT

The best worker is not always the best candidate for manager. In these cases, do firms promote
the best potential manager or the best worker in her current job? Using microdata on the
performance of sales workers at 214 firms, we find evidence consistent with the “Peter
Principle,” which predicts that firms prioritize current job performance in promotion decisions at
the expense of other observable characteristics that better predict managerial performance. We
estimate that the costs of promoting workers with lower managerial potential are high, suggesting
either that firms are making inefficient promotion decisions or that the benefits of promotion-
based incentives are great enough to justify the costs of managerial mismatch.


Alan Benson                                     Kelly Shue
Carlson School of Management                    Yale School of Management
321 19th Ave S, 3-300                           165 Whitney Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55409                           P.O. Box 208200
bensona@umn.edu                                 New Haven, CT 06520-8200
                                                and NBER
Danielle Li                                     kelly.shue@yale.edu
MIT Sloan
100 Main St, E62-484
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
danielle.li@mit.edu
     When management requires different skills than lower-level work, the best workers may
not make the best managers. In these cases, do firms promote someone who excels in
her current position or someone who is likely to excel as a manager? If firms promote
workers based on their current performance, they may end up with worse managers. Yet
if firms promote workers based on traits that predict managerial potential, they may pass
over higher-performing workers, thereby weakening incentives for workers to perform well in
their current roles. Such promotion policies could also lead to perceptions of favoritism or
unfairness, or the impression that effort in one’s job goes unrewarded.
    Using detailed microdata on sales workers in US firms, we provide the first large-scale
empirical evidence showing that firms prioritize current performance in promotion decisions
at the expense of promoting the best potential managers. Our findings are consistent with
the “Peter Principle,” which, in its extreme form, states that firms promote competent
workers until they become incompetent managers (Peter and Hull 1969). In particular, we
show that high-performing sales workers are more likely to be promoted, but that prior
sales performance negatively predicts managerial performance, even after accounting for
selection into the sample of promoted workers. These results suggest either that firms make
mistakes in their promotion decisions or that the incentive benefits of promoting based on
sales performance justify the costs of promoting workers with lower managerial potential.
We provide supportive evidence for the latter possibility by showing that firms appear to
actively manage the trade-off between providing incentives and promoting the best potential
managers: firms place less emphasis on sales performance in promotions where managerial
roles entail greater responsibility and where sales performance is also rewarded by relatively
strong pay-for-performance.
    The Peter Principle applies broadly to settings in which the skills required to succeed
at one level in the organizational hierarchy may differ from the skills required in the next
level, e.g., science, engineering, manufacturing, academia, or entrepreneurship (Baker, Jensen
and Murphy 1988). Among such settings, sales is particularly attractive from a research
perspective for several reasons. First, it is an economically important occupation, accounting
for 10.4 percent of the US labor force.1 Second, sales performance is relatively easy to
quantify, allowing us to observe a more reliable measure of worker performance. Finally,
the sales setting allows us to explore an interesting tension. Sales is both widely cited as a
   1
   In 2016, the U.S. labor force had 14.5 million workers in sales and sales-related occupations (Bureau of
Labor Statistics 2016).




                                                    1
canonical example of where the Peter Principle is likely to apply2 and a setting in which a
simple economics model would predict that the Peter Principle may be less likely to apply:
pay-for-performance is common in sales, so firms may not need to rely on promotion-based
incentives to induce worker effort. Finding evidence of the Peter Principle in such a setting
would suggest that pay-for-performance cannot fully resolve the tension between providing
incentives and promoting the most qualified managers.
    Our analysis uses new transaction-level data that are well suited for the study of firms’
promotion policies.3 These data, provided by a firm that offers sales performance
management software to client firms, include standardized measures of sales transactions
and organizational hierarchy for a panel of 53,035 workers, 1,531 of whom are promoted
into managerial positions during our sample period. Our data cover 214 different US-based
client firms in a range of industries from 2005 to 2011. Data on multiple firms allow us to
study heterogeneity in how much firms prioritize current job performance as a function of
firm organization or pay practices.
   For sales workers, we use employment history and sales credit data to examine
promotion as a function of sales performance (the dollar value of sales), sales collaboration
(the number of colleagues with whom a worker shared credit on transactions), and other
observable worker characteristics. For promoted managers, we evaluate their managerial
performance as their “manager value added” in shaping their subordinates’ sales
performance, i.e., each manager’s contribution to improving her subordinates’ sales,
controlling for subordinate and firm-year-month fixed effects, as well as other potentially
confounding factors (following the methods used in, e.g., Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis
1999; Bertrand and Schoar 2003; Lazear, Shaw and Stanton 2016). While this measure of
manager value added has a number of important advantages, it remains imperfect given
that managers may be non-randomly matched to subordinates. Thus, we present a number
   2
     Deutsch (1986) points out that “American companies have always wrestled with ways to keep the Peter
Principle at bay—to prevent competent salesmen, for example, from rising to become incompetent sales
managers.” Baker, Jensen and Murphy (1988) state that “in many cases, the best performer at one level in
the hierarchy is not the best candidate for the job one level up—the best salesman is rarely the best manager.”
Sevy (2016), in a Forbes article entitled “Why Great Sales People Make Terrible Sales Managers,” argues
that great sales workers are motivated by a desire for personal—rather than team—achievement: “success
in sales is about me while success in sales management is about my team. This is where the downside of
a strong achievement drive makes itself known. If I’m driven to prove my personal ability, I find it hard
(nearly impossible sometimes) to step back and let others take the spotlight.”
   3
     We do not observe promotion offers. As such, when we refer to a “promotion policy,” we refer to the
combined impact of the firm’s promotion offer and the worker’s decision to accept the offer.




                                                      2
of additional tests in Section 5 to show that non-random matching is unlikely to drive our
findings of evidence consistent with the Peter Principle.
    We begin by documenting a strong, positive relation between past sales performance
and promotion to managerial positions. Doubling sales credits increases the probability
that a worker will be promoted by 14.3 percent relative to the base probability of
promotion.4    However, among promoted workers, we find that pre-promotion sales
performance negatively predicts manager value added: doubling the new manager’s
pre-promotion sales corresponds to a 7.5 percent decline in the sales performance of each of
the newly-promoted manager’s subordinates. Equivalently, relatively poor prior sales
performance among newly promoted managers is associated with significant improvements
in subordinate performance. This negative correlation is consistent with the Beckerian
insight about selection and discrimination: if firms’ promotion policies “discriminate”
against poor sales performers, then poor sales performers who are nevertheless promoted
should be better managers.
    Our analysis also identifies another observable worker characteristic, sales collaboration
experience, which is positively related to managerial performance but not consistently
correlated with promotions. Sales collaboration may be a measure of a worker’s experience
working in teams or with more complex or customized products that require coordination.
In either case, these results suggest that firms wishing only to maximize managerial quality
could potentially achieve better outcomes by placing more weight on collaboration
experience, rather than sales, when making promotion decisions.5
   Next, we show that these findings are robust to selection concerns. Because workers are
not promoted at random, the relation between sales and managerial performance in the
promoted sample may not reflect the true relation in the full sample of workers. To recover
the full-sample predictive relation, we apply a model of promotions based on the Heckman
(1976) selection model. We instrument for promotion, i.e., selection into the sample of
promoted workers, using the average firm- and industry-level promotion rates within each
time period. These average promotion rates reflect time-varyinlg vacancies and firm- and
industry-level demand for managers, which are strongly positively correlated with a
   4
     A doubling of a worker’s relative sales performance is not an unusual occurrence given the wide dispersion
in sales across workers. It is equivalent to a worker moving from the 50th to the 67th percentile in terms of
sales relative to others in the same firm-year-month.
   5
     We caution that our results hold in the sense that collaboration experience under the existing set of
promotion policies positively predicts managerial value added. If firms began to heavily weight collaboration
experience in promotion decisions, workers could potentially add fake collaborators by sharing credits. Recent
examples of the gaming of various evaluation metrics include Benson (2015); Larkin (2014); Oyer (1998).


                                                      3
worker’s probability of promotion. To satisfy the exclusion restriction, these average
promotion rates must be uncorrelated with managerial performance. In general, this may
not be true: high average promotion rates may reflect strong consumer demand or other
time-varying firm shocks that affect the performance of all sales workers and may thus be
correlated with managerial performance. In our setting, however, we measure a manager’s
quality as his or her value added to subordinate sales, net of worker and firm-year-month
fixed effects. Because our instruments only vary across firm-year-months, they are—by
construction—orthogonal to our measures of manager value added, which are extracted
from a regression that controls for firm-year-month fixed effects. After accounting for
selection, we continue to find a strong, negative predictive relation between pre-promotion
sales performance and manager value added.
    In addition to addressing potential selection biases, we also provide evidence in Section 5
that our results are not driven by other potential measurement issues such as mean reversion,
non-linear relations, or the unwillingness of some top sales workers to accept promotion
offers. We further test whether managers with high pre-promotion sales contribute to the
firm in other ways, such as by retaining more skilled subordinates, and find no evidence that
high-sales managers are better on these dimensions.
    We next assess the magnitude of the costs associated with promoting high-performing
sales workers at the expense of promoting the best potential managers. To do this, we
compare the predicted managerial performance of actually promoted workers to the predicted
managerial performance of workers who would have been promoted under a counterfactual
policy in which firms weigh worker observables solely to maximize managerial quality. We
find that average managerial quality, as measured by value added to subordinate sales, is 30
percent higher under the counterfactual policy.
    We emphasize here that finding evidence of the Peter Principle does not imply that
firms make mistakes. Alternative promotion policies that maximize managerial match
quality may lead to the loss of incentive benefits associated with existing promotion
policies. Indeed, a promotion policy that favors top sales workers may provide a variety of
incentive benefits that justify the costs of managerial mismatch. For example, such policies
may preserve tournament incentives (Lazear and Rosen 1981), especially if workers
strongly value the security, stature (e.g. DellaVigna and Pope 2016; Larkin 2011), or
external signaling abilities associated with promotions (DeVaro and Waldman 2012).
Prioritizing objective performance measures in promotions may also improve incentives by
avoiding favoritism (Fisman et al. 2017; Prendergast and Topel 1996) and maintaining pay


                                              4
equity and fairness norms (e.g., Larkin, Pierce and Gino 2012). Promotion policies based
on verifiable performance metrics such as sales may also discourage the manipulation of
other, more fungible performance metrics such as credit sharing and collaboration
experience (DeVaro and Gürtler 2015; Fisman and Wang 2017). What our findings do
suggest is that the costs of not promoting the best potential managers are high: firms
appear willing to forgo a 30 percent improvement in subordinate performance to achieve
better incentives or to avoid costly politicking.
    Our final two results explore how firms trade off the benefits of using promotion-based
incentives against the costs of managerial mismatch. If firms consciously choose to provide
strong incentives at the expense of selecting the best managers, we would expect to find more
evidence of the Peter Principle in settings in which promotion-based incentives are relatively
important and less evidence in settings where managerial quality is relatively important.
    We first examine how promotion policies vary with differences in managerial
responsibility. In particular, the cost of promoting bad managers is likely to be higher
when managers lead large teams, and so we would expect firms with larger teams to place
less weight on sales performance and more weight on collaboration experience in their
promotion choices. This is indeed what we find in our data: when the quality of managers
is relatively more important, firms appear more willing to promote workers who are weaker
in terms of pre-promotion sales but more likely to be effective managers.
    Similarly, firms should place less weight on current performance in promotions if they
have chosen to incentivize worker performance in other ways. For a subset of our data, we
observe both variable and fixed worker compensation, which allows us to measure how
much each firm uses explicit pay-for-performance. We find that firms with stronger
pay-for-performance—defined as those in which commissions and bonuses are large on
average relative to fixed compensation—put less weight on sales performance when making
promotion decisions. While this finding suggests that pay-for-performance can partially
substitute for promotion-based incentives, it does not imply that pay-for-performance can
eliminate the costs associated with the Peter Principle.         Indeed, relative to other
occupations, sales is associated with high pay-for-performance, and yet we continue to find
evidence consistent with the Peter Principle. This again suggests that the incentive power
of promotions may be quite important in practice. Pay-for-performance may not always be
the most cost-effective way to motivate workers (Cullen and Perez-Truglia 2018),6 and
  6
    Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2018) use experimental evidence in the field to show that horizontal pay
inequality (which could result from pay-for-performance) can demotivate workers, whereas vertical pay
inequality (which could result from promotion-related incentives) can motivate workers.


                                                  5
workers may additionally value managerial titles associated with promotion because they
confer status and can be readily advertised on resumes (DeVaro and Waldman 2012;
Waldman 2003).
    In general, our results do not allow us to reject the possibility that firms make mistakes
in their promotion decisions. However, they do suggest that firms are aware of the trade-off
between providing worker incentives and selecting good managers, and attempt to set their
promotion policies accordingly.
    This study offers the first empirical test of the Peter Principle using data on promotions
across a large number of firms. Although theoretical work and reviews have hypothesized
that promotions based on current job performance may yield managerial mismatch (Fairburn
and Malcomson 2001; Lazear 2004; Waldman 2003), there is little empirical work that tests
the Peter Principle directly. Our paper is most closely related to Grabner and Moers (2013),
which shows that a bank places less weight on current job performance when a promotion
would be to a job performing dissimilar tasks. However, Grabner and Moers use data from
a single firm and do not attempt to estimate the overall cost of the Peter Principle.
    Our analysis is motivated by research showing that managerial quality is an important
determinant of firm productivity (e.g., Bloom and Reenen 2007). A large related literature
on corruption in leadership dating back to Weber (1947) attributes the existence of bad
leaders to selection policies that are polluted by nepotism and cronyism. However, our
findings suggest that promotion policies that are more meritocratic or “fair” may still be
problematic, as promoting based on merits in the current job—rather than on managerial
potential—may still result in bad leaders.
   Our analysis is also related to recent findings in Kaplan, Klebanov and Sorensen (2012)
and Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) showing that execution ability, interpersonal skills, and
other general skills are associated with performance in executive roles. These findings
underscore the possibility that promoting based on lower-level job skills rather than
managerial skills can be extremely costly. Our findings also relate to the literature
exploring the declining popularity of internal promotions and the rising popularity of
external managers or directors (e.g., Murphy and Zabojnik 2004). The decision to hire an
external manager must weigh the benefits of expanding the field of candidates to improve
the quality of an eventual match against the costs of reducing incentives for internal
candidates. The Peter Principle may also be very relevant for entrepreneurial firms, which
must decide whether to keep founders and early team members in leadership roles as the




                                              6
business scales or bring in external talent whose skills may be better suited to management
(Ewens and Marx 2016; Hellmann and Puri 2002).


1     Setting and data
   Our data come from a firm that offers sales performance management (SPM) software
over the cloud. The firm’s clients input their employee records, organizational hierarchies,
and sales transactions into the software, which then calculates pay for each individual
worker. Transaction inputs can be entered manually or linked to order management and
customer relationship management software. Pay outputs are typically linked directly to
payroll software. The software also provides reporting and analysis. Sales workers and sales
managers can view their sales credits, progress toward quotas, commissions, and other
data. The software can also generate reports for use in auditing and compliance with
Sarbanes-Oxley.
    The data include 214 client firms and 53,035 sales workers, 1,531 of whom are promoted
to managerial roles. The most-represented industries include manufacturing (62 firms),
information technology and services (56 firms), and professional services (38 firms). In
2011, sales workers in the US earned a median monthly wage of $2,070 and about half
worked in retail sales (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2011). By contrast, sales workers in our
data predominantly work in business-to-business sales and earn a median monthly
commission of $3,658, not including base salary and bonuses. Table 1 provides descriptive
statistics for sample coverage. All firms have at least one complete fiscal year of data, and
no one firm constitutes more than 8 percent of person-months.


1.1    Overview of sales positions
    Sales workers are typically assigned a market consisting of a territory, a set of products, or
a type of client. Within their market, they are responsible for generating leads on potential
new clients, making first contact, executing the initial sale, cross-selling other products,
selling upgrades, and maintaining relationships. The sales industry refers to this process as
the sales cycle.
   The primary measure of a salesperson’s performance is the total dollar value of the sales
to which he or she contributes. Our data include 156 million sales transactions tied to
individual workers. Table 1 describes the distribution of sales generated. Because sales tend


                                                7
to be intermittent and can vary over the year, we report rolling averages of sales credits
in the previous 12 months. The quartiles for monthly worker sales are $49,956, $285,573,
and $1.54 million (in 2010 dollars). Reflecting the wide and skewed distribution of sales
standards across markets in which workers operate, the mean of this figure is $3.62 million.
    Figure 1 also illustrates the skewness in the distribution of sales. The top left panel
presents a histogram for the raw distribution of worker-level monthly sales (measured as 12
month rolling averages). The middle left panel plots the log of monthly sales, and shows
that this follows a less skewed distribution. The bottom left panel, which reflects our main
measure of sales performance, shows the residual distribution of monthly sales after
controlling for firm-year-month fixed effects. In other words, we measure sales performance
as the recent performance of a sales worker compared to others in her same company at the
same period in time. Even with these fixed effects, we still observe wide variation in sales
credits across workers. The interquartile range of residual log sales is 2.49, meaning that,
among rank and file sales workers in the same firm in the same year-month, a worker in the
75th percentile generates approximately e2.49 = 12.1 times as much revenue as one in the
25th percentile. Although this difference is stark, it’s also consistent with the so-called
“80-20 rule,” a well-known heuristic in the sales industry that states that the top 20
percent of the sales force is responsible for 80 percent of sales.
    In addition to total sales, we also observe collaboration experience. In the potentially
complex business-to-business sales settings that constitute the majority of our data, sales
transactions are often credited to more than one worker. For example, a relationship
manager may be a client’s single point of contact. For specialized products and services,
the relationship manager may consult a product specialist, and, if a sale is made, both the
relationship manager and the product specialist would receive a credit. For complex
products and services, a single transaction can involve salespeople across many sales
functions, products, and geographies. In our data, we observe all workers credited on a
transaction and define a salesperson’s collaboration experience as her average number of
distinct colleagues per order over the past 12 months (or for her tenure if less than a year).
A salesperson’s collaboration history can serve as a proxy for both experience in working in
teams and experience with more complex products that require more coordination to sell.
    Table 1 presents summary statistics for collaboration, and Figure 1 presents histograms
of the distribution of the mean number of collaborators a sales worker has per order, over
the past year (or her tenure if less than a year). Over 40 percent of workers worked alone
in the past year, while the remainder vary greatly in their number of collaborators. This


                                              8
difference does not merely reflect differences in work organization across firms or over time.
The bottom-right panel of Figure 1 shows that even within the same firm-year-month, there
is substantial variation in the extent to which workers collaborate on sales. The within
firm-year-month interquartile range of sales collaborators is 1.19, signifying that the 75th
percentile worker has e1.19 = 3.28 times as many collaborators as the 25th percentile worker.
    This variation highlights two archetypal sales workers: those who are the only person
credited on transactions and those who share sales credits on transactions. Indeed, much of
the practitioner literature emphasizes different performance management practices for these
groups. “Lone wolves” might be recruited for their self-confidence, resilience, and autonomy,
and are stereotypically marked by their reluctance to share leads, best practices, and client
relationship responsibilities with others in the organization. The most effective team players,
by contrast, enable those around them by forwarding leads, crafting sales that include many
others’ territories and products, forwarding established clients to account managers, and
developing team members so they can be effective in these capacities. These lead generation
and origination activities would also generally entitle that salesperson to a portion of the
sales executed by others.7
    The correlation between our sales and collaboration measures is 0.21. While positive
and statistically significant, the moderate correlation shows that there is substantial
variation across these measures: workers can be effective salespeople under various models
of collaboration.
    Table 1 also provides summary statistics for worker compensation. Because our data
provider’s software is designed to track and distribute pay for sales performance, salary is an
optional field and can be missing or measured with error. Based on these limited data, we
believe that the median worker in our sample receives at most $89,000 in base pay per year,
and more likely $50,000 to $60,000 per year in base pay, which is approximately half that of
managers.8 Given that the software outputs commission data that are often linked to payroll,
   7
     We do not assume that collaboration experience is freely chosen by the worker. Indeed, some workers
may be assigned to work alone or in teams. We instead focus on showing that collaboration experience,
which is observable by the firm, positively predicts manager value added.
   8
     The salary figures reported in Table 1 are based on data that are sometimes unclear in terms of units.
Given the manner in which the software interprets these fields on online dashboards and other automated
reports, we believe that the majority of salaries are reported in monthly terms. However, some salary fields
may be populated with annual salaries, and some workers with missing salary data may have missing salary
data precisely because they work fully on commission. We expect the latter bias to affect workers more than
managers, since conversations with our data provider suggest that managers are very rarely paid entirely
on commission. These two biases operate in the same direction and lead us to believe that the true median
monthly salary is lower than the median $7,443 figure reported in this table.



                                                     9
we’re more confident in these measures, although they can still be missing. The median
sales worker earns $3,658 per month in commission pay, slightly less than our estimates of
workers’ base pay, and the 75th percentile sales worker earns the same in commission as in
base pay. These numbers are generally consistent with benchmark data for the relative sizes
of compensation for sales workers. However, total compensation in our data is substantively
greater than BLS estimates for median pay among non-retail sales workers, which ranges
from $48,200 to $71,550 per year. This is unsurprising given that our sample is largely
composed of highly-compensated sales workers who engage in big-ticket business-to-business
sales.
    Our analysis uses monthly sales as the measure of pre-promotion sales performance, which
has the advantage of being highly standardized, and after controlling for firm-year-month
fixed effects, has an easy interpretation. A limitation of our sales performance measure is
that we do not observe the profit margins associated with sales transactions. Nevertheless,
we believe that the relative levels of sales credits among workers in the same firm and time
offers a reasonable approximation of relative sales performance, and in the data, these sales
mechanically determine the ultimate commissions. In theory, we could instead use worker
compensation as a measure of sales performance. However, this approach would also have
disadvantages. First, compensation can be difficult to interpret because firms can “pay for
performance” by paying a high base rate and setting high standards for retention. Second,
compensation doesn’t always correspond to recent performance; for example, in a given
month, workers may receive commissions for origination or renewals for sales that were
made in the distant past. Third, the base pay data can be unreliable since they are not
required by the software and not directly linked to payroll. Therefore, we prefer relative
sales credits as our measure of sales performance.
    While our data have the unique advantage of offering detailed organizational structure
and worker productivity measures, we unfortunately do not observe employee demographic
characteristics such as age, gender, or education. We do observe worker tenure, which may
affect both worker sales and promotion prospects. The tenure variable is censored by the
date the firm began using the SPM software. Therefore, we control for tenure within the
SPM system and its interaction with whether tenure is potentially censored.


1.2    Overview of managerial positions
   In our data, we observe the hierarchical structure linking sales managers to sales
subordinates. For each person in the data, we observe the ID number of at most one direct

                                             10
superior within the hierarchy, as well as the ID numbers of any direct subordinates.
Therefore, we define a worker as someone with zero subordinates and a manager as
someone with at least one subordinate. Some managers are higher up in the hierarchy, and
have subordinates who manage other subordinates. While it would be very interesting to
study promotions from managerial positions into higher level managerial positions, we
observe relatively few promotions into higher levels of management. Therefore, we focus
our analysis on front-line sales workers (those at the bottom of the sales hierarchy), and
managers one level above these front-line sales workers.
    Managers typically have titles such as “territory manager,” “sales director,” “regional
director,” “regional manager,” and “regional vice president.” The last panel of Table 1
summarizes the characteristics of managers in our data. On average, each manager has five
subordinates. Conversations with our data provider suggest that managers typically receive
greater total compensation than their subordinates and have a pay mix that favors base
pay rather than commission pay. Consistent with this, managers in our data have
significantly higher reported salaries than workers on average and at each quartile of the
pay distribution. In absolute terms, managers also have greater commissions than workers
at each quartile of the commission pay distribution, though managers’ overall pay mix is
more weighted toward base pay. In addition, nonpecuniary rewards are also likely to favor
managers, who typically enjoy greater prestige, opportunities for career progression inside
and outside the firm, benefits, job security, pay security, and better work conditions than
their subordinates. Nevertheless, the top salespeople in our data earn more in commissions
than the median manager. This raises the possibility that some top sales workers in our
sample may prefer not to be promoted to managerial positions. We’ll return to this
potential selection concern in the empirical section.
    Managers also perform substantially different tasks. While sales workers are primarily
engaged in direct sales activities, sales managers are responsible for building a
high-performing sales team and earn commissions as a function of their team’s
performance. A survey of front line sales managers by the Sales Management Association
(2008) reports that sales managers spend the most time on performance management,
followed by company administration, sales planning, selling and market development, and
staff deployment. Performance management requires leadership, coaching, and training
skills that may be imperfectly related to those used in direct sales activities.
Administrative duties require general management knowledge so that the sales manager
can interface with other functions, such as marketing and operations. Sales planning


                                            11
requires data analysis skills so that managers can read market research, set quotas, assign
territories, monitor performance, and prioritize sales activities. Sales managers also oversee
the development of playbooks that compile best practices and outline the company’s
strategy for selling their products. Successfully executing these activities reflects in the
performance of their teams. For example, if the manager misreads market research, sales
workers could be misallocated to unproductive products or territories, quotas could be set
at unattainably demotivating thresholds, or training could encourage salespeople to
emphasize the wrong product features for their market.

Measuring manager quality

    Because sales managers are ultimately responsible for improving the performance of their
subordinates, we measure managerial performance as the impact of the manager on the sales
of his or her subordinates. In general, any measure of managerial performance that relies
on subordinate performance may be biased by the non-random assignment of managers to
subordinates. For example, if a manager is assigned to high-performing subordinates, the
high sales numbers for these subordinates should not be attributed to the manager’s skill.
Indeed, Table 8, presented in later sections, shows that managers with high pre-promotion
sales tend to be assigned to subordinates who had relatively high sales under their previous
managers.
   To address these concerns, we follow Lazear, Shaw and Stanton (2016), as well as Hoffman
and Tadelis (2018) and a large literature on employer-employee, and teacher-student matched
data (e.g., Abowd et al. 2001), and estimate a manager’s performance as his or her value
added from a regression of the form:

                     Log(1 + Salesimf t ) = a + δi + δm + δf ×t + Xit + eimf t                        (1)

    Here, the dependent variable is the log of worker i’s sales performance under manager m
in firm f in year-month t. δi , δm , and δf ×t represent worker, manager, and firm-year-month
fixed effects, respectively.9 Xit represents worker-time characteristics, which in our setting
represents seven bins for worker tenure each interacted with an indicator for whether tenure
is potentially censored. The coefficients of interest are the manager fixed effects, δm , which
is the average, time-invariant component of a manager’s quality or value added.
   9
    We estimate this regression using the Stata package felsdvreg. Rather than estimating δf ×t directly,
we demean the outcome variable by firm-year-month prior to estimation in order to reduce the computational
demands of the regression specification.


                                                   12
    By including both manager and worker fixed effects, manager value added is identified
from workers whom we observe under multiple managers. A manager’s fixed effect represents
the average change in sales performance across all workers who switch to or from that
manager. As such, a manager with a high value added is one under whom workers perform
above their individual mean across all the managers under whom they have worked. Whether
a manager is assigned to strong or weak subordinates should not impact our measure of value
added because a manager is credited only for changes in the performance of her subordinates.
Further, firm-year-month fixed effects net out macroeconomic, industry-specific, and other
firm-time specific conditions that may impact subordinate sales performance.
    Estimating managerial quality as the manager’s value added as in Equation (1) has
clear advantages, as described above. However, we also acknowledge that it is an imperfect
measure. First, our estimates of manager value added are likely to be noisy. In Equation
(1), the dependent variable is worker monthly sales, which varies widely, with some workers
making zero sales in some months and large sales in others.10 Classical measurement error
in worker sales will add noise to our measures of manager value added. However, our tests
of the Peter Principle will regress manager value added on each manager’s pre-promotion
sales experience. Noise in manager value added (the dependent variable in the regression)
will reduce our statistical power but should not bias our estimated coefficients.
    One may still be concerned, however, that our estimates of manager value added are
systematically biased. This could happen if managers are non-randomly assigned to
subordinates on the basis of time-varying subordinate performance. For example, if some
types of managers tend to be assigned to subordinates whose sales performance is on an
increasing trend, then Equation (1) may mistakenly attribute subsequent sales gains by
those employees to the manager’s ability. Our estimates may also be biased if workers are
assigned to managers based on match-specific quality; in this case, we could not interpret a
manager’s estimated value added as his or her value added for the average worker. Instead,
the worker’s change in sales could be due to the quality of the match between the worker
and the new manager or team.
   However, our tests of the Peter Principle remain valid even with the existence of such
biases in the estimates of manager value added, as long as the biases in value added are not
  10
    In later regressions where we test how sales performance predicts promotions, we used backward rolling
averages of sales to smooth this variation, but we do not use backward rolling averages in Equation (1)
because we are interested in measuring changes in performance as workers move across managers; backward
averages would contaminate measures of manager value added by including worker performance under
previous managers.



                                                   13
related to the manager’s pre-promotion sales performance. In particular, our main test of
the Peter Principle will regress estimates of value added on the manager’s pre-promotion
sales performance. For example, non-random assignment of some managers to workers on
upward time trends in performance will not impact our conclusions as long as this
non-random assignment to time-varying worker performance is uncorrelated with a
manager’s pre-promotion sales.
    In Section 5, we test for non-random assignment directly and show that managers are
not assigned to workers with trending sales performance on the basis of the managers’
pre-promotion characteristics. Further, if it were the case that we mistakenly assigned
some managers higher value added on the basis of their subordinates’ time-trends in
performance, then we would expect there to be a correlation between a manager’s
estimated value added and the recent prior performance of his or her new subordinates. In
Section 5, we show that this is not the case.

Summary statistics: manager quality

   Table 2 presents summary statistics for our estimates of manager value added. We
observe 6,515 managers in our data, of whom we are able to estimate fixed effects for 4,887.
This lowered number comes from the high bar required to identify manager fixed effects:
to estimate a fixed effect for a given manager, we must observe that manager supervising
multiple subordinates whose own fixed effects are known through their work under other
managers. Many managers in our sample do not have subordinates whose performance we
observe under other managers.
    Our sample is also constrained to managers within groups of workers and managers who
are connected through moves. For instance, a connected group might contain a manager, her
new subordinates, the previous managers of those subordinates, and the other subordinates of
those managers. Fixed effects for managers within the same connected group are comparable
relative to a group-specific normalization. For the average firm in our sample, 76.5 percent of
workers are part of this largest connected group. To make these fixed effects more comparable
across firms, we further demean them by firm specific averages. Because we estimate manager
fixed effects with varying precision, we weight summary statistics and regressions involving
these fixed effects by the inverse variance of our estimates.
   Finally, to estimate the relation between pre-promotion characteristics and
post-promotion managerial performance, we must further restrict the sample to observed



                                              14
promotions. We have information on both manager value added and pre-promotion
characteristics for 1,028 managers who are promoted during our sample period.
   Figure 2 plots the distribution of our estimates of manager value added. By construction,
manager value added has a mean of zero. The 25th percentile of this distribution is -0.71,
implying that, when assigned to a 25th percentile manager, a worker’s output is e−0.71 = 0.49
of what it would have been under the mean manager. Conversely, when assigned to a 75th
percentile manager, a worker’s output increases by a factor of e0.85 = 2.34.
    Note that this interquartile range may be large because it reflects real differences in
managerial performance or because of noise in the estimation of manager fixed effects, which
exaggerates the variance.11 Our analysis will regress these manager fixed effects on variables
representing the managers’ pre-promotion characteristics. Error in the dependent variable
in these regressions should not bias our estimates of how mean differences in manager value
added relate to pre-promotion characteristics. However, this additional noise raises the
model’s standard errors and upwardly biases our estimates of the variance of manager fixed
effects.


2      What predicts promotion?
    Our first empirical exercise examines how the sales and collaboration experience of front
line sales workers predict promotion to management:

             Promoteif t = a1 Salesif t + a2 Collaboratorsif t + Wif t + δf ×t + eif t                  (2)

We estimate a probit model for Equation (2) on a worker-year-month level panel for worker
i at firm f who has not yet been promoted as of year-month t in which at least one worker
at the firm is promoted. The dependent variable, Promoteif t , is an indicator for whether a
worker is promoted in the next month. Salesif t is the log of one plus worker i’s monthly sales
credits, averaged over the past 12 months or over the worker’s total tenure if it spans fewer
than 12 months. Because sales varies significantly across firms and with market conditions,
we demean worker sales by the mean in each firm-year-month. Thus, Salesif t represents
each worker’s sales performance relative to other workers in the firm during the same time
  11
    As discussed earlier, regressions presented in later sections that estimate the mean expected difference
in manager value added across managers with different pre-promotion attributes remain unbiased because
noise in the dependent variable should not bias regression coefficients, though they may increase standard
errors.



                                                    15
period. Collaboratorsif t is the log of one plus worker i’s average number of collaborators per
order, again averaged over the past 12 months or over the total tenure if it spans fewer than
12 months. The other covariates Wif t include fixed effects for seven bins of worker tenure,
interacted with whether tenure may be censored in the data. Some specifications also control
for the industry-wide and firm-wide promotion rates in the current month.
    Equation (2) estimates the determinants of firm “promotion policies,” which we use as an
umbrella term for the ultimate outcome in terms of which workers transition into managerial
positions. We caution that firm “promotion policies” refer to more than the firm’s choice of
which workers to offer promotion opportunities, it also depends on the terms of the promotion
offer and whether workers accept. We present a detailed discussion of non-random selection
into the sample of promoted workers in Section 3.1.
    Table 3 reports the regression results. We find that firms are significantly more likely
to promote higher performing salespeople. This result is robust across specifications that
control for a worker’s pre-promotion tenure and the industry- or firm-level promotion rates
in each year-month. The estimate in Column 4 implies that a doubling of a worker’s relative
sales performance corresponds to a 0.030 percentage point increase in a worker’s probability
of being promoted, or a 14.3 percent increase relative to the base rate.12 We also note that
a doubling of a worker’s relative sales performance is not an unusual occurrence in our data
given the wide dispersion in worker sales—it is equivalent to a worker moving from the 50th
to the 67th percentile in terms of relative worker sales.
    By contrast, workers with high collaboration experience do not appear, in most
specifications, to be more likely to be promoted—despite, as we will later show,
collaboration experience being predictive of manager value added. In Appendix Table A1,
we present results using an OLS model of promotion instead of a probit model. The OLS
model also accommodates firm-year-month fixed effects as additional control variables. We
continue to find that sales positively predicts promotion, while collaboration experience
insignificantly predicts or negatively predicts promotion probability.
    The estimates presented in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 additionally control for industry
or firm-level promotion rates in each year month. As expected, industry- and firm-level
promotion rates are highly predictive of worker promotion probability. We will use this
result in later analysis when we instrument for a worker’s probability of promotion.
  12
    A doubling of sales corresponds to a 0.699 log point increase in the independent variable. This leads to
a 0.699*0.043=0.030 percentage point increase in the likelihood of promotion, relative to a base rate of 0.21
percent, making for a 0.030/0.21=14.3 percentage point increase.




                                                     16
3    What predicts managerial performance?
   Next, we examine the relation between pre-promotion worker characteristics and
post-promotion manager value added:

 Manager Value Addedif = b1 Pre-Promotion Salesif + b2 Pre-Promotion Collaboratorsif
                                +Wif + uif                                                  (3)

    We estimate Equation (3) at the manager level because manager value added is defined
as a time-invariant manager characteristic. Pre-Promotion Salesif is the log of one plus
manager i’s monthly sales credits as a worker, averaged over the 12 months prior to i’s
promotion or over the total tenure if it spans fewer than 12 months. Analogous to the
demeaned measure of worker sales in Equation (2), Pre-Promotion Salesif is also demeaned
by the average sales performance of all workers in the sample in the same firm-year-month
to account for variation in market conditions. Thus, Pre-Promotion Salesif represents each
manager’s pre-promotion sales performance relative to other workers in the firm during the
same time period.
    Similarly, Pre-Promotion Collaboratorsif is the log of one plus manager i’s average
number of collaborators per order in the year prior to promotion or over the total tenure if
it spans fewer than 12 months. In some specifications, we also control for manager i’s
tenure in the month prior to the promotion event.
    Table 4 shows that, among promoted managers, there is a significant negative relation
between pre-promotion sales performance and subsequent managerial performance.
Column 2 shows that doubling a manager’s pre-promotion sales corresponds to a 7.5
percent decline in manager value added. Since manager value added represents the change
in log subordinate sales, this implies that a manager with double the pre-promotion sales
leads each subordinate’s sales to decline by 7.5 percent. Given that a typical manager is in
charge of five subordinates, our results also imply that a doubling of a manager’s
pre-promotion sales predicts that total team sales under the new manager will decline by
more than one third of one worker. By contrast, collaboration experience is positively
correlated with manager value added. In Column 2, we find that doubling collaboration
experience predicts a 15.8 percent improvement in manager value added.
   While it may seem counterintuitive that good sales workers make worse managers because
both roles are likely to require social skills, the business press offers some insights into why
excellence in sales may translate negatively into managerial quality. Sevy (2016), in an Forbes

                                              17
article “Why Great Sales People Make Terrible Sales Managers,” argues that great sales
workers are motivated by a desire for personal—rather than team—achievement: “success
in sales is about me while success in sales management is about my team. This is where
the downside of a strong achievement drive makes itself known. If I’m driven to prove my
personal ability, I find it hard (nearly impossible sometimes) to step back and let others
take the spotlight.” Consistent with the idea that sales performance may be negatively
correlated with team commitment, we show in later analysis that lone-wolf sales workers
(that is, those that have never collaborated in group sales) tend to have low manager value
added as managers.
    In some cases, workers are promoted to replace their former managers. In these types
of promotions, one may be concerned that our estimates of the relation between manager
value added and pre-promotion characteristics may be driven by spillover effects on the team
that loses the high performing salesperson. When a high performing salesperson is promoted
to manage her previous teammates, the salesperson’s existing pipeline and territory could
roll over to the salesperson’s former peers, giving a temporary boost to the newly promoted
manager’s estimated value added. If scenarios like this cause the net spillover effect to
be positively correlated with sales performance, then this would bias us against finding
evidence of the Peter Principle: better salespeople would appear to become better managers.
Alternatively, promoting high performing salespeople could disrupt relationships or accounts
for which peers share credit or cause resentment. If promoting high performers has net
negative spillovers, then we would be biased toward finding evidence of the Peter Principle.
   To examine whether changes in performance are driven by spillovers, we further restrict
our sample to managers who are promoted to largely different teams. Specifically, we require
that more than two-thirds of the newly promoted manager’s assigned subordinates were not
previously a peer, where a peer is defined as someone also working under the same manager.
In Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4, we find similar results in this restricted sample.


3.1    Correcting for selection
   The empirical results so far show that firms promote based on current job performance
even though pre-promotion sales negatively predict managerial performance and another
observable characteristic, collaboration experience, positively predicts managerial
performance. This evidence is consistent with the Peter Principle and the idea that firms
promote based upon current job performance at the expense of promoting the best
potential managers. However, these results are estimated from the selected sample of

                                            18
workers who are actually promoted. Because promotion is not random, the relationship
between sales and managerial performance in the promoted sample may not reflect the true
relationship among all workers. For example, suppose that firms promote to maximize
expected managerial match quality, which is a positive function of sales performance plus
some other unobserved worker characteristic. In this example, strong sales performance can
make up for deficits in the unobserved dimension, meaning that, among promoted workers,
high sales workers will tend be weaker on unobservables than low sales workers. This type
of selection would negatively bias our estimates of the true relation between pre-promotion
sales and managerial quality, and may lead us to mistakenly conclude that sales
performance negatively predicts managerial performance in the overall sample, even if the
true relationship were positive and firms were indeed promoting the best potential
managers. Selection bias can also lead to a positive bias in the estimated relation between
sales and manager value added. Top sales people with weak unobservables may be more
likely to turn down promotion offers because they expect to earn more in their current
positions. If so, sales and unobserved managerial ability will be positively correlated in the
selected sample of workers who are offered and accept promotions. We discuss this type of
selection in more detail in Section 5.
    To address this measurement challenge, we apply a two-step selection model in the style
of Heckman (1976), Heckman (1979), Gronau (1974), and Lewis (1974). The goal of this
selection correction is to recover the predictive relationship between sales performance and
latent managerial potential for the full sample of workers, so that we can assess whether firms
indeed promote high performing sales workers even though sales performance negatively
predicts managerial performance.
   Suppose that the underlying relationship between latent managerial potential Mi and
worker characteristics is given by:

                       Mi = β1 Salesi + β2 Collaboratorsi + Xi β3 + εi .                   (4)

However, we only observe Mi if workers are promoted. The firm’s promotion policy is given
by:
               Pi = I (τ1 Salesi + τ2 Collaboratorsi + Xi τ3 + Zi τ4 + µi > 0)        (5)

This promotion equation is flexible and allows promotion to depend on observable worker
characteristics that impact managerial potential (Salesi , Collaboratorsi , and Xi ) as well as
other factors Zi that affect the probability of promotion but not managerial potential. We


                                              19
do not impose any restrictions on the relation between Equations (4) and (5) other than the
standard assumption in Heckman-style selection models that their respective error terms are
jointly normally distributed with mean zero and correlation ρ, and that there exist variables
Zi that affect promotion but do not relate to managerial performance (discussed shortly).
    Our empirical test of the Peter Principle centers on showing that both τ1 > 0 (firms
are more likely to promote high-performing salespeople) and β1 < 0 (higher-performing
salespeople are more likely to be worse managers). If this were the case in the full sample
of workers, it would have to be that better sales performers were receiving some kind of
positive boost in promotion probability unrelated to their managerial potential. We have
already shown τ1 > 0 in the full sample of workers, and we now seek to recover β1 after
correcting for sample selection.
    Before continuing, we note that τ1 > 0 and β1 < 0 is a sufficient but not necessary criterion
for the Peter Principle. Firms may be promoting the best sales workers at the expense of
managerial match quality even if the underlying relation between sales and latent managerial
performance is positive. In such cases, firms may simply place too much weight on sales
performance in promotion decisions and thereby overemphasize current job performance at
the expense of promoting the best potential managers. In other words, the Peter Principle
could still apply if τ1 > 0 and β1 > 0, but τ1 were too large relative to the weights on
other characteristics in the promotion rule. In practice, we will show that sales performance
continues to negatively predict managerial performance after correcting for selection, so any
positive weight on sales in the promotion decision represents a promotion policy that does
not maximize managerial match quality.
   In our setting, latent managerial performance defined in Equation (4) is observed only
when workers are promoted according to the rule defined in Equation (5). Following the
standard Heckman correction procedure, we first estimate promotion propensity in the full
worker-month level panel using a probit model:

  Pr(Pif t = 1|Salesif t , Collaboratorsif t , Xif t , Zif t )
                                         = Φ(a1 Salesif t + a2 Collaboratorsif t + Xif t a3 + Zif t a4 ) (6)

This first stage is identical to the probit regression model that was already presented in
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3. We then recover estimates for the βs in Equation (4) by
estimating a regression similar to Equation (3)—presented earlier—also controlling for the




                                                        20
inverse Mills ratio, λi , of the fitted values from the first stage regression:

                    Mi = b1 Salesi + b2 Collaboratorsi + Xi b3 + b4 λi + ei .               (7)

This selection model allows us to recover unbiased estimates for the βs in Equation (4).
Here, the inverse Mills ratio is a function of sales, collaborations, and other covariates X and
Z. Crucially, we assume that there exist variables Zi that impact a worker’s probability of
promotion, but not her managerial potential. If this assumption holds, then λi is separately
identified from the other variables in the second stage regression because we assume that Zi
does not directly impact managerial performance and thus would not directly enter into this
regression. This is equivalent to saying that the Zi s are instruments for promotion.
    For Zi , we use of industry-level or firm-level promotion rates. As shown in Columns 3
and 4 of Table 3, these average promotion rates are strongly positively correlated with a
worker’s probability of promotion. However, one may be concerned that differences in
industry or company conditions captured by promotion rates may also reflect strong
consumer demand and other firm-level factors, which may directly impact the performance
of managers. Formally, industry-level or firm-level average promotion rates must be
orthogonal to latent managerial potential in the full set of workers. While it is impossible
to fully test this exclusion restriction because we do not observe latent managerial
performance for the full sample of workers, we measure managerial quality as the value
added of managers to subordinate sales, after controlling for worker and firm-year-month
fixed effects. As such, our measure of manager quality among promoted workers is—by
construction—orthogonal to our instruments for selection, which do not vary within
year-month for a given firm.
    Before continuing, we note that this approach allows us to recover the predictive
relationship between worker characteristics and managerial potential in the full sample of
workers and is not intended to establish a causal relation between these characteristics and
managerial performance. For example, it remains possible that something correlated with
sales performance, rather than sales performance per se, causes lower managerial
performance. The same logic applies to collaboration experience. In addition, workers may
not have the option to choose their level of collaboration if their products and collaborators
are assigned by the firm. In this case, collaboration experience may not reflect a worker’s
underlying preferences for teamwork. Nevertheless, we argue that understanding the
underlying predictive relation between observable worker characteristics and managerial



                                                21
performance can aid firm promotion decisions even absent causality. Firms can still take
these observable characteristics into account to promote the best potential managers.
    Table 5 reports the relationship between pre-promotion characteristics and manager
value added, corrected for selection. We continue to find that sales performance negatively
predicts manager value added. Using industry-month level promotion rates as the selection
instruments in Column 1, we estimate that a doubling (0.7 log point increase) in
pre-promotion sales performance predicts a 7.4 percent decline in the sales performance of
subordinates. Controlling for fixed effects in a manager’s pre-promotion tenure in Column
2 does not make a difference. Using firm-month promotion rates in Columns 3 and 4 also
yields nearly identical estimates. Overall, these estimates are similar in magnitude to those
in Table 4, which did not correct for selection issues.
    In Appendix Table A2, we restrict our sample to promoted managers that are assigned
to subordinates that were not also their former team members. We find similar results in
this sample, suggesting that our findings are not driven by unusual time trends occurring
when workers are promoted to replace their former managers.
    Figure 3 plots the relationship between sales performance, promotion probability, and
manager value added. In the left panel, we see that sales is strongly associated with a
higher probability of promotion, after controlling for firm-year-month fixed effects and
collaboration experience. At the same time, however, this residual sales performance is
negatively correlated with manager value added, even after applying a selection correction.
Further, this figure allows us to look for potential non-monotonicities in the relationship
between pre-promotion characteristics and promotion or manager value added. An inverted
relation for certain parts of the sales distribution would suggest that promoting based on
sales may actually help to maximize managerial match quality, at least within those parts
of the sales distribution. For example, suppose that pre-promotion sales performance
negatively predicts manager value added on average, but positively predicts manager value
added for high values of sales. If so, firms may be maximizing managerial match quality
when they promote based on sales performance, at least among the sample of workers with
high sales. As can been seen in Figure 3, we do not find strong evidence of inversions for
sales.
   In Table 5, we also continue to find that collaboration experience positively predicts
manager value added after applying a selection correction. The estimated magnitudes are
economically large, but significant only when using industry-month rather than firm-month
promotion-rates as the instruments for selection. Across all specifications, a doubling of


                                             22
pre-promotion collaboration experience predicts a 12.3 to 16.9 percent increase in subordinate
performance.
    We explore the relationship between collaboration experience and manager value added
in more detail in Table 6. We find that workers who never collaborate with others—so
called “lone wolves”—fare particularly poorly when they are promoted into managerial
roles. Anecdotally, lone wolves are known within the sales profession to be “the deeply
self-confident, the rule-breaking cowboys of the sales force who do things their way or not
at all” (Dixon and Adamson 2011). In our setting, whether a salesperson works alone or
collaborates with others may either be a choice or be assigned. Regardless, we find that
lone wolf status negatively predicts manager value added. A manager who was a lone wolf
prior to promotion is associated with a 35 percent decrease in subordinate performance,
relative to managers with collaboration experience. Despite this, lone wolves are not less
likely to be promoted. Appendix Table A4 shows the predictive relation between lone wolf
status and promotion; we find, if anything, a positive relation between the two. Similarly,
Appendix Table A3 shows that this result is robust to considering workers promoted to
manage different teams.


4    Could managers contribute in other ways?
    Our results so far show that high-sales managers have lower value added from the
perspective of increasing the average sales performance of their subordinates. It is possible,
however, that managers contribute to firm value in other ways and that high pre-promotion
sales managers may be better at these tasks in a way that justifies their promotion. For
example, managers may play a role in reducing costly worker turnover or in recruiting new
sales employees to expand the operations of the firm.
    In Table 7, we show that, to the extent we are able to measure these behaviors in our
data, high sales managers do not appear to be associated with better performance on these
dimensions. To assess whether high-sales managers contribute by managing larger or more
important divisions, we regress a manager’s pre-promotion characteristics on the size of the
team to which he or she is assigned. All team size and retention measures are demeaned by
the average within a firm-year-month so that we can focus on differences across managers
within the same firm-year-month. Column 1 shows that we find no statistically significant
differences along this dimension. Next, Columns 2 and 3 show that high sales managers do
not appear to be better at growing their team size or reducing turnover, respectively. Finally,


                                              23
Column 4 shows that they are not better at retaining good sales workers while letting go
of poor performers: subordinates departing from the teams of high sales managers appear
to come from the same percentile of the performance distribution as those departing teams
managed by those with poorer pre-promotion sales records. In addition to being statistically
insignificant, these estimates are economically close to zero. For example, the coefficient
of 0.049 in Column 1 signifies that a doubling in pre-promotion sales is associated with
0.034 more subordinates (relative to other teams in the same firm-year-month), an increase
of less than one percent relative to the mean team size. In practice, our estimates are
somewhat noisy and we interpret them as showing that there is no significant evidence that
pre-promotion sales are associated with meaningful differences in performance along other
dimensions.


5    Potential alternative explanations
    The results above are consistent with the Peter Principle, which we define as promotion
policies that favor higher performing workers at the expense of promoting the best potential
managers. In this section, we explore whether alternative explanations or biases could explain
our findings such that firms in our sample actually are promoting the best potential managers.
     Lazear (2004) shows that mean reversion can generate patterns that, on the surface,
look like the Peter Principle. The highest performing sales worker at any point in time may
be a person who is currently selling above her individual mean; if she is promoted at this
point, then her performance as a manager may fall relative to her pre-promotion
performance due to mean reversion. The existence of mean reversion implies that, even if
firms were promoting the best potential managers, we may see a decline in within-person
performance after promotion. Our results cannot be explained by this type of mean
reversion for two fundamental reasons.         First, our empirical tests do not exploit
within-person changes in performance after promotion. Instead, we show that sales
negatively predicts potential managerial value added in the cross-section of workers. That
is, regardless of whether individual workers experience mean reversion after promotion, our
results suggest that firms can improve managerial performance by promoting workers with
strong collaboration experience, rather than those with strong sales performance. Second,
our measure of managerial performance is not based on a manager’s own sales, but is
instead based on the value added to the sales performance of his or her subordinates.



                                             24
Thus, mean reversion in the manager’s own sales performance would not affect our measure
of manager value added.
   Another potential concern is that newly promoted managers may be assigned to
subordinates in a non-random manner. When a worker is promoted to manager, her new
set of subordinates may be non-randomly drawn from the full sample of workers. In
general, a simple correlation between the pre-promotion sales of newly-promoted managers
and the level of performance of their assigned subordinates should not impact our results
because we estimate manager value added from changes in subordinate performance under
the new manager.        However, we remain concerned that managers’ pre-promotion
performance may be correlated with time-varying aspects of a worker’s sales performance.
In particular, managers with high pre-promotion sales may be systematically assigned to
subordinates whose sales are likely to decrease thereafter, for reasons unrelated to that
manager’s quality.
    Table 8 explores the assignment of managers to subordinates. The first key pattern
that emerges is that managers are not randomly assigned to subordinates: a doubling of
a manager’s pre-promotion sales is correlated with an approximately 20 percent increase
in the prior sales of the subordinates to whom he or she is assigned. However, managers
with higher pre-promotion sales do not appear to be assigned to subordinates with different
trends in performance. Table 8, Columns 1, 2, and 3 examine subordinates’ sales in the
7-9, 4-6, and 1-3 months prior to the arrival of the new managers. We find that the sales
performance of subordinates in the 7-9 months prior to being assigned a new manager is just
as predictive of that manager’s pre-promotion sales performance as the subordinate’s sales in
the 1-3 months prior. The stability of these estimates over time suggests that managers with
higher pre-promotion sales are not assigned to subordinates with increasing or decreasing
trends in performance. We also find that managers with high pre-promotion collaboration
experience tend to be assigned to subordinates with lower sales, although this relationship
is not statistically significant, and there are no obvious time trends.
    We also explore potential biases from non-random assignment by considering how
subordinates’ sales prior to a manager’s promotion are correlated with the new manager’s
estimated value added. For example, high performing sales workers may have less scope for
further improvement. If so, managers who are assigned to high prior sales subordinates
may have low value added simply because these subordinates are already such high
performers. In this case, manager value added should be negatively correlated with a
subordinate’s prior sales.     Table 8, Columns 4 and 5 instead show a statistically


                                             25
insignificant relationship between subordinate prior sales and manager value added. In
Column 6, we find a borderline significant positive relationship suggesting that, if anything,
high performing subordinates are associated with higher value added of future managers.
Because managers with high pre-promotion sales are more likely to be assigned to these
high performing subordinates, this positive relation would bias us away from finding
evidence of the Peter Principle.
    One may also be concerned about a different type of selection issue in which some top sales
workers prefer not to be promoted. Although most workers enjoy significant pay increases
after promotion, the very top sales workers in our sample earn more than the typical sales
manager. It may be the case that some top sales workers do not want to be promoted and, as
a consequence, we do not observe managers with very high pre-promotion sales in our sample
of promoted workers. This type of selection is likely to be a bias against our findings that
higher pre-promotion sales is associated with lower manager value added. Sales workers who
are offered promotions should compare their expected pay as managers with their expected
pay as sales workers, and then decide whether to accept the promotion. Thus, workers with
strong sales should only accept promotions if they have very good prospects as managers.
In other words, the selection in terms of who accepts promotion should bias toward finding
that better sales workers make better managers, contrary to our finding that better sales
workers become worse managers.
   Even if it were the case that the very best sales workers actually made good managers
but preferred to remain in their current roles, our results would still indicate that firms were
not maximizing managerial performance by promoting good sales workers. If firms wish to
maximize managerial match quality, they should promote the best potential managers from
the set of workers who would be willing to accept such a promotion.
    Finally, one may also be concerned that our results are influenced by the Great Recession,
which occurs in our sample period. For example, high performing sales workers may be poor
managers in recessions, but good managers otherwise, so that our results may lack external
validity outside of downturns. Tables A5 and A6 provide evidence that this is not the case
by showing that our results are robust to excluding the period of the Great Recession.


6    What are the performance losses from mismatch?
    How much do the observed promotion policies cost firms in terms of lost subordinate
sales? To analyze this, we set aside tournament incentives, worker motivation, monitoring


                                              26
constraints, fairness concerns, and other potential benefits of firms’ promotion rules to focus
instead on the costs of managerial mismatch. Our estimates may be interpreted as the match
quality that firms forgo to use promotions for other purposes.
    To calculate the cost of mismatch, we examine how predicted managerial performance
differs among three groups of workers:         (1) actually promoted salespeople, (2)
non-promoted salespeople among the promoted worker’s peers, and (3) the top predicted
manager among a promoted sales worker’s peers. Peers are defined as other salespeople in
a team managed by the same manager in the same time period. We interpret case (3) to be
the performance-maximizing promotion decision under the restriction that mobility and
other frictions prevent the firm from promoting among the entire organization, so that
firms must promote among the peers of promoted workers. If we relax this restriction, then
the estimated costs of mismatch will further increase. If firms face greater restrictions in
promotions than we impose in our simulation, then we would overestimate the costs of
mismatch.
    We predict manager value added for each group using fitted values from the regression
presented in Table 5, Column 2, modified so that pre-promotion sales are measured as an
equally spaced three-part spline to allow for potential non-linearities.13 Figure 4 shows the
distributions of predicted manager value added in the three groups of workers. The mean
predicted improvement in subordinate sales performance is scaled to zero for the sample of
promoted workers.
    The mean change in subordinate sales performance for the sample of non-promoted
workers is 0.07, implying that firms’ current promotion policies do slightly worse than
promoting at random. This is expected, as firms’ current promotion policies strongly favor
sales performance, and sales performance negatively predicts manager value added (even
when we allow for nonlinear relationships in the counterfactual simulation). Therefore, a
random promotion policy that does not favor high sales workers outperforms the existing
promotion policy in terms of promoting the best potential managers.
    The mean in the sample of best predicted managers is 0.29, implying that subordinate
performance could improve by up to 30 percent if firms pursued an alternative promotion
policy of promoting the best predicted manager within a sales team.14 Our estimate is not
  13
     As discussed previously, the variance of manager value added may be biased upward because of
measurement error in the estimation of the manager fixed effects. However, the measurement error associated
with manager value added should not bias regression coefficients and estimates in this counterfactual, which
uses fitted values from a regression based on Table 5, Column 2.
  14
     We estimate a 30 percent gain in sales if firms switched to a promotion policy in which they promoted
the best potential managers. This number would be even higher if we adjusted for the fact that promoting


                                                    27
meant to suggest that firms would actually achieve 30 percent gains in sales if they switched to
a promotion policy in which they promoted the best potential managers. This counterfactual
estimate ignores potentially large productivity declines that could result due to lost incentive
and other morale effects that may occur if firms switched away from the current promotion
policy of rewarding high sales with promotions. Thus, the 30 percent should be viewed as a
lower bound for how large the incentive and other benefits of promoting the top sales workers
would have to be to rationalize the current set of promotion policies.


7     Heterogeneity across firms
    In this section, we consider whether firms vary in the extent to which they emphasize sales
performance in promotion decisions. If firms are aware of the trade-off between maximizing
managerial match quality and providing incentives for workers in their current roles, then
we would expect firms to behave differently depending on the specific costs and benefits
they face. For example, firms in which managers have greater responsibility may place more
weight on picking the best managers and may therefore be more willing to promote workers
who are weaker in terms of sales performance. Similarly, firms that have alternative ways
of incentivizing workers to exert effort in their current job roles may prioritize managerial
match quality more in their promotion decisions.
    Table 9 considers the first possibility by examining how promotion policies differ across
firms by the supervisory responsibilities assigned to managers. We use the number of
subordinates associated with each manager as a proxy for managerial responsibility and
then take averages to obtain a firm-level measure. We then augment Equation (2), which
examines a worker’s likelihood of promotion, by interacting our measures of worker’s sales
and collaboration experience with the log of average team sizes each firm-year. Our
estimation also controls for the direct effects of all variables.
    Our results show that firms with larger subordinate teams tend to place less weight on
sales performance in promotion decisions. A doubling of average team size reduces the
predictive relationship between sales performance and promotion by over 25 percent. By
contrast, firms with larger team sizes place relatively more weight on collaboration
experience. These findings suggest that, when the costs of managerial mismatch are
lower sales workers results in less foregone sales, given that managers are no longer engaged in direct front
line sales.




                                                     28
particularly high, firms are more willing to sacrifice possible incentive benefits of
performance-based promotion tournaments in order to promote better managers.
    Next, we consider how promotion policies vary with pay-for-performance. Baker, Jensen
and Murphy (1988) suggest that pay-for-performance incentivizes worker effort and may
offer an alternative to the tournament incentives associated with promotion policies that
heavily weight current job performance. To explore this possibility, we construct a firm-level
measure of pay-for-performance as the ratio of commissions and bonuses to base salary,
averaged across all workers in the firm within each calendar year. Before proceeding, we
note that, although we observe commission and bonus compensation for most workers in our
sample, we only observe base salaries for a subsample of firms, leading to an approximate
35 percent decline in sample size for this analysis. Further, as discussed previously, our data
provider’s software is not designed to track or distribute base salaries, which is an optional
field. Therefore, salary data can be missing or measured with error (for example, if they
are not updated or the pay periods are unclear). Nevertheless, we are able to construct a
reasonable, if noisy, proxy for the strength of pay-for-performance incentives across firms in
our data.
    As with our team size analysis, we regress whether a worker is promoted on the interaction
between our measure of pay-for-performance and worker sales and collaboration experience.
We find that firms with relatively stronger pay-for-performance tend to implement promotion
policies that are less sensitive to worker sales performance and more sensitive to collaboration
experience. This is consistent with the idea that pay-for-performance incentives can partially
offset the need to provide incentives through promotion tournaments based on current job
performance. However, our results do not necessarily imply that pay-for-performance can
fully substitute for promotion based-incentives. Pay-for-performance may be an expensive
substitute for promotion-based incentives, especially if workers also value the security, stature
(e.g. DellaVigna and Pope 2016; Larkin 2011), or external signaling abilities associated with
promotions (DeVaro and Waldman 2012). The sales positions we study already have strong
pay-for-performance relative to many other occupations. The fact that we still observe
evidence of the Peter Principle in the sales setting suggests that it may be difficult to fully
substitute for promotion-based incentives.




                                               29
8    Conclusion
    We use detailed microdata on the performance and promotions of sales workers at a large
number of firms to test the adage that “the best salesperson doesn’t always make the best
manager.” Consistent with the Peter Principle, we find that promotion decisions place more
weight on current performance than would be justified if firms only tried to promote the
best potential managers. The most productive worker is not always the best candidate for
manager, and yet firms are significantly more likely to promote top frontline sales workers
into managerial positions. As a result, the performance of a new manager’s subordinates
declines relatively more after the managerial position is filled by someone who was a strong
salesperson prior to promotion. This is particularly true if the new manager had little
collaboration experience during her tenure as a sales worker.
    We caution against interpreting these results as evidence that firms have mistaken beliefs
or behave inefficiently. Rather, consistent with tournament theory, firms may heavily weight
current job performance in promotion decisions to encourage workers to exert effort in their
current job roles and to maintain norms of fairness. In addition, the availability of relatively
clear measures of worker productivity among frontline sales workers may lead organizations
to emphasize these characteristics rather than other, more subjective or fungible employee
characteristics in promotion decisions.
   Regardless, our analysis shows that firms do not promote to maximize managerial
match quality. Instead, firms appear to actively manage the trade-off between providing
incentives and promoting the best potential managers: firms place less emphasis on current
job performance in promotions where managerial roles entail greater responsibility and
where current performance is rewarded by relatively strong pay-for-performance. Overall,
our results imply that managerial match quality, tournament incentives, and other
objectives of job promotions are not perfectly aligned. The trade-off between incentives
and match quality is likely to be an important consideration for any firm or institution in
which the skills required to succeed at one level in the organizational hierarchy differ from
the skills necessary to succeed at a higher level.




                                              30
References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. “High Wage
 Workers and High Wage Firms.” Econometrica, 67(2): 251–333.

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, David N. Margolis, and Kenneth R. Troske.
 2001. “The Relative Importance of Employer and Employee Effects on Compensation: A
 Comparison of France and the United States.” Journal of the Japanese and International
 Economies, 15(4): 419–436.

Baker, George P., Michael C. Jensen, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1988. “Compensation
 and Incentives: Practice vs. Theory.” The Journal of Finance, 43(3): 593–616.

Benson, Alan. 2015. “Do Agents Game Their Agents Behavior? Evidence from Sales
 Managers.” Journal of Labor Economics, 33(4): 863–890.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. “Managing with Style: The Effect
 of Managers on Firm Policies.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1169–1208.

Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and Explaining
  Management Practices across Firms and Countries.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  122(4): 1351–1408.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2016. “Occupational Employment Statistics: Sales and
 Related Occupations.”

Cullen, Zoe, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2018. “How Much Does Your Boss Make?
 The Incentive Effects of Inequality.” Working paper.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Devin Pope. 2016. “What Motivates Effort? Evidence and
 Expert Forecasts.” The Review of Economic Studies.

Deutsch, Claudia. 1986. “Holding on to Technical Talent.” New York Times.

DeVaro, Jed, and Michael Waldman. 2012. “The Signaling Role of Promotions: Further
 Theory and Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics, 30(1): 91–147.

DeVaro, Jed, and Oliver Gürtler. 2015. “Strategic Shirking in Promotion Tournaments.”
 Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 507–32.



                                          31
Dixon, Matthew, and Brent Adamson. 2011. The Challenger Sale: Taking Control of
 the Customer Conversation. Penguin.

Ewens, Michael,      and Matt Marx. 2016. “Founder Replacement and Startup
 Performance.”

Fairburn, James A., and James M. Malcomson. 2001. “Performance, Promotion, and
  the Peter Principle.” The Review of Economic Studies, 68(1): 45–66.

Fisman, Raymond, and Yongxiang Wang. 2017. “The Distortionary Effects of
  Incentives in Government: Evidence from China’s Death Ceiling Program.” American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(2): 202–218.

Fisman, Raymond, Jing Shi, Yongxiang Wang, and Rong Xu. 2017. “Social Ties
  and Favoritism in Chinese Science.” Journal of Political Economy (Forthcoming).

Grabner, Isabella, and Frank Moers. 2013. “Managers’ Choices of Performance
 Measures in Promotion Decisions: An Analysis of Alternative Job Assignments.” Journal
 of Accounting Research, 51(5): 1187–1220.

Gronau, Reuben. 1974. “Wage Comparisons: A Selectivity Bias.” Journal of Political
 Economy, 82: 1119–1143.

Heckman, James J. 1976. “The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,
 Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such
 Models.” Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 51: 475–492.

Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica:
 Journal of the Econometric Society, 153–161.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri. 2002. “Venture Capital and the
 Professionalization of Start-up Firms: Empirical Evidence.” The Journal of Finance,
 57(1): 169–197.

Hoffman, Mitchell, and Steven Tadelis. 2018. “People Management Skills, Employee
 Attrition, and Manager Rewards: An Empirical Analysis.” Working paper.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Morten Sorensen. 2016. “Are CEOs Different? Characteristics
 of Top Managers.” Working paper.


                                          32
Kaplan, Steven N., Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen. 2012. “Which CEO
 Characteristics and Abilities Matter?” The Journal of Finance, 67(3): 973–1007.

Larkin, Ian. 2011. “Paying $30,000 for a Gold Star: An Empirical Investigation into the
  Value of Peer Recognition to Software Salespeople.” Working paper.

Larkin, Ian. 2014. “The Cost of High-powered Incentives: Employee Gaming in Enterprise
  Software Sales.” Journal of Labor Economics, 32(2): 199–227.

Larkin, Ian, Lamar Pierce, and Francesca Gino. 2012. “The Psychological Costs
  of Pay-for-performance: Implications for the Strategic Compensation of Employees.”
  Strategic Management Journal, 33(10): 1194–1214.

Lazear, Edward P. 2004. “The Peter Principle: A Theory of Decline.” The Journal of
  Political Economy, 112(S1): S141–S163.

Lazear, Edward P., and Sherwin Rosen. 1981. “Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum
  Labor Contracts.” The Journal of Political Economy, 89(5): 841–864.

Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton. 2016. “Who
  Gets Hired? The Importance of Finding an Open Slot.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Lewis, H. Gregg. 1974. “Comments on Selectivity Biases in Wage Comparisons.” The
  Journal of Political Economy, 21: 1145–1155.

Murphy, Kevin J, and Jan Zabojnik. 2004. “CEO Pay and Appointments: A
 Market-Based Explanation for Recent Trends.” The American Economic Review,
 94(2): 192–196.

Oyer, Paul. 1998. “Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on
 Business Seasonality.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 149–185.

Peter, Laurence J., and Raymond Hull. 1969. The Peter Principle. New York: William
 Morrow & Co.

Prendergast, Canice, and Robert H. Topel. 1996. “Favoritism in Organizations.” The
 Journal of Political Economy, 104(5): 958–978.

Sales Management Association. 2008. “How Do Sales Managers Spend Their Time?”

                                          33
Sevy, Bruce. 2016. “Why Great Salespeople Make Terrible Sales Managers.” Forbes.

Waldman, Michael. 2003. “Ex Ante Versus Ex Post Optimal Promotion Rules: The Case
 of Internal Promotion.” Economic Inquiry, 41(1): 27–41.

Weber, Max. 1947. “The Theory of Social and Economic Organization.” AM Henderson
 and Talcott Parsons (New York, 1947), 132.




                                         34
       Figure 1: Distribution of Sales and Number of Collaborators


                     Sales in millions                        Number of collaborators
     50%                                               50%
     40%                                               40%
     30%                                               30%
     20%                                               20%
     10%                                               10%
      0%                                                0%
                0          2        4        6               0          10       20           30
                         Log(sales)                               Log(collaborators)
     8%                                                40%
     6%                                                30%
     4%                                                20%
     2%                                                10%
     0%                                                0%
            0        5         10       15   20              0     1     2       3        4   5
                    Residualized sales                       Residualized collaborators
     15%

     10%                                               20%
                                                       15%
       5%                                              10%
                                                        5%
       0%                                               0%
            -10       -5        0       5    10              -4    -2        0        2       4


Notes: Left and right panels are 12-month moving averages for sales and number of
collaborators, respectively. The top panels show the untransformed distribution. The
middle panels show the log-transformed distribution. The bottom panels show the
residuals after the log-transformed variables are regressed on firm-year-month fixed effects.




                                                  35
               Figure 2: Distribution of Manager Value Added




      0.3


      0.2


      0.1


         0
             -10            -5            0          5                      10
                                 Manager Value Added

Notes: The figure shows the kernel density of estimated manager value added, which is
computed as described in Section 1.2.




                                         36
       Figure 3: Binned Scatterplot of Promotion and Manager Value Added vs
                                Pre-promotion Sales

                           .5

                                                                                                            1




                           .4
Probability of Promotion




                                                                                     Manager Value Added
                                                                                                           .5


                           .3




                                                                                                            0
                           .2




                           .1
                                                                                                           -.5
                                0   20         40            60          80   100                                0   20         40            60          80   100
                                         Residualized Sales Percentile                                                    Residualized Sales Percentile




Notes: The left panel shows a binned scatterplot relating worker sales and probability of
promotion. Residualized sales percentile is the percentile-ranked residual from a regression
of the 12-month moving average of log pre-promotion sales (measured relative to the
firm-year-month mean) on log(collaborators). The right panel plots the relation between
pre-promotion sales performance and manager value added. These data are at the
manager-level and include only promoted managers. Residual sales percentile is the
percentile-ranked residual from a regression of the manager’s pre-promotion sales in the 12
months before promotion (measured relative to the firm-year-month mean) on
pre-promotion log(collaborators) and the likelihood of selection into the promoted sample.




                                                                                37
                         Figure 4: Actual vs. Optimal Promotion Policies


               1


               .8


               .6
     Density




               .4


               .2


               0
                    -4              -2             0               2                 4
                                          Manager Value Added

                                  Promoted              Best Potential Managers
                                  Non-Promoted


Notes: The figure shows the distribution of predicted manager value added for the samples
of workers that are promoted, workers that are not promoted, and workers that would make
the best potential managers. All manager value added measures are predicted fitted values
of manager value added based on the regression in Table 5, Column 2, modified so that
pre-promotion sales is measured as an equally spaced three-part spline to allow for potential
non-linearities. To determine the best potential managers sample, we select the worker with
the highest predicted manager value added within the same team and month when a worker
is actually promoted. The non-promoted sample consists of other, non-promoted, workers
in the same team and month when a worker is actually promoted.




                                                 38
                          Table 1: Descriptive Statistics



  Sample coverage                                      Pr(Promotion)

  # Firms                                      214     Overall                  0.0288
  # Workers                                 53,035     Monthly hazard           0.0021
  # Workers promoted to management           1,531
  Years covered                          2005-2011


  Summary Statistics                            Mean      25th       50th         75th

  Worker characteristics
  Monthly sales*                         $3,620,399    $49,956 $285,573     $1,540,871
  # Collaborators*                              6.5          1      1.8            5.6
  Monthly commissions*                      $12,485     $1,101   $3,658        $ 9,716
  Salary                                     $7,450     $4,938   $7,443         $9,481
  Manager Characteristics
  # of subordinates                             5.4           2         4            8
  Monthly commissions*                      $22,193      $3,112   $10,180      $25,165
  Change in monthly commissions              $7,173       -$839    $2,006      $10,156
  Salary                                    $10,563      $8,317   $10,690      $13,283

Notes: * denotes 12 month moving average. The change in monthly commissions represents
changes in pay after promotion, estimated as average monthly commissions in the 12 months
after promotion minus average monthly commissions in the 12 months before promotion.




                                           39
                            Table 2: Managers Samples

 Managers sample size
 Number of managers                                                 6,515
 ... with mover subordinates and estimated fixed effects            4,887
 ... with mover subordinates, estimated fixed effects,              1,028
     who are internally promoted within our sample
 Share of workers who switch managers                               0.273
 Average size of connected group (worker-months)                   13,558
 Share of workers in largest connected group                        0.765
Notes: Managers with mover subordinates are managers with at least one subordinate who
has worked under other managers within our data sample. Internally promoted managers
are managers we observe as workers prior to promotion.




                                            40
                      Table 3: Probit Model for Promotions

                                                     Worker is promoted
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
    Log(sales)                         0.0400*** 0.0448***       0.0433***   0.0428***
                                       (0.00578) (0.00645)       (0.00642)   (0.00610)

    Log(collaborators)                  0.00895       0.0235     0.0461**      -0.0103
                                        (0.0212)     (0.0209)    (0.0205)     (0.0207)

    Industry-month promotion rate                                0.315***
                                                                 (0.0183)

    Firm-month promotion rate                                                0.167***
                                                                             (0.00653)
    Pre-promotion controls                 No          Yes          Yes         Yes
    Pseudo R-squared                      0.004       0.018        0.042       0.112
    Observations                         207,092     207,092      207,092     207,092

Notes: This table presents the probit regression described in Equation (2). We use data
at the worker-month level for workers that have not yet been promoted, for firm-months in
which at least one worker at the firm is promoted. The dependent variable is an indicator
for whether a worker is promoted in the next month. Log sales is the log of one plus
worker i’s monthly sales credits, averaged over the past 12 months or for the worker’s
total tenure if tenure is fewer than 12 months, and demeaned within company-year-month.
Log(collaborators) is the log of one plus the average number of other collaborators worker
i has per order, again averaged over the past 12 months or for the worker’s total tenure
if tenure is fewer than 12 months. Pre-promotion characteristics include controls for
seven bins of a worker’s tenure, interacted with an indicator for whether tenure may be
censored. Industry-month promotion rate is the percentage of workers promoted within an
industry-year-month. Firm-month promotion rate is the percentage of workers promoted
within worker i’s firm in the same month. Reported coefficients represent marginal effects
and are multiplied by 100 to represent percentage point change in the probability of being
promoted. Standard errors are clustered by worker. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                              41
                  Table 4: Predictors of Manager Value Added

                                                       Manager value added
                                        All promotions          Promoted to different team
                                        (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)
 Pre-promotion log(sales)            -0.106***      -0.108***   -0.123***     -0.128***
                                      (0.0401)       (0.0395)    (0.0418)      (0.0409)

 Pre-promotion log(collaborators)     0.244*         0.226*       0.219         0.193
                                      (0.132)        (0.131)     (0.140)       (0.141)
 Pre-promotion controls                  No            Yes         No            Yes
 R-squared                              0.04          0.066       0.066         0.077
 Observations                          1,028          1,028        909           909

Notes: This table presents the regression described in Equation (3). We use data at the
manager level. The sample is restricted to promoted managers for whom we can observe
pre-promotion characteristics and for whom we can estimate manager value added fixed
effects using movements of subordinates across managers. The dependent variable is manager
value added, estimated as the change in subordinate performance associated with each
manager (see Equation (1)). Log sales is the log of one plus manager i’s monthly sales
credits as a worker, averaged over the 12 months prior to i’s promotion (or for i’s total
pre-promotion tenure, if fewer than 12 months), and demeaned within company-year-month.
Log(collaborators) is the log of one plus manager i’s number of distinct other collaborators
per order, averaged over the 12 months prior to promotion (or for i’s total pre-promotion
tenure, if fewer than 12 months). Even-numbered columns include controls for the manager’s
tenure in the month prior to promotion, as described in Table 3. Columns 3 and 4 further
restrict the sample to managers who are assigned to subordinates, at least two-thirds of whom
were not their previous teammates. Observations are weighted by the inverse variance of the
manager value added measures. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. ***, **,
* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                               42
Table 5: Heckman Selection Model for Predictors of Manager Value Added

                                                  Manager value added
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
  Pre-promotion log(sales)           -0.106***     -0.110***   -0.109***   -0.114***
                                      (0.0400)      (0.0394)    (0.0407)    (0.0394)

  Pre-promotion log(collaborators)     0.242*       0.228*      0.233*       0.176
                                       (0.133)      (0.131)     (0.130)     (0.130)
  Instrument                         Industry ×   Industry ×    Firm ×     Firm ×
                                       month        month       month      month
  Pre-promotion controls                 No           Yes         No          Yes
  R-squared                             0.04         0.066       0.042       0.073
  Observations                          1,028        1,028       1,028       1,028

Notes: This table re-estimates Table 4 using the Heckman selection model, using
industry-month or firm-month promotion rates as the instruments for selection into the
sample of promoted managers. All other variables are defined as in Table 4. In Columns 1
and 2, the promotion instrument is the industry-month promotion rate; for Columns 3 and
4, it is the firm-month promotion rate. Observations are weighted by the inverse variance
of the manager value added measures. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                           43
Table 6: Heckman Selection Model for Predictors of Manager Value
Added, Lone Wolf

                                                    Manager value added
                                       (1)             (2)          (3)         (4)
       Pre-promotion log(sales)    -0.110***        -0.114***    -0.113***   -0.116***
                                    (0.0415)         (0.0403)     (0.0422)    (0.0402)

       Pre-promotion lone wolf      -0.379**         -0.357**    -0.353**      -0.218
                                     (0.176)          (0.172)     (0.167)     (0.166)
       Instrument                 Industry ×        Industry ×   Firm ×      Firm ×
                                    month             month      month       month
       Pre-promotion controls          No              Yes           No         Yes
       R-squared                      0.039           0.065         0.04       0.071
       Observations                   1,028           1,028        1,028       1,028

Notes: This table re-estimates Table 5 but with collaboration experience defined as an
indicator variable for whether a manager collaborated with at least one other person on a
sale in the year prior to promotion (or pre-promotion tenure if less than one year). All other
variables are as defined for Table 4. Observations are weighted by the inverse variance of the
manager value added measures. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. ***, **,
* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                               44
                                   Table 7: Retention

                                    Number of       Fraction       Fraction      Percentile
                                   subordinates      joining        leaving      of leavers
                                       (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)
Pre-promotion log(sales)              0.0494        0.000639       0.000241       0.000573
                                     (0.0585)      (0.000423)     (0.000405)      (0.00265)

Pre-promotion log(collaborators)     0.00587        -0.000784       0.00167        0.0160
                                     (0.401)        (0.00228)      (0.00180)      (0.0142)
Pre-promotion controls                 Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
R-squared                             0.165          0.013          0.009            0.05
Observations                         14,397          14,397         14,397          1,627

Notes:      This table tests whether manager pre-promotion characteristics predict
the employee retention after the manager’s promotion.              The data are at the
promoted-manager-month level. Pre-promotion sales and collaborators are as defined in
Table 4. Number of subordinates is the size of the manager’s team; fraction joining is
the fraction of new team members joining each month; fraction leaving is the fraction
of team members exiting each month; and percentile of leavers is the sales percentile of
departing workers, measured relative to all workers in each firm-month. All these variables
are measured relative to the firm-year-month mean in the full sample. Observations are
weighted by the inverse variance of the manager value added measures. Standard errors are
clustered by manager. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.




                                              45
                Table 8: Assignment of Managers to Subordinates



                                                                  Log(subordinate sales)
 Months before promotion window:         [-9, -7]      [-6, -4]      [-3, -1]   [-9, -7]   [-6, -4]   [-3, -1]
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
 Pre-promotion log(sales)               0.292***      0.316***      0.289***
                                        (0.0702)      (0.0696)      (0.0716)

 Pre-promotion log(collaborators)         -0.173       -0.339         -0.157
                                         (0.282)      (0.249)        (0.253)

 Manager value added                                                            0.00986 -0.00689      0.0462
                                                                                (0.0809) (0.113)      (0.115)
 R-squared                                0.149        0.178          0.155     < 0.001    < 0.001    0.001
 Observations                              569          569            569        569        569       569

Notes: This table explores how new managers are assigned to subordinates. The sample
is at the manager-level, and includes all promoted managers for whom there exist data
on manager value added, and are assigned to subordinates with observable performance in
the nine months before the promotion window of the manager, with the window defined
as [-1,+1] months around the promotion date. The dependent variable is the team-wide
average of subordinate monthly log sales in the 7-9 month, 4-6 month, and 1-3 month period
prior to the promotion window. All other variables are as defined in Table 4. Observations
in Columns 4-6 are weighted by the inverse variance of the manager value added measures.
Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                 46
         Table 9: Heterogeneity in Promotion Policies by Team Size

                                                      Worker is promoted
                                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
 Log(sales)                               0.524***    0.507***    0.425***    0.666***
                                          (0.0677)    (0.0676)    (0.0644)    (0.0946)

 Log(sales) x log(avg teamsize)           -0.206***   -0.198***   -0.164***   -0.252***
                                           (0.0308)    (0.0307)    (0.0291)    (0.0420)

 Log(collaborators)                        -0.387**    -0.251*    -0.348**      -0.267
                                            (0.152)    (0.145)     (0.146)     (0.350)

 Log(collaborators) x log(avg teamsize)    0.178**     0.128*     0.161**      0.0528
                                           (0.0757)   (0.0719)    (0.0702)     (0.163)

 Log(avg teamsize)                        -0.897***   -0.796***   -0.412***
                                           (0.120)     (0.115)     (0.119)

 Industry-month promotion rate                        0.363***
                                                      (0.0185)

 Firm-month promotion rate                                        0.182***
                                                                  (0.00595)
 Firm-month FE                               No          No          No         Yes
 Pseudo R-squared                           0.033       0.054       0.12       0.043
 Observations                              186,532     186,532    186,532     186,532

Notes: This table explores how promotion policies vary with the average size of teams
across firms. Log average team size is the log of the average number of subordinates
assigned to each manager within each firm-year. Observations are at the worker-month
level. All other variables and sample restrictions are as described in Table 3. Columns 1-3
are estimated using a probit model, while Column 4 is estimated using OLS to accommodate
firm-year-month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by worker. ***, **, * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                            47
 Table 10: Heterogeneity in Promotion Policies by Pay-for-Performance

                                                       Worker is promoted
                                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
 Log(sales)                                0.200***    0.182***    0.181***    0.342***
                                           (0.0470)    (0.0471)    (0.0429)    (0.0782)

 Log(sales) x ratio variable pay           -0.373***   -0.329***   -0.316*** -0.597***
                                            (0.110)     (0.110)     (0.103)   (0.180)

 Log(collaborators)                        -0.387***   -0.238**     -0.0902    -0.733***
                                            (0.111)     (0.107)     (0.109)     (0.255)

 Log(collaborators) x ratio variable pay   0.910***    0.575**       0.135      1.33**
                                            (0.276)    (0.263)      (0.282)     (0.639)

 Ratio variable pay                        -1.42***    -0.994**     -0.677*
                                            (0.403)     (0.399)     (0.405)

 Industry-month promotion rate                         0.543***
                                                       (0.0364)

 Firm-month promotion rate                                         0.175***
                                                                   (0.00783)
 Firm-month FE                               No          No          No          Yes
 Pseudo R-squared                           0.018       0.037       0.092       0.031
 Observations                              136,083     136,083     136,083     136,083

Notes: This table explores how promotion policies vary with the strength of
pay-for-performance across firms. Ratio variable pay represents the ratio of commissions
plus bonus to salary, averaged across all workers within each firm-year. Observations are
at the worker-month level and exclude firms for which we do not have compensation data.
All other variables and sample restrictions are as described in Table 3. Columns 1-3 are
estimated using a probit model, while Column 4 is estimated using OLS to accommodate
firm-year-month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by worker. ***, **, * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                            48
                          Appendix for Online Publication


        Appendix Table A1: Linear Probability Model for Promotions

                                                       Worker is promoted
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)
Log(sales)                      0.0371***   0.0377***      0.0338***   0.0417***   0.0465***
                                (0.00500)   (0.00505)      (0.00502)   (0.00496)   (0.00547)

Log(collaborators)               0.00518      0.0206       0.0790***   -0.0530**   -0.157***
                                 (0.0219)    (0.0223)       (0.0225)    (0.0217)    (0.0412)

Industry-month promotion rate                               1.640***
                                                             (0.140)

Firm-month promotion rate                                              0.986***
                                                                       (0.0455)
Pre-promotion controls              No          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
Firm-month FE                       No          No            No          No          Yes
R-squared                         < 0.001      0.002         0.011       0.043       0.044
Observations                      207,092     207,092       207,092     207,092     207,092

Notes: This table presents the regression described in Equation (2) using OLS instead of
probit. All variables are as describe in Table 3. Standard errors are clustered by worker.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                            49
Appendix Table A2: Heckman Selection Model for Predictors of Manager
Value Added, Different Teams

                                                      Manager value added
                                            (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)
   Pre-promotion log(sales)              -0.122***     -0.129***     -0.126***   -0.134***
                                          (0.0416)      (0.0407)      (0.0420)    (0.0407)

   Pre-promotion log(collaborators)        0.217         0.194         0.205       0.135
                                          (0.141)       (0.141)       (0.138)     (0.141)
   Instrument                           Industry ×    Industry ×      Firm ×      Firm ×
                                          month         month         month       month
   Pre-promotion controls                   No            Yes           No          Yes
   R-squared                               0.066         0.077         0.073       0.086
   Observations                             909           909           909         909

Notes: This table re-estimates Table 5 using only the sample of managers who are
assigned to subordinates, at least two-thirds of whom were not their previous teammates.
Observations are weighted by the inverse variance of the manager value added measures.
Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                               50
Appendix Table A3: Heckman Selection Model for Predictors of Manager
Value Added, Lone Wolf, Different Teams

                                                     Manager value added
                                        (1)             (2)          (3)         (4)
       Pre-promotion log(sales)     -0.127***        -0.132***    -0.130***   -0.135***
                                     (0.0431)         (0.0416)     (0.0436)    (0.0414)

       Pre-promotion lone wolf        -0.345*         -0.316*      -0.311*      -0.153
                                      (0.186)         (0.183)      (0.176)     (0.181)
       Instrument                   Industry ×       Industry ×   Firm ×      Firm ×
                                      month            month      month       month
       Pre-promotion controls           No              Yes          No          Yes
       R-squared                       0.065           0.076        0.071       0.085
       Observations                     909             909          909         909

Notes: This table re-estimates Table 6 using only the sample of managers who are
assigned to subordinates, at least two-thirds of whom were not their previous teammates.
Observations are weighted by the inverse variance of the manager value added measures.
Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                51
        Appendix Table A4: Probit Model for Promotions, Lone Wolf

                                                     Worker is promoted
                                           (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
    Log(sales)                         0.0428*** 0.0463***      0.0429***   0.0465***
                                       (0.00663) (0.00623)      (0.00664)   (0.00625)

    Lonewolf                             -0.0681    0.118***      -0.0195    0.184***
                                        (0.0417)    (0.0385)     (0.0519)    (0.0508)

    Log(collaborators)                                            0.0396     0.0534**
                                                                 (0.0255)    (0.0260)

    Industry-month promotion rate       0.315***                0.316***
                                        (0.0184)                (0.0184)

    Firm-month promotion rate                       0.168***                 0.169***
                                                    (0.00656)                (0.00657)
    Pre-promotion controls                Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
    Pseudo R-squared                     0.042        0.113       0.042        0.113
    Observations                        207,092      207,092     207,092      207,092

Notes: This table re-estimates Table 3, but with collaboration experience defined as an
indicator variable for whether a manager collaborated with at least one other person on a
sale in the year prior to promotion (or pre-promotion tenure if less than one year). All other
variables are as defined for Table 3. Standard errors are clustered by worker. ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                             52
Appendix Table A5: Probit Model for Promotions, Excluding the Recession

                                                     Worker is promoted
                                           (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
    Log(sales)                         0.0208*** 0.0233***      0.0229***   0.0201***
                                       (0.00298) (0.00305)      (0.00302)   (0.00262)

    Log(collaborators)                  0.00577      0.0132*    0.0158**      -0.00262
                                       (0.00673)    (0.00685)   (0.00677)    (0.00674)

    Industry-month promotion rate                               0.0779***
                                                                (0.00414)

    Firm-month promotion rate                                               0.0681***
                                                                            (0.00320)
    Pre-promotion controls                No           Yes         Yes          Yes
    Pseudo R-squared                     0.006        0.017       0.034        0.141
    Observations                        523,132      523,132     523,132      523,132

Notes: This table re-estimates Table 3, but excluding year-months corresponding to the
Great Recession (NBER dates: December 2007 to June 2009). All variables are as defined for
Table 3. Standard errors are clustered by worker. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                             53
Appendix Table A6: Heckman Selection Model for Predictors of Manager
Value Added, Excluding the Recession

                                                     Manager value added
                                       (1)              (2)          (3)         (4)
       Pre-promotion log(sales)     -0.127***        -0.132***    -0.130***   -0.135***
                                     (0.0431)         (0.0416)     (0.0436)    (0.0414)

       Pre-promotion lone wolf       -0.345*          -0.316*      -0.311*      -0.153
                                     (0.186)          (0.183)      (0.176)     (0.181)
       Instrument                  Industry ×        Industry ×   Firm ×      Firm ×
                                     month             month      month       month
       Pre-promotion controls          No               Yes          No          Yes
       R-squared                      0.065            0.076        0.071       0.085
       Observations                    909              909          909         909

Notes: This table re-estimates Table 5, but excluding managers who were promoted
in year-months corresponding to the Great Recession (NBER dates: December 2007 to
June 2009). All variables are as defined for Table 5. Observations are weighted by the
inverse variance of the manager value added measures. Standard errors are adjusted for
heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.




                                                54
