                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     WHAT DO TRADE AGREEMENTS REALLY DO?

                                          Dani Rodrik

                                      Working Paper 24344
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24344


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




I am grateful to Robert Lawrence, Gene Grossman, and the editors of the Journal of Economic
Perspectives for helpful comments that improved the paper, and to Vedant Bahl for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
What Do Trade Agreements Really Do?
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 24344
February 2018
JEL No. F13

                                         ABSTRACT

As trade agreements have evolved and gone beyond import tariffs and quotas into regulatory
rules and harmonization, they have become more difficult to fit into received economic theory.
Nevertheless, most economists continue to regard trade agreements such as the Trans Pacific
Partnership (TPP) favorably. The default view seems to be that these arrangements get us closer
to free trade by reducing transaction costs associated with regulatory differences or explicit
protectionism. An alternative perspective is that trade agreements are the result of rent-seeking,
self-interested behavior on the part of politically well-connected firms – international banks,
pharmaceutical companies, multinational firms. They may result in freer, mutually beneficial
trade, through exchange of market access. But they are as likely to produce purely redistributive
outcomes under the guise of “freer trade.”


Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 J.F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
       The Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago asked its panel of economics
experts—made up of leading professors of economics around the country—to respond to two
statements on international trade in its March 2012 survey
(at http://www.igmchicago.org/surveys/free-trade). The first statement focused on attitudes
towards the general concept of free trade: “Freer trade improves productive efficiency and
offers consumers better choices, and in the long run these gains are much larger than any
effects on employment.” The second statement honed in specifically on the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA): “On average, citizens of the U.S. have been better off with the
North American Free Trade Agreement than they would have been if the trade rules for the
U.S., Canada and Mexico prior to NAFTA had remained in place.” The experts could choose
among a range of options, from “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree.”
       There was near-unanimous support for the first statement on free trade. Of the 37
economists who answered, 35 picked “strongly agree” or “agree.” Two answered “uncertain”
and none disagreed. The second question on NAFTA produced a virtually identical response.
Once again, noone disagreed and only two economists picked “uncertain.” The only difference
was that there was one less vote for “strongly agree” (reducing the tally for this option from 11
to 10) and one more vote for “agree” (raising the tally from 24 to 25).
       The consensus in favor of the general statement supporting free trade is not a surprise.
Economists disagree about a lot of things, but the superiority of free trade over protection is
not controversial. The principle of comparative advantage and the case for the gains from trade
are crown jewels of the economics profession. So the nearly unanimous support for free trade
in principle is understandable. But the almost identical level of enthusiasm expressed for the
North American Free trade Agreement—that is, for a text that runs into nearly 2,000 pages,
negotiated by three governments under pressures from lobbies and special interests, and
shaped by a mix of political, economic, and foreign policy objectives—is more curious.
       The economists must have been aware that trade agreements, like free trade itself,
create winners and losers. But how did they weight the gains and losses to reach a judgement
that US citizens would be better off “on average”? Did it not matter who gained and lost,
whether they were rich or poor to begin with, or whether the gains and losses would be diffuse


                                                -1-
or concentrated? What if the likely redistribution was large compared to the efficiency gains?
What did they assume about the likely compensation for the losers, or did it not matter at all?
And would their evaluation be any different if they knew that recent research suggests NAFTA
produced minute net efficiency gains for the US economy while severely depressing wages of
those groups and communities most directly affected by Mexican competition?1
        Perhaps the experts viewed distributional questions as secondary in view of the overall
gains from trade. After all, opening up to trade is analogous to technological progress. In both
cases, the economic pie expands while some groups are left behind. We did not ban
automobiles or light bulbs because coachmen and candle makers would lose their jobs. So why
restrict trade? As the experts in this survey contemplated whether US citizens would be better
off “on average” as a result of NAFTA, it seems plausible that they viewed questions about the
practical details or the distributional questions of NAFTA as secondary in view of the overall
gains from trade.
        This tendency to view trade agreements as an example of efficiency-enhancing policies
that may nevertheless leave some people behind would be more justifiable if recent trade
agreements were simply about eliminating restrictions on trade such as import tariffs and
quotas. In fact, the label “free trade agreements” does not do a very good job of describing
what recent proposed agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the Trans-Atlantic
Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), and numerous other regional and bilateral trade
agreements actually do. Contemporary trade agreements go much beyond traditional trade
restrictions at the border. They cover regulatory standards, health and safety rules, investment,
banking and finance, intellectual property, labor, the environment, and many other subjects
besides. They reach well beyond national borders and seek deep integration among nations

1
 Caliendo and Parro (2015) is the most sophisticated evaluation to date of NAFTA’s overall economic effects.
These authors develop a multi-sector, multi-country Ricardian model with intermediate inputs and productive
heterogeneity within sectors. They conclude that NAFTA increased US “welfare” by 0.08 percent (that is, by less
than one tenth of one percent). Moreover half of this gain came not from an increase in efficiency but from an
improvement in the U.S. terms of trade (i.e., at the expense of other countries, mainly Mexico). As for the
distributional impacts, they have been recently estimated by Hakobyan and McLaren (2016). These authors find
very sharp adverse effects for certain groups of workers. High school dropouts working in industries that were
heavily protected by tariffs on Mexican exports prior to NAFTA experienced a drop in wage growth of as much as
17 percentage points relative to wage growth in unaffected industries.


                                                       -2-
rather than shallow integration, to use Robert Lawrence’s (1996) helpful distinction. According
to one tabulation, 76 percent of existing preferential trade agreements covered at least some
aspect of investment (such as free capital mobility) by 2011; 61 percent covered intellectual
property rights protection; and 46 percent covered environmental regulations (Limão 2016).
       To illustrate the changing nature of trade agreements, compare US trade agreements
with two small nations, Israel and Singapore, signed two decades apart. The US-Israel Free
Trade Agreement, which went into force in 1985, was the first bilateral trade agreement the US
concluded in the postwar period. It is quite a short agreement -- less than 8,000 words in
length. It contains 22 articles and three annexes, the bulk of which are devoted to free-trade
issues such as tariffs, agricultural restrictions, import licensing, and rules of origin. The US-
Singapore Free Trade Agreement went into effect in 2004 and is nearly ten times as long, taking
up 70,000 words. It contains 20 chapters (each with many articles), more than a dozen annexes,
and multiple side letters. Of its 20 chapters, only seven cover conventional trade topics. Other
chapters deal with behind-the-border topics such anti-competitive business conduct, electronic
commerce, labor, the environment, investment rules, financial services, and intellectual
property rights. Intellectual property rights take up a third of a page (and 81 words) in the US-
Israel agreement. They occupy 23 pages (8,737 words) plus two side letters in the US-Singapore
agreement.
       Taking these new features into account requires economists to rethink their default
attitudes toward trade agreements, and the politics behind them. This paper offers a starting
point toward the reconsideration that is needed. I will argue that economists’ conflation of free
trade with trade agreements is rooted in an implicit political economy perspective that views
import-competing interests as the most powerful and dominant architect of trade policy. Under
this perspective, protectionists on the import side are the main villain of the story. Trade
agreements, when successfully ratified, serve to counter their influence and get us closer to a
welfare optimum by reducing the protectionism (or harmful regulations) that these special
interests desire. In particular, they prevent beggar-thy-neighbor and beggar-thyself policies that
would result in the absence of trade agreements. In achieving these ends, governments may be
assisted by other special interests – those with a stake in expanding exports and market access


                                                  -3-
abroad. But the latter play an essentially useful role, since they are merely a counterweight to
the protectionist lobbies.
       There is an alternative political economy perspective, one that reverses the
presumption about which set of special interests hold the upper hand in trade policy. In this
second view, trade agreements are shaped largely by rent-seeking, self-interested behavior on
the export side. Rather than rein in protectionists, they empower another set of special
interests and politically well-connected firms, such as international banks, pharmaceutical
companies, and multinational corporations. They may result in freer, mutually beneficial trade,
through exchange of market access. But they are as likely to produce welfare-reducing, or
purely redistributive outcomes under the guise of free trade.
       When trade agreements were largely about import tariffs and quotas -- that is before
the 1980s -- the second scenario may not have been particularly likely. But with trade
agreements increasingly focusing on domestic rules and regulations, we can no longer say the
same. Taking these new features into account requires us to cast trade agreements, and the
politics behind them, in quite a different light.


Free Trade versus Free Trade Agreements


       Basic trade theory suggests that free trade is the optimal policy for an economy,
provided compensatory policies can be implemented and adverse interactions with market
failures can be addressed through complementary policies. The only exception is that a large
country may be able to manipulate its terms of trade at the expense of its trade partners. The
latter motive provides a rationale for countries to enter in trade agreements, preventing
mutually harmful trade protectionism.
       Economists have long known that real-world trade agreements are difficult to
understand from the lens of “optimal tariff” theory. And as trade agreements have evolved and
gone beyond import tariffs and quotas into regulatory rules and harmonization (patent rules,
health and safety regulations, labor standards, investment investor courts, etc.), they have
become harder and harder to fit into received economic theory.


                                                    -4-
        International agreements in such new areas produce economic consequences that are
far more ambiguous than is the case of lowering traditional border barriers. They may well
generate increases in the volume of trade and cross-border investment. Nevertheless their
welfare and efficiency impacts are fundamentally uncertain. Here, I will sketch the issues that
arise in four areas that have become common in modern trade agreements: trade-related
intellectual property rights, rules about cross-border capital flows, investor-state dispute
settlement procedures, and harmonization of regulatory standards.
        Consider first patents and copyrights (so-called “trade-related intellectual property
rights” or TRIPs). TRIPs entered the lexicon of trade during the Uruguay Round of multilateral
trade negotiations, which were completed in 1994. The US has pushed for progressively tighter
rules (called TRIPs-plus) in subsequent regional and bilateral trade agreements. Typically TRIPs
pit advanced countries against developing countries, with the former demanding stronger and
lengthier monopoly restrictions for their firms in the latter’s markets. Freer trade is supposed to
be win-win, with both parties benefiting. But in TRIPs, the advanced countries’ gains are largely
the developing countries’ losses. Consumers in the developing nations pay higher prices for
pharmaceuticals and other research-intensive products and the advanced countries’ firms reap
higher monopoly rents. One needs to assume an implausibly high elasticity of global innovation
to developing countries’ patents to compensate for what is in effect a pure transfer of rents
from poor to rich countries. 2 That is why many ardent proponents of free trade were opposed
to the incorporation of TRIPs in the Uruguay Round (e.g., Bhagwati et al. 2014).
        Nonetheless, TRIPs rules have not been dropped, and in fact expand with each new FTA.
Thanks to subsequent trade agreements, intellectual property protection has become broader
and stronger, and much of the flexibility afforded to individual countries under the original
WTO agreement has been eliminated (Sell 2011).




2
 See Diwan and Rodrik (1991) for an attempt to justify TRIPS from the standpoint of developing nations. The
history of this paper is of some interest. It was written while I was visiting the World Bank as a junior researcher
and at a time when developing nations were strenuously objecting to the US push for TRIPS in the Uruguay Round.
The paper was motivated by a challenge that came down to us from the then chief economist of the World Bank.
Wouldn’t it be nice if someone could make a positive economic case for TRIPS for the developing nations? It
turned out someone could.

                                                        -5-
       Second, consider restrictions on nations’ ability to manage cross-border capital flows.
Starting with its bilateral trade agreements with Singapore and Chile in 2003, the US
government has sought and obtained agreements that enforce open capital accounts as a rule.
These agreements make it difficult for signatories to manage cross-border capital flows,
including in short-term financial instruments. In many recent US trade agreements such
restrictions apply even in times of macroeconomic and financial crisis. This has raised eyebrows
even at the International Monetary Fund (IMF, Siegel 2013).
       Paradoxically, capital account liberalization has become a norm in trade agreements just
as professional opinion among economists was becoming more skeptical about the wisdom of
free capital flows. The frequency and severity of financial crises associated with financial
globalization have led many experts to believe that direct restrictions on the capital account
have a second-best role to complement prudential regulation and, possibly, provide temporary
breathing space during moments of extreme financial stress. The IMF itself, once at the
vanguard of the push for capital-account liberalization, has officially revised its stance on capital
controls. It now acknowledges a useful role for them where more direct remedies for
underlying macroeconomic and financial imbalances are not available. Yet investment and
financial services provisions in many FTAs run blithely against this new consensus among
economists.
       A third area where trade agreements include provisions of questionable merit is so-
called “investor-state dispute settlement procedures” (ISDS). These provisions have been
imported into trade agreements from bilateral investment treaties (BIT). They are an anomaly
in that they enable foreign investors, and they alone, to sue host governments in special
arbitration tribunals and to seek monetary damages for regulatory, tax, and other policy
changes that reduce their profits. Foreign investors (and their governments) see ISDS as
protection against expropriation, but in practice arbitration tribunals interpret the protections
provided more broadly than under, say, domestic US law (Johnson et al., 2015).
       Developing countries traditionally have signed on to ISDS in the expectation that it
would compensate for their weak legal regimes and help attract direct foreign investment. But
ISDS also suffers from its own problems: it operates outside accepted legal regimes, gives


                                                 -6-
arbitrators too much power, does not follow or set precedents, and allows no appeal. Whatever
the merits of ISDS for developing nations, it is more difficult to justify its inclusion in trade
agreements among advanced countries with well-functioning legal systems (e.g. the
prospective Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the U.S. and
European countries).3
        Finally, consider the pursuit of the harmonization of regulatory standards that lies at the
center of today’s trade agreements. The justification for harmonization is that eliminating
regulatory differences among nations reduces the transaction costs associated with doing
business across borders. Taking this line of argument one step further, proponents sometimes
label regulatory standards that are more demanding than those at home as “non-tariff
barriers.” And there is little question that governments sometimes do deploy regulations to
favor domestic producers over foreign ones. But often these differences reflect dissimilar
consumer preferences or divergent regulatory styles. European bans on GMOs and hormone-
fed beef, for example, are rooted not in protectionist motives – the same bans apply to
domestic producers as well – but in pressures from consumer groups at home. The US
government, for its part, considers them as protectionist barriers, and dispute-settlement
panels of the World Trade Organization have often agreed (Euractiv, 2006, 2012).
        The trouble is that unlike in the case of tariffs and quotas, there is no natural benchmark
that allows us to judge whether a regulatory standard is excessive or protectionist. Different
national assessments of risk – safety, environmental, health -- and varying conceptions of how
business should relate to its stakeholders – employees, suppliers, consumers, local
communities – will produce different standards, none obviously superior to others. In the
language of economics, regulatory standards are public goods over which different nations
have different preferences. An optimal international arrangement would trade off the benefits
of expanding market integration (by reducing regulatory diversity) against the costs of excessive
harmonization. But in general we have only a hazy ideas where that optimal point may lie,

3
 For some statistics on the use of ISDS, see UNCTAD (2015), chapter III. Of all concluded cases as of end-2014, 27
percent resulted in a ruling in favor of the investor. Twenty-seven percent was settled, 9 percent was discontinued,
and in 2 percent the state was found in breach but no damages were awarded. The rest of the rulings (36 percent)
were in favor of the state. Note that even when the state “wins” in these cases, it is at most awarded its legal
costs.

                                                        -7-
which in any case will vary across different policy domains. Perhaps regulators and trade
negotiators do their job properly and assess the costs and benefits appropriately, safeguarding
room for diversity. Perhaps not.
         Regardless, it is curious that economists tend to be nearly unanimous in their view that
trade agreements are a good thing. Despite not knowing much about the details, they must
believe such agreements regularly strike the right balance in all these areas of ambiguity. 4 Is it
that none of these complications matter as long as the agreement is called a “Free Trade
Agreement”?
         The tendency to associate “free trade agreements” all too closely with “free trade” may
be the result of the fact that the new (and often problematic) beyond-the-border features of
these agreements have not yet made their mark on the collective unconsciousness of
economists. But I suspect it is also the result of a certain implicit, hand-waving kind of political
economy analysis. In this perspective, protectionist interests are the dominant influence in the
determination of trade and other policies. Hence, in the absence of trade agreements barriers
to trade are too high and there is too little trade. Trade agreements are in turn a mechanism
through which protectionist interests can be neutralized. The specific details of the agreement
do not matter much as long as trade-creating interests are empowered to offset the otherwise
dominant protectionist influences. In other words, trade agreements must move us in a
desirable direction because they are a counterweight to protectionists.
         This is a valid inference as long as the argument’s premise is correct, namely that on
balance trade agreements empower the special interests more closely aligned with good
economic performance. But what if they empower the wrong special interests instead – the
investors, banks, and multinational enterprises seeking to increase rents at the expense of the
general interest?




4
  An additional area of concern raised by trade specialists early on in the context of NAFTA was the design of the
rules of origin, the regulations that determine whether a good imported by one country receives duty-free
treatment within the free trade area. Krueger (1993) and others worried that restrictive rules of origin would
essentially extend the more protectionist country’s tariffs to the other partners. (This concern does not arise in
customs unions where countries adopt a common external tariff.)


                                                         -8-
        When trade agreements are mostly about tariffs and quotas, there is an easy way to tell
the difference. The presence of high tariffs ex ante and tariff reduction ex post are prima facie
evidence that protectionists were the dominant influence before the agreement and that they
were countervailed through the agreement. But this intuition does not carry over to trade
agreements on domestic rules, regulations, and standards since we do not readily know where
the efficient benchmark is. A trade agreement captured by an alternative set of special interests
may make things worse just as easily as it makes them better. Such an agreement can move us
away from the efficient outcome, even if it takes the guise of a free trade agreement and
expands the volume of trade and investment.
        There is plenty of anecdotal evidence of rent-seeking by firms that favor trade
agreements. But to put this evidence in context, let us first examine why countries sign trade
agreements in the first place.


The Logic of Trade Agreements


        When economists teach the gains from trade, they emphasize that free trade is good for
each nation on its own. (What it means to say “good for the nation” in the presence of losers as
well as gainers is, if course, a thorny issue, but I will leave that aside, in keeping with the
standard treatment.5) Ricardo’s (1817) demonstration of the principle of comparative
advantage -- free trade expands a nation’s consumption possibilities frontier even if it has an
absolute productivity advantage in producing every good – remains one of our profession’s
most significant intellectual achievements. A direct implication is that countries should want to
have free trade regardless of what their trade partners do. Responding to another country’s
protectionism by raising one’s own trade barriers is tantamount to cutting off the nose to spite
the face.
        If this insight were the end of the story, the presence (and proliferation) of trade
agreements would be a mystifying puzzle. What is the point of signing agreements with other

5
 See though Driskill (2007) who takes the profession to task, correctly, for sweeping distribution under the rug
when discussing the “welfare gains” from trade.


                                                        -9-
countries to do what is in your national interest in the first place? A possible answer was
provided early on by Harry Johnson (1953). Countries that are “large” in world markets have
the incentive to exploit their market power. An import tariff restricts home demand for other
countries’ exports and drives down the world price of the imported good. A Nash equilibrium
among large countries would be inefficient, as each country would be imposing its own,
positive “optimal” tariffs. Correspondingly, a trade agreement that enforced free trade could
leave all the countries better off.
        Even if the logic of this argument is accepted, the question remains of why a formal
trade agreement is needed, such as the World Trade Organization or NAFTA. After all, a free-
trade equilibrium can be achieved through cooperation in a repeated interaction game. In
addition, one can ask whether a formal agreement on its own can prevent opportunistic
behavior on the part of sovereign nations. Nonetheless, the motive to manipulate the terms-of-
trade provides a valid economic motive for countries to commit themselves to free trade by
signing on to trade agreements.6
        However, this theory does not sit well with the fact that actual policy makers do not
seem very concerned about the terms of trade when they negotiate trade agreements. They
tend to care more about the volume of trade: they like it when their exports grow, but not so
much when their imports expand. Effectively, nations trade market access: more of your
imports in return for more of my exports. Moreover, these preferences do not seem to be
grounded in the effects that trade volumes have on world market prices. It is true that home
policies that lower import demand tend to reduce their world market prices, and hence
improve the terms of trade. But on the export side, general government practice consists of
boosting export supply, through export subsidies, credits, and other assistance, rather than
reducing it. This has the effect of lowering export prices on world markets, and hence
worsening the terms of trade.
        Also, if trade agreements are really about curbing terms-of-trade manipulation, what do
we make of the prohibition on export subsidies in the WTO? When a government resorts to

6
 See Grossman (2016) for an exposition of the Johnson argument and the subsequent literature. Bagwell and
Staiger (2004) have been the most consistent and prolific defenders of this perspective on trade agreements.


                                                      -10-
export subsidies, it worsens its own terms of trade and confers economic benefits on other
nations. If it does so nevertheless, it must be for non-economic or special-interest reasons.
Regardless, there would be no reason for trade agreements to prohibit their use. As Grossman
(2016) notes, “the literature offers no compelling reason why trade agreements should outlaw
export subsidies in a trading environment characterized by perfectly competitive markets.” 7
        Trade policy practitioners worry little about international terms-of-trade spillovers.
Instead, they tend to justify trade agreements by reference to the politics of trade policy at
home: Trade agreements are what enable governments to say “no” to domestic import-
competing interests. Absent trade agreements, this argument goes, governments are too easily
tempted to do the easy thing and provide import protection when faced with short-term
political pressures (see for example Brown 2016).
        A number of academic papers conceptualize this argument in the form of a time-
inconsistency problem (for example, Staiger and Tabellini, 1987; Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare,
1998). In this framework, the government knows that free trade is the best policy in the long-
run. But it faces short-term political pressures to respond to organized interest groups.
Forward-looking workers and capitalists understand the difference between the government’s
ex ante and ex post incentives and behave accordingly. In particular, they make their sectoral
allocation decisions so as to ensure the government provides them with trade protection ex
post. In these settings, trade agreements are a commitment device for governments to
withstand political pressure from future protectionists. As Grossman (2016) notes, we may
question whether there is not an easier way of purchasing such commitment than negotiating
very complicated deals with multiple partners over many years. Nevertheless, the view that
trade agreements serve to neutralize protectionist special interests is very widely held.
        This commitment, or lock-in argument is analogous to the familiar case for policy
delegation in other areas with dynamic inconsistency, such as monetary policy (justifying an
independent central bank) or business regulation (justifying autonomous regulatory agencies).
In any of these settings, the validity of the policy conclusion depends critically on the
specification of the game that is being played between the government and special interests.
7
 Under imperfect competition, countries may have an economic incentive to use export subsidies to shift excess
profits from foreign firms to domestic firms. See Grossman (2016, section 3) for a discussion.

                                                      -11-
        When there is a genuine time consistency problem, everyone is better off with pre-
commitment or delegation (save, possibly for the lobbyists and special interests). When
protectionists show up at the government’s door, the government says: "sorry, I’d love to help
you out, but the trade agreement will not let me do it." This is the good kind of delegation and
external discipline.
        Now consider a different setting. Here, the government fears not its future self, but its
future opponents: the opposition party (or parties). The latter may have different views on
economic policy, and if victorious in the next election, the opposition may well choose to shift
course. In this situation, an incumbent government enters an international agreement to tie the
hands of its opponents. From the standpoint of social welfare, this strategy has much less to
recommend itself. The future government may have better or worse ideas about government
policy, and it is not clear that restricting what it can do in the future is a win-win outcome. This
government too will present its case in traditional delegation terms. But what it is really doing is
to ensure the permanence of partisan policies.8
        Now suppose further that the current government is captured by special interests—but
by exporter lobbies instead of import-competing lobbies. In this case, the government’s
objectives are explicitly redistributive, to transfer rents from the rest of society to a special
interest. But unlike in the usual model, the rent-seekers are not the traditional protectionists.
They are pharmaceutical companies seeking tighter patent rules, financial institutions that want
to limit ability of countries to manage capital flows, or multinational companies that seek
special tribunals to enforce claims against host governments. In this setting, trade agreements
serve to empower special interests, rather than rein them in.


Whose Interests Do Trade Agreements Serve?




8
 Of course, if trade deals are the outcome of partisan politics, there will be pressure in the future to renege on
them, once political power changes hands. But this is no different than in the standard time-inconsistency case,
where short-term incentives always militate in favor of reneging on trade agreements. In both cases, the argument
relies on the presence of costs that render international agreements hard to reverse.

                                                      -12-
       With traditional trade agreements, which focused on reducing tariff and non-tariff
barriers to trade, it was relatively easy to figure out which of these different models
approximated reality better. Consider for example the GATT (General Agreements on Tariffs
and Trade) rounds of multilateral trade negotiations, before the World Trade Organization was
established in 1995. Tariff levels were high after World War II, and negotiations were largely
about bringing them down. Few other issues were discussed beyond tariffs and other explicit
barriers at the border. The fact that tariffs were high to begin with is prima facie evidence that
protectionist interests had the upper hand in the political equilibrium ex ante. The fact that
trade agreements succeeded in lowering tariffs is evidence that such agreements served to
counteract those protectionist interests ex post. In other words, the trade-agreements-as-
political-commitment story worked pretty well. It suggests that these agreements were moving
the economies of the negotiating parties broadly in the right direction.
       With post-1995 trade agreements, matters are no longer so simple. Tariffs and explicit
barriers to trade have dropped considerably, and many new areas of negotiation have opened
up in which there is typically no efficient “free-trade” benchmark analogous to the role that
zero duties play in the context of tariffs. Do Vietnam’s capital-account regulations, say, or
patent rules serve the country’s economic development well or poorly? Are European Union
food safety regulations closely aligned with European consumers’ risk preferences or do they
privilege producer interests too much? Does US jurisprudence provide adequate protections for
foreign investors, or not? To be sure, domestic regulations and product standards can be
enacted for protectionist purposes – simply to keep competing imports out. But they can be
also used to serve developmental, social, or other deserving goals.
       If countries have gotten the balance wrong in these and other areas, can we be at all
sure that trade agreements such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership or the Transatlantic Trade and
Investment Partnership will move their policies closer to the social optimum -- and not further
away? Can the dispute settlement process provided by such trade agreements draw the




                                                -13-
appropriate distinctions in practice between pure protectionism and legitimate regulatory
divergence?9
        It is hard to provide a definite answer to these questions. What is clear is that we cannot
simply look at whether agreements are trade-creating or not and evaluate them on that basis.
It is all too easy to come up with examples where too much regulatory harmonization in the
name of reducing transaction costs to trade leaves at least one of the negotiating parties worse
off. The case of tightening intellectual property rights in developing countries, mentioned
earlier, is a prominent example. Erosion of consumer protections in high-standard countries
may likewise expand trade, but it will not leave importing countries better off. It is similarly
easy to see that agreements that privilege investors or corporations over other interests (e.g.,
labor or the environment) can end up producing largely redistributive consequences with few
efficiency gains. That is a widespread fear among opponents of investor courts for example.
        Potential trade-offs arise in all of these areas: regulatory harmonization may spur trade,
but it could also prevent regulations from reflecting domestic preferences. A proper negotiating
process would take both sides of the ledger into account. The texts of trade agreements pay
plenty of lip service to economic and social goals beyond trade. However, these are
fundamentally trade deals. They are not negotiations on public health, regulatory
experimentation, promoting structural change and industrialization in developing nations, or
protecting labor standards in the advanced economies. It would not be surprising if the process
were captured by trade interests. Nor should it be unexpected that the success of the
agreements are typically gauged by the volume of trade they create.
        We could gain further insight into specific outcomes by looking at the actual process
through which trade agreements are negotiated. However, such negotiations are typically
secret – a feature that draws the ire of labor, public-interest groups, and many politicians.
During the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, for example, only two copies of the text were


9
  See Sykes (2017) for some of the difficulties. Howse and Tuerk (2001) provide an early discussion of WTO
jurisprudence, drawing attention to the risk that WTO rules can be used to challenge domestic regulations aimed
at addressing serious health risks. The specific case they discuss is a case brought by Canada against France’s ban
on asbestos in construction materials. Even though the WTO panel ultimately ruled against Canada, it accepted the
basis of the claim, namely that asbestos and non-asbestos materials were “like products” and that therefore
France had discriminated against Canadian imports.

                                                       -14-
made available in special reading rooms to US congressmen and their staff with special security
clearances (Bradner 2015). And they could be prosecuted if they revealed the contents to the
public.
          The ostensible reason for secrecy is to facilitate the back-and-forth dealing needed to
produce compromise. But from the perspective of broader social welfare, secrecy is a mixed
blessing. It may promote quicker bargains. But it also tends to bias the results against interests
not present in the negotiation (Kucik and Pelc 2016). Business is rarely far from the actual
negotiations. In fact, it is commonplace for business lobbyists to wait just outside the
negotiation room and influence the outcome in real time (for example, see the account of
NAFTA negotiations in Smith 2015).
          One of the better-known and most instructive cases is the story of trade-related
intellectual property rights, or TRIPs. The inclusion of TRIPs in the 1994 agreement that
established the World Trade Organization was a landmark event. As Devereaux et al. (2006, p.
42) write, “[a]fter seven years of negotiating, industries that rely on copyrights, patents, and
trademarks received more protection than anyone had believed possible at the outset of the
talks.” Business interests had been pushing since at least the 1970s to get the US government
to enforce patent and copyright protections abroad. The conventional international forum for
discussion of such issues was the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). However, US
firms regarded WIPO as an ineffective UN agency dominated by developing countries. A
coalition made up of agrochemical companies like Monsanto, trademark-based companies such
as Levi-Strauss and Samsonite, pharmaceutical companies like Pfizer, and computer companies
such as IBM effectively redefined TRIPs as a trade issue. They managed to engineer what
political scientists call “forum shifting,” moving the focus of international negotiation from
WIPO to what would eventually become the World Trade Organization. US firms coordinated
with their counterparts in Europe and Japan to develop minimum standards on which they
would agree. These standards would in turn significantly shape the final agreement that
emerged from the Uruguay Round (Devereaux et al. 2006; Sell 2011).
          The shift in forums from the World Intellectual Property Organization to the World
Trade Organization was a brilliant strategic move for business. It ensured that commercial


                                                 -15-
considerations would dominate and outweigh other goals, such as implications for economic
development and public health. But TRIPs was only the beginning. Following their success with
using the Uruguay Round to pursue their goals for protection of intellectual property,
pharmaceutical and other companies engaged in what Sell (2011) calls “vertical” forum
shifting—that is, pushing for and obtaining further protections in specific free trade
agreements. The United States had much greater bargaining leverage vis-à-vis individual
developing nations in bilateral or regional trade agreements. Once a precedent had been set in
the WTO talks, it was now possible to go considerably beyond TRIPs. Pharmaceutical companies
were able to obtain test data exclusivity (preventing generics providers to use the same data in
their own licensing applications), a prohibition on parallel imports (of original products, but by
others than the patent holders), severe restrictions on compulsory licensing requirements by
host governments, and automatic patent term extensions (Sell 2011). The Trans-Pacific
Partnership, the latest of these agreements, has such broad protection of intellectual property
that even the head of the World Health Organization has spoken out against it, blaming
interference by “powerful economic operators” (Germanos 2015). 10
        The influence of special interests is rarely exercised through the naked application of
power—do this, or else! Instead, these groups get their way by convincing policymakers and
the broader public that certain of their goals also further the public interest. The success of
TRIPs had to do in no small part with the framing of the issue in terms that gave it broad
legitimacy and appeal. Thus, what might have been more accurately called monopoly rents
were transformed into “property rights.” Then firms abroad who imitated and reverse-

10
   Even though US pharmaceutical companies would have gotten a better deal under the Trans-Pacific Partnership
than they ever had, they were dissatisfied at the end, because they could not get the other countries to agree to
the 12-year protection in biologics that they currently enjoy in the United States. They got a minimum of five years
instead, with three additional years under special regulatory safeguards. Mark Grayson, a spokesman for PhRMA,
which represents top pharmaceutical companies, is quoted as saying: “They were supposed to come back with U.S.
law on [intellectual property] rights, and they didn’t, and our board is very disappointed” (Ferris 2015). For
another perspective, Branstetter (2016) concludes that TPP struck a reasonable balance between incentives to
innovation and access to medicines. He praises the agreement for exporting the US regulatory model (specifically,
the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984, often known Hatch-Waxman Act) to the
Asia-Pacific context. But given that the parties to the trade agreement are at very different stages of development,
it is not clear that a similar model is suitable for all, rather than being a mechanism for rent shifting from less
developed to more developed countries. Moreover, empirical research fails to find strong effects on innovation
from more restrictive patents (Boldrin and Levine 2012; Moser 2013; Sakakibara and Branstetter 1999; Branstetter
2004).

                                                       -16-
engineered technologies of the more advanced countries became engaged in “piracy,” even
though this is a time-honored practice by technologically lagging countries, including today’s
developed countries in their own time. Many of Boston’s original textile mill owners “stole”
their designs from Lancashire, taking elaborate steps to evade British intellectual property
rights protections (Morris 2012). With some hand-waving, preserving the monopoly of US film
studios, pharmaceutical companies, and fashion houses turned into a fundamental issue of free
trade.
         Pro-trade business interests are known to have played a significant role in the expansion
of trade agreements into other new areas beyond intellectual property. For example, the push
to include services in multilateral trade negotiations took place at the behest of American firms.
Services differ from trade in goods insofar they often require changes in domestic regulations.
Financial services is a good example. As Marchetti and Mavroidis (2011, p. 692) write, “it was
the US financial services sectors that first argued systematically in favor of a trade round that
would include a chapter on liberalization of trade in services.” A key role was played by the
Coalition of Service Industries, a trade group representing US service industries, which focused
its energies on the right of establishment of financial and insurance companies in foreign
countries: “The CSI gathered data, organized conferences, engaged in extensive public
lecturing, and heavily lobbied the US government to this effect” (p. 693). The heads of Citibank
and American Express each headed key advisory groups organized by the US Trade
Representative in the run-up to the Uruguay Round agreement in 1994. American Express was
especially active, with its executives building up a domestic lobby, establishing links with other
service-industry lobbies around the world, and exerting influence on US policy through direct
participation in negotiations with other countries (Yoffie 1990, cited in Marchetti and Mavroidis
2011).
         Interestingly, this lobbying to expand markets abroad in services has not done much to
nullify service protectionism in the US itself – unlike in the traditional account of what trade
agreements do. For example, one of the most blatant forms of US protectionism is the
Merchant Marine Act of 1920 (the Jones Act), which prevents foreign ships to serve domestic
shipping lines. The objective of the law is to maintain a strong US shipbuilding industry and


                                                -17-
merchant marine, ostensibly for national security purposes. But the protectionist intent and
consequences are clear (Grennes 2017). It has remained untouched in all the trade agreements
the US has negotiated, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
       As trade agreements move into these new areas, the role of business lobbies changes as
well. Governments have to rely on knowledge and expertise from businesses to negotiate
complex regulatory changes. Hence, business lobbies become partners and collaborators for
the trade negotiators: they help define the issue, provide information and expertise, and
mobilize support from other business groups transnationally. As Woll and Artigas (2007, p. 131)
put it, “[u]nlike the exchange model assumed in the traditional economic models, firms do not
just exchange votes or money to lobby against regulation. Rather, they offer expertise and
political support in exchange for access to the elaboration of specific stakes.” Business lobbies
also become much more intimately involved in the actual trade negotiations, sometimes
forming a larger part of the delegation than the actual government representatives (Woll and
Artigas 2007).
       A rough idea of who actually lobbies for trade agreements can be obtained from data
collected by the Sunlight Foundation for the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Their analysis is based on
public lobbying reports issued by corporations and industry associations, and whether the TPP
is mentioned by name in those reports (as reported by Drutman 2014). Perhaps unsurprisingly,
pharmaceutical manufacturing firms and PhRMA (the industry association) dominate the list.
Others that stand out are auto manufacturers, milk and dairy producers, textiles and fabrics
firms, information technology firms, and the entertainment industry. Labor unions such as
United Steelworkers and AFL-CIO, which are traditionally associated with protectionist motives,
tend to lag behind these industry-based groups.
       Business interests exert influence also through their presence in the various trade
advisory committees that are set up in the course of trade negotiations. Such committee are in
principle made up of a wide range of all the stakeholders, including labor groups and
environmental nongovernment organizations who may have a negative view of conventional
trade agreements. But business representatives and trade associations are by far the dominant
group, making up more than 80 percent of the membership of such committees during the


                                               -18-
negotiation of Trans-Pacific Partnership (as reported in Ingraham 2014; Ingraham and
Schneider 2014).
       Systematic studies of how interest groups on different sides of trade agreements shape
the negotiations are rare, given the lack of transparency of the process. However, one analysis
of Swedish lobbies takes advantage of the fact that Sweden has a far-reaching freedom of
information clause in its constitution, which enabled Rönnbäck (2015) to access all the
documents behind trade policy formulation in the country during the Uruguay Round. As
Rönnbäck points out, the commonly maintained assumption in the literature on the political
economy of trade is that the process is influenced overwhelmingly by import-competing,
protectionist interests. Trade agreements are signed despite these interests, not because of
them. But Rönnbäck found that the approach pursued by the Swedish government in the trade
negotiations was not only in line with special-interest lobbying, but it was largely shaped by it.
The interest groups that played the determining role in the consultative process were in favor
of expanding trade. But the interests of these groups were not in tariffs per se, which were
already low. Instead their demand was “to broaden the scope of the agenda of the GATT, by
including issues such as trade in services, investment measures and public tender agreements”
(p. 286). In other words, industry lobbies pushed for deep integration measures beyond the
standard free-trade policies.
       Rönnbäck’s (2015) study also documents how trade negotiations can help special
interests coordinate across national borders. Apparently Swedish businesses initially did not
show much awareness – or interest in – intellectual property rights. But as the United States
pushed harder on TRIPs in the negotiations, the issue rose in prominence among Swedish
interest groups. As Rönnbäck (p. 287) puts it: “It seems as if the interest groups only realized
the potential for economic rents that the trade negotiations could offer quite slowly, as the
negotiations progressed. As soon as the Swedish interest groups realized this potential,
however, they did not hesitate to act and make demands on the government.” As individual
corporations such as Astra as well as the Pharmaceutical Industry Association took up the
cause, Sweden’s government followed suit. By the late 1980s, any doubts the Swedish
government may have harbored about the wisdom of including TRIPs in the Uruguay Round


                                                -19-
seems to have vanished. In the years leading to the final agreement, the intellectual property
issue came to be “described as among the most important for the Swedish interests” (p. 288).
       Finally, the influence of special interests also shows up in the dog that does not bark:
potential areas of negotiation with high social returns that are left out of the trade agenda. One
such area that touches directly the interests of large firms is global tax-and-subsidy
competition. In a world with mobile capital, governments are tempted to offer better terms to
globally mobile corporations in order to compete for investment. This results in a sub-optimal
Nash equilibrium with larger transfers to corporations and their shareholders than is globally
desirable. In practice, the effects show up in two areas: investment subsidies (in the form of tax
holidays and other sweeteners) and reductions in corporate tax rates. In view of the obvious
cross-border externalities, enacting global disciplines on tax-and-subsidy competition would
make excellent economic sense. Yet trade agreements have never touched on this issue. They
are replete with restrictions on what home governments can do to impose obligations on
foreign investors. But they do not prevent these governments from wasting tax dollars and
enriching corporations in a harmful race to the bottom.


Ammunition to the Barbarians?
       When I recently gave a talk arguing that economists underplay some of the adverse
consequences of advanced globalization, an economist in the audience took me to task: Don’t
you worry, he asked, that your arguments will be used (or abused) by populists and
protectionists to further their own interests? It is a reaction that reminds me of a response
from a distinguished economist more than two decades ago to my 1997 monograph Has
Globalization Gone Too Far? All your arguments are fine, he told me, but they will give
“ammunition to the barbarians.”
       The objection is instructive insofar as it lays bare the implicit political economy
understanding with which economists tend to approach public discussions of trade policy. In
this perspective, the serious threats to sensible trade policy nearly always come from the
import protectionists, and trade agreement mainly offset the influence of the protectionists.
But as trade agreements have evolved and gone beyond import tariffs and quotas into


                                               -20-
regulatory rules and harmonization—intellectual property, health and safety rules, labor
standards, investment measures, investor-state dispute settlement procedures, and others--
they have become harder and harder to fit into received economic theory. Why do many
economists presume that it is more dangerous to express skepticism in public about these rules
than it is to cheerlead? In other words, why do they think that there are barbarians only on one
side of the issue?
       I have presented an alternative perspective in this paper. Rather than neutralizing the
protectionists, trade agreements may empower a different set of rent-seeking interests and
politically well-connected firms – international banks, pharmaceutical companies, and
multinational firms. They may serve to internationalize the influence of these powerful
domestic interests. Trade agreements could still result in freer, mutually beneficial trade,
through exchange of market access. They could result in the global upgrading of regulations and
standards, for labor, say, or the environment. But they could also produce purely redistributive
outcomes under the guise of “freer trade.” As trade agreements become less about tariffs and
non-tariff barriers at the border and more about domestic rules and regulations, economists
might do well to worry more about the latter possibility. They may even adopt a stance of
rebuttable prejudice against these new-type trade deals, a prejudice which should be
overturned only with demonstrable evidence of their benefits.




                                               -21-
REFERENCES

Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert Staiger, The Economics of the World Trading System, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2004.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, Pravin Krishna, and Arvind Panagariya, “The World Trade System: Trends and
Challenges,” Department of Economics, Columbia University, May 2014.

Boldrin, Michele, and David K. Levine, “The Case Against Patents,” Working Paper 2012-035A,
Research Division, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, September 2012.

Bradner, Eric, “How Secretive is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?” CNN, June 12,
2015, http://www.cnn.com/2015/06/11/politics/trade-deal-secrecy-tpp/index.html.

Branstetter, Lee G., “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Local Innovation?” Journal of
International Economic Law, Volume 7, Issue 2, June 2004, 359-370.

Branstetter, Lee, “TPP and the Conflict over Drugs: Incentives for Innovation versus Access to
Medicines,” in Jeffrey J. Schott and Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs, eds., Assessing the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, vol. 2: Innovations in Trading Rules, Peterson Institute for International Economics,
Washington, DC, March 2016.

Brown, Chad P., “The Truth about Trade Agreements and Why We Need Them,” Peterson
Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, November 21,
2016 https://piie.com/commentary/op-eds/truth-about-trade-agreements-and-why-we-need-
them.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
NAFTA,” Review of Economic Studies, 82, 2015, 1–44.

Devereaux, Charan, Robert Z. Lawrence, and Michael D. Watkins, Case Studies in U.S. Trade
Negotiation, vol. 1: Making the Rules, Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC,
2006.

Diwan, Ishac, and Dani Rodrik, “Patents, Appropriate Technology, and North-South
Trade.” Journal of International Economics, February 1991.

Driskill, Robert A., “Deconstructing the Argument for Free Trade,” Vanderbilt University,
unpublished, February
2007, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/254401781_Deconstructing_the_argument_f
or_free_trade.



                                               -22-
Drutman, Lee. 2014. “How Big Pharma (and others) began lobbying on the Trans-Pacific
Partnership before you ever heard of it.” Sunlight Foundation. March
13, https://sunlightfoundation.com/2014/03/13/tpp-lobby.

Euractiv, “EU GMO ban was illegal, WTO rules,” May 12, 2006 (updated: Nov 5,
2012), https://www.euractiv.com/section/trade-society/news/eu-gmo-ban-was-illegal-wto-
rules/.

Ferris, Sarah, “Pharma Flap Imperils President’s Trade Deal,” The Hill, October 20,
2015, http://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/lobbying/257386-pharma-flap-imperils-presidents-
trade-deal.

Germanos, Andrea, “WHO Head Joins Chorus Denouncing TPP's Blow to Public Health, Boon to
Big Pharma,” Common Dreams, November 12,
2015, https://www.commondreams.org/news/2015/11/12/who-head-joins-chorus-
denouncing-tpps-blow-public-health-boon-big-pharma.

Grennes, Thomas, “An Economic Analysis of the Jones Act,” Mercatus Center, George Mason
University, 2017.

Grossman, Gene, “The Purpose of Trade Agreements,” in Kyle Bagwell and Robert Staiger,
eds., Handbook of Commercial Policy, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2016.

Hakobyan, Shushanik, and John McLaren, “Looking for Local Labor Market Effects of
NAFTA,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(4), October 2016, 728–741.

Howse, Robert, and Elisabeth Tuerk, “The WTO Impact on Internal Regulations—A Case Study
of the Canada–EC Asbestos Dispute,” Grainne de Burca and Joanne Scott, eds., The EU and the
WTO: Legal and Constitutional Issues, Hart Publishing, Oxford and Portland, 2001.

Ingraham, Christopher. 2014.” Interactive: How companies wield off-the-record influence on
Obama’s trade policy,” Washington Post, February
28. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/02/28/how-companies-wield-off-
the-record-influence-on-obamas-trade-policy/?utm_term=.2af41e0fe37a.

Ingraham, Christopher, and Howard Schneider. 2014. “ Industry voices dominate the trade
advisory system.” Washington Post, February 27, 2014, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
srv/special/business/trade-advisory-committees/.

Johnson, Harry G., “Optimum Tariffs and Retaliation,” Review of Economic Studies 21 (2), 1953,
142-153.



                                             -23-
Johnson, Lise, Lisa Sachs and Jeffrey Sachs, “Investor‐State Dispute Settlement, Public Interest
and U.S. Domestic Law,” Columbia Center for Sustainable Investment, Columbia University,
May 2015.

Krueger, Anne O., “Free Trade Agreements as Protectionist Devices: Rules of Origin,” NBER
Working Paper No. 4352, April 1993.

Kucik, Jeffrey, and Krzysztof J. Pelc, “Measuring the Cost of Privacy: A Look at the Distributional
Effects of Private Bargaining,” British Journal of Political Science, Volume 46, Issue 4, October
2016, 861-889.

Lawrence, Robert Z., Regionalism, Multilateralism, and Deeper Integration, Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C., 1996.

Limão, Nuno, “Preferential Trade Agreements,” NBER Working Paper 22138, March 2016.

Maggi, Giovanni, and Andres Rodriguez‐Clare, “The Value of Trade Agreements in the Presence
of Political Pressures,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 3, June 1998), pp. 574-601.

Marchetti, Juan A., and Petros C. Mavroidis, “The Genesis of the GATS (General Agreement on
Trade in Services),” The European Journal of International Law, Vol. 22 no. 3, 2011, 689-721.

Morris, Charles, R., “We Were Pirates, Too,” Foreign Policy, December 6,
2012, http://foreignpolicy.com/2012/12/06/we-were-pirates-too/.

Moser, Petra, “Patents and Innovation: Evidence from Economic History,” The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 27, No. 1 (Winter 2013), 23-44.

Rönnbäck, Klas, “Interest-group Lobbying for Free Trade: An Empirical Case Study of
International Trade Policy Formation,” The Journal of International Trade & Economic
Development, 24:2, 2015, 281-293.

Sakakibara, Mariko, and Lee Branstetter, “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation?
Evidence from the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms,” NBER Working Paper No. 7066, April
1999.

Sell, Susan K., “TRIPs Was Never Enough: Vertical Forum Shifting, FTAS, ACTA, and TPP,” Journal
of Intellectual Property Law, 18, 2011, 447-478.

Siegel, Deborah E., “Capital Account Regulations and the Trading System,” in Kevin P. Gallagher
and Leonardo E. Stanley, eds., Capital Account Regulations and the Trading System: A
Compatibility Review, Pardee Center Task Force Report, Boston University, March 2013.


                                                -24-
Smith, Tacey Vanek, “Remembering NAFTA Gives Insight Into Why Trade Deals Are Kept
Secret,” NPR, June 19, 2015, http://www.npr.org/2015/06/19/415809462/remembering-nafta-
gives-insight-into-why-trade-deals-are-kept-secret.

Staiger, Robert W., and Tabellini, Guido, ‘‘Discretionary Trade Policy and Excessive
Protection.’’ American Economic Review, 77, December 1987, 823–37.

Sykes, Alan O., “Regulatory Consistency Requirements in International Trade,” Arizona State
Law Journal, 49, 821 (Special Issue), 2017.

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, World Investment Report 2015,
Geneva, Switzerland, 2015.

Woll, Cornelia, and Alvaro Artigas, “When Trade Liberalization Turns into Regulatory Reform:
The Impact on Business-Government Relations in International Trade Politics,” Regulation &
Governance, 1, 2007, 121-138.

Yoffie, David B., “Trade in Services and American Express,” in D.B. Yoffie, International Trade
and Competition: Cases and Notes in Strategy and Management, 1990, 367–386.




                                               -25-
