NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CARPOOLING AND THE ECONOMICS OF SELF-DRIVING CARS
Michael Ostrovsky
Michael Schwarz
Working Paper 24349
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24349

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018

We are grateful to Saurabh Amin, Alexandre Bayen, Ben Edelman, Emir Kamenica, Hal Varian,
and Laura Wynter for helpful comments and suggestions, and to Suraj Malladi for research
assistance. This paper was presented at the 2017 NBER Market Design Working Group Meeting.
Per NBER disclosure policy, we report that although Michael Schwarz is currently at Microsoft,
this research was commenced when he was Chief Scientist for Waze. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of their past or current employers
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Michael Ostrovsky and Michael Schwarz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Carpooling and the Economics of Self-Driving Cars
Michael Ostrovsky and Michael Schwarz
NBER Working Paper No. 24349
February 2018
JEL No. C78,D47,L91
ABSTRACT
We study the interplay between autonomous transportation, carpooling, and road pricing. We
discuss how improvements in these technologies, and interactions among them, will affect
transportation markets. Our main results show how to achieve socially efficient outcomes in such
markets, taking into account the costs of driving, road capacity, and commuter preferences. An
important component of the efficient outcome is the socially optimal matching of carpooling
riders. Our approach shows how to set road prices and how to share the costs of driving and tolls
among carpooling riders in a way that implements the efficient outcome.

Michael Ostrovsky
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
ostrovsky@stanford.edu
Michael Schwarz
Microsoft
2140 Shattuck Ave
Berkeley, CA 94704
mschwarz@microsoft.com

1

Introduction
The market for transportation will be transformed by three emerging technologies. Autonomous

driving technology is the most radical of the coming changes, but there are two other emerging
technologies that are less futuristic but potentially no less disruptive. The two other technologies are
technology for time-sensitive tolls that can be charged for each road segment without slowing down
cars and carpooling technology for seamlessly matching cars with multiple passengers. This paper
explores the issue of designing efficient transportation markets powered by these three technologies.
Of course, neither tolls nor carpooling are new. However, the frictions currently associated with
road pricing and carpooling are very high. These frictions are likely to decrease substantially in
the future because of technological improvements.
In the case of tolls, the first generation of the technology involved human toll collectors charging
a payment from each passing car, which had to stop to make the payment. The second (current)
generation of toll technology (like E-ZPass and FasTrak) involves costly hardware at the points
of toll collection. Both technologies are expensive to install and/or run, are thus limited to only
a few major locations, and do not allow toll collection on most road segments. E.g., even in the
major locations where toll collecting systems are installed, such as bridges, the tolls are often
charged only to cars going in one of the two directions, which is not sufficient for efficient traffic
management.1 Generally, implementing toll collection on only a small subset of roads may not be
welfare improving, because traffic flows from those roads may spill over to other streets, worsening
congestion there.
The third (next) generation of toll technology will reduce the cost of physical toll infrastructure
by orders of magnitude, because of advances in GPS, mobile, and other related technologies. These
technologies will make it feasible and practical to charge tolls systemwide, street intersection by
street intersection, allowing regulators to keep roads toll-free during off-peak hours, and to set tolls
high enough to keep traffic flowing during rush hour.2 Moreover, the ability to coordinate tolls on
all the roads in the system together (rather than only on a small subset) will allow regulators to use
the tolls as a powerful tool to optimize systemwide traffic, without worrying about “spillovers” from
paid roads to free ones. Of course, technological constraints are not the only potential barrier to
the adoption of systemwide tolls: commuters may worry about distributional consequences of such
1

While adjusting the level of tolls in one direction makes it possible to control the overall flow of traffic, it does
not allow the regulator to charge time-sensitive tolls in the opposite direction, and thus does not allow to spread
traffic in that direction over time in an efficient pattern. To give just one example illustrating the high costs of the
current technology, in 2007 the U.S. federal government earmarked over one billion dollars for installing a handful of
tolls in just five pilot metropolitan areas (“Cities to Split $1.1 Billion For Traffic Proposals,” the Wall Street Journal,
August 14, 2007, https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB118713672357497944).
2
Satellite-based systems are already in use in several European countries, where they are used to charge tolls on
trucks for road usage. In 2016, the Land Transport Authority of Singapore announced plans to implement a satellitebased toll system for all motorists by year 2020 (“LTA to roll out next-generation ERP from 2020, NCS-MHI to build
system for $556m,” the Straits Times, February 25, 2016, http://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/transport/ncsmhi-to-build-islandwide-satellite-based-erp-for-556m).

2

tolls,3 or about not benefiting from the toll revenue collected by the government.4 As we explain in
Section 2.3, introducing systemwide tolls in the presence of frictionless carpooling technology helps
substantially alleviate these concerns: the two technologies are complementary.
Carpooling is of course also an old “technology,” with a potentially large upside: putting two
or three commuters in a car, instead of having them drive solo, would cut the number of cars
on the road and the cost of transportation in half. Various government initiatives have promoted
carpooling for over half a century, going back to World War II. Yet it still not widely used: according
to the US Census Bureau, only around 9.3% of commuters in the US carpooled to work, compared
to 76.4% who drove alone.5 Why will the future be different from the past? The answer is, again,
technological progress. Perfect carpool partners travel along similar routes at similar times. For
many people, there are many compatible carpool partners—however, these carpool partners change
day to day, because schedules change. Until recently, it was too hard to find a good carpool partner,
at least without advance planning, and too inconvenient to coordinate with him or her. This is
starting to change. New mobile phone apps (e.g., Waze Carpool and Scoop) automate the process
of finding suitable carpool matches with short detours and compatible travel times, and also keep
track of user reputation, preferences, and patterns, and make it seamless for passengers to reimburse
drivers for part of travel costs.6 The products are still in their infancy, available only in limited
geographic areas, but they clearly demonstrate the potential of technology to substantially lower
the frictions associated with carpooling, especially as the technology matures and the network of
commuters who use it grows. So even if the rest of the technological landscape remained unchanged,
the barriers to carpooling would drop, making it more attractive. But viewing technological progress
in carpooling in isolation would present an incomplete picture of its potential.
In Section 2, we argue that there are strong interdependencies between improvements in the
three technologies we mentioned: autonomous transportation, road pricing, and carpooling. Autonomous transportation makes both road pricing and carpooling more convenient and attractive.
Road pricing and carpooling reinforce each other: the former makes the latter more attractive,
and vice versa. These observations raise a variety of questions about the efficient design of transportation in light of these technological improvements and interactions among them. How should
road prices be set? How should carpooling groups be determined? How much should each of the
carpooling passengers pay (e.g., if one passenger is in the car for only a part of the ride, while
another passenger is in the car for the whole ride—but the car had to make a small detour to
3

E.g., in response to a proposal to introduce toll lanes on highway 580 in Orange County, state Assemblyman Allan
Mansoor commented, “If you put toll lanes in, it’s a money grab. Who can afford $10 to $15? Seniors can’t afford
it. Low-income families cannot afford it.” (http://abc7.com/news/politicians-oppose-oc-405-fwy-toll-lanes/234209/)
4
In which case they may not benefit from having the tolls. E.g., in Vickrey’s (1969) canonical example, (homogeneous) drivers are indifferent between paying efficient tolls and waiting in traffic: they simply pay in dollars what
they used to pay in time. The increase in social welfare comes solely from the fact that the time in traffic is a pure
waste, while the collected tolls become government revenue. If the revenue is not used to benefit the drivers in any
way, then their welfare is not improved.
5
https://factfinder.census.gov/bkmk/table/1.0/en/ACS/16 5YR/S0801/0100000US
6
https://www.mercurynews.com/2017/01/03/road-warriors-unite-carpooling-apps-wont-save-the-planet-butmay-help-us-save-each-other/

3

pick up the first passenger)? How should carpooling interact with road pricing (e.g., how should
tolls paid by passengers depend on the number of riders in the car)? Our modeling framework in
Section 3 is designed to address these questions.
The framework blends together ideas from coalition formation games (riders form coalitions to
carpool and share costs) and competitive equilibrium (road prices are set at the level that clears
the market). The framework naturally incorporates interactions between the two components: tolls
impact which carpooling coalitions get formed; in turn, the carpooling coalition formation process
impacts the demand for roads. Our main results in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 show how to achieve
socially efficient outcomes in such markets, taking into account the costs of driving, road capacity,
and commuter preferences. An important component of the efficient outcome is the socially optimal
matching of carpooling riders. Our approach shows how to set road prices and how to share the
costs of driving and tolls among carpooling riders in a way that implements the efficient outcome.
We find that efficient market design for this setting can be “decomposed” into (i) road pricing by
the road authorities (where road segments have positive prices only when they are at capacity, and
are free otherwise) and (ii) unconstrained coalition formation in which groups of riders are allowed
to arrange whichever carpooling trips they want, and can split the costs of those trips in any way
they choose. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper that jointly characterizes efficient
tolls and efficient carpooling arrangements.
Our main results are established for an economy in which all cars are self-driving. The technical
difference between a world in which all cars are self-driving vs. one in which some or all cars have
human drivers is that carpool matching with self-driving is a one-sided matching problem, while
with regular cars it is a two-sided one. Section 3.3 points out that our results can be adapted to a
world in which some or all cars are conventional.
In Sections 4 and 5 we discuss various assumptions behind our modeling framework, as well
as potential extensions and generalizations. In Section 4, we consider the issue of the potential
economic gains from increased car utilization (as measured by the fraction of time each car is on
the road). Perhaps surprisingly, these gains turn out to be relatively small—and, in particular,
much smaller than the potential gains from increased utilization of seats within a car (by arranging
carpools with multiple passengers traveling in the same car). This observation informs our modeling framework, specifically, the assumptions that the physical cost of a trip depends only on the
characteristics of that trip, and that for a self-driving car, there is no cost of waiting between trips.
Section 5 concludes with a discussion of other issues related to our model and potential extensions.

2

Technological Interactions
In this section, we discuss the interactions between the three emerging technologies mentioned

in the introduction: autonomous transportation, frictionless carpooling, and improved road pricing.
This discussion explains why a transportation market powered by these technologies needs to be
studied in a unified framework. The framework itself is presented in Section 3. A reader interested

4

SelfDriving
Cars

Information
Technology

Tolls

Carpooling

Figure 1: Technological influences
in our formal analysis can skip directly to that section.
Figure 1 illustrates influences between the technologies. The overall progress in information
technology makes self-driving cars feasible, and, as discussed in the introduction, also brings about
dramatic improvements in carpooling and road pricing. Autonomous transportation technology, in
turn, makes carpooling and road pricing even more attractive, as we discuss in Sections 2.1 and
2.2. Finally, as we discuss in Section 2.3, next-generation carpooling and road pricing technologies
are highly complementary and make each other more attractive.

2.1

The influence of autonomous transportation on carpooling

Carpooling can be viewed as a form of public transportation. Currently, the cost of drivers is a
significant component of public transit costs. Because drivers’ time is expensive, public transportation uses large vehicles that make frequent stops, resulting in slow and often inconvenient service.
By eliminating the cost of drivers’ time, self-driving technology will make public transportation
much cheaper than it is today. Moreover, it will make public transit more convenient by enabling
fewer stops and door-to-door transit at a reasonable cost. Carpooling will become much more
attractive in the world of self-driving cars, blurring the line between solo driving and mass transit.
Below we list various reasons for this impact of autonomous transportation on carpooling.
• No-hassle coordination: regardless of whether or not a rider carpools, the self-driving car
has to know its destination and the possible routes, and so coordinating carpooling does not
require effort on the part of riders.
• It is easy for an automated system to make carpooling matches in real time (i.e., when the
car is already moving) and adjust its route accordingly. For a human driver to accept a ride
request when the car is already moving could be inconvenient or unsafe.
5

• One of the key challenges in creating a carpooling platform is getting to a critical mass
where on-demand carpooling is reliable enough to be practical. With transportation services
powered by self-driving cars, this issue is resolved automatically.
• With several people sharing a ride, it does not have to be the case that the same person is
the first one getting in the car and the last one getting out of it.
• Detours are much less costly: it costs much less to sit in the car as a passenger who is
reading/sleeping/working while the car is making a five-minute detour than to drive during
that time. Essentially, with driving, a five-minute detour costs the driver her regular wage
for that period, while for a passenger in a self-driving car, the cost is lower.
• No need to depend on a potentially unreliable carpool driver.
• No-hassle payments. Social frictions are removed or reduced.
• People are reluctant to carpool in part due to the loss of flexibility: with conventional carpooling, the driver needs to commit to a departure time and the passenger needs to be ready
at the agreed-upon time. With real-time carpooling that can be enabled by self-driving cars,
it is possible to offer “asymmetric service”: the first passenger to be picked up pays a small
premium so that the car can wait for her (so she can leave her house at any time during a
certain time window). As the car starts moving, it can pick up other passengers along the
route.
• Consistency of experience. E.g., no need to worry about being matched with an unsafe driver.
• Regular cars are built for families; they are not optimized for carpooling. Self-driving cars
may be built with carpooling use in mind. The seating could then be arranged to maximize
the comfort and privacy of passengers.

2.2

The influence of autonomous transportation on road pricing

With self-driving cars, intelligent systemwide road pricing also becomes more attractive, for the
following reasons.
One reason is the potential equilibrium effect of autonomous transportation on road demand in
the absence of road pricing. Without the need to drive, a rider’s disutility from spending a certain
amount of time in traffic is substantially reduced: she can sleep, work, read, play videogames, and so
on—i.e., engage in many of the same leisure or productive activities that she would otherwise do at
home or at work. While individually attractive, this substantially reduced disutility from spending
time in traffic may lead to highly undesirable equilibrium effects, with riders being much more
willing to take trips during already congested times, and commute over longer distances. Riders
would thus impose even higher negative externalities on others, with ambiguous overall effects on
social welfare, despite the obvious individual benefits of the improved technology. The Tesla CEO

6

Elon Musk expressed a related concern that convenient and affordable autonomous transportation
may lead to increased congestion: “A lot of people think that once you make cars autonomous
that they’ll be able to go faster and that will alleviate congestion and to some degree that will be
true. But . . . the amount of driving that will occur will be much greater with shared autonomy
and actually, traffic will get far worse.”7 In such circumstances, intelligent systemwide road pricing
becomes particularly valuable.
Another reason why self-driving technology makes road pricing more attractive is largely logistical, on the rider side. A passenger of a self-driving car already needs to enter her destination when
she begins the trip, and it is convenient to present road prices at that moment, as well as let her
choose among several options (e.g., a faster route vs. a cheaper one). Similarly, if the passenger’s
departure time is flexible, the system can present her with various options to travel at a lower price
at a different time. In other words, it is convenient to incorporate road pricing directly into the
user interface for autonomous transportation. Note that various carpooling options are also easy
to integrate into the same user interface, allowing the user to choose among various combinations
of options.
The third reason is also logistical, but on the side of technological infrastructure. Since a selfdriving car’s system must already have exact data on what route the car is taking, and at what
time, that data can in principle also be used to compute tolls, at a very low marginal cost relative
to the cost of developing the toll-collection infrastructure from scratch.

2.3

The complementarity between road pricing and carpooling

Finally, there is a strong complementarity between carpooling and road pricing. To illustrate
this complementarity, consider the following simple example based on Vickrey (1969). There is one
congested road, which is a “bottleneck.” Twice as many drivers want to go over that road during
a certain period of time than the road can allow. Without any interventions, we get congestion,
delay, and wasted time. To make the following example as transparent as possible, we assume that
the cost of driving is zero—the only issue is congestion and delay.
• Suppose carpooling becomes very convenient: its disutility (vs. driving solo) is some small
∆ > 0. This has no effect on outcomes, because nobody has an incentive to carpool.
• Suppose there is no carpooling and tolls are set at the socially optimal level. To make the
point particularly stark, suppose also that toll revenues are not spent in ways that benefit
the drivers who pay these tolls. Vickrey (1969) then shows that with homogeneous drivers,
none of the drivers are better off : they simply pay in dollars what they used to pay in time.8
• Now suppose we both have convenient carpooling and set socially optimal tolls. We then fully
relieve congestion, all riders arrive at their most preferred times, and are now much better
7

https://electrek.co/2017/05/01/tesla-network-elon-musk-autonomous-ride-sharing-vision/
Society is better off overall, because tolls are an efficient mechanism for raising revenues. A driver’s time in traffic
is a social waste, while toll payments are an efficient transfer. However, as we stated above, drivers are no better off
if toll revenues are used by the central authority in a way that does not benefit them.
8

7

off than they were before—even if all the revenue from tolls is simply destroyed. Moreover,
even if only a fraction of drivers can carpool, they become better off, paying in dollars less
than half of what they used to pay in time.9
Thus, deployed together, intelligent tolls and seamless carpooling operate as a “shock absorber”
for times of peak travel demand: on average, there will be more riders in each car during times of
peak demand than during off-peak hours. Note that both technologies are needed for this shock
absorber to work well, and they reinforce each other. The presence of tolls makes carpooling
more attractive, since it allows riders to share the costs of those tolls and thus pay less and travel
closer to their preferred times—in contrast to the situation with congestion delays and without
tolls, in which carpooling does not reduce any rider’s cost of waiting in traffic. A cost paid in
the form of dollars can be shared among the carpooling riders and thus substantially reduced for
each one of them individually, while a cost paid in the form of time spent in traffic cannot: each
of the carpooling riders “pays” the full amount. Conversely, the presence of convenient, seamless
carpooling makes tolls much more attractive politically, because it gives price-sensitive riders a
feasible way to commute during their preferred times, and can make them substantially better off
even if the revenue from tolls does not benefit them directly.

3

Model and Main Results
In this section, we present our model of a transportation marketplace with autonomous driving,

carpooling, and tolls, and state and prove our main results. In Section 3.1, we present the model
and the first result on efficiency. In Section 3.2, we present an auxiliary, “fractional” model of
transportation, and prove results on existence and efficiency. In Section 3.3, we discuss to what
extent our results are applicable to the world with human drivers.

3.1

Model and Efficiency

There is a finite set of riders m = 1, . . . , M . There is also a finite set of road segments s =
1, . . . , S. Each road segment s identifies both the physical road segment that can be viewed as an
“indivisible” road unit (e.g., a part of a freeway between two exits) and a specific time. Note that
time is discretized and the same road at two different times is viewed as two distinct road segments.
Each road segment s has an integer capacity qs > 0.
9

Hall (2017) discusses the difficulties of allocating toll revenue in ways that make all drivers better off, and also
raises the question of whether tolls can make all drivers better off even if the revenue from tolls is destroyed. He shows
that putting appropriate tolls on some of the lanes on a congested highway can lead to a Pareto improvement, by
relieving hypercongestion on those lanes and thereby increasing those lanes’ throughput—which would in turn lead
to fewer cars and a lower congestion level on the remaining free lanes. However, as Hall (2017) notes, “Obtaining a
Pareto improvement [. . . ] comes at a cost. By only pricing a portion of the lanes, we leave the other lanes congested,
with all the resulting social costs. That said, inasmuch as generating a Pareto improvement makes it politically
feasible to implement tolling, then we are trading potential, but unrealized, welfare gains for actual welfare gains.”
Our example shows that with carpooling, one may not need to face this trade-off: it may be possible to both obtain
the first-best outcome and generate Pareto improvement for all commuters (relative to the congested status quo),
even if all revenue from tolls is destroyed.

8

A trip is a feasible combination of one or more riders and one or more road segments, and
possibly other characteristics (which can encode a wide variety of options: e.g., which rider gets
which seat, what type of car is used, and so on). There is a finite number T of possible trips
t = 1, . . . , T .
Each trip t has a non-negative physical cost c(t) ∈ R associated with it. This cost includes the
physical cost of the resources associated with the trip: gas or electricity used; wear and tear on the
car; etc.
Each rider m has a non-negative valuation for every possible trip t that involves him, vm (t) ∈ R.
We assume that for each rider m, there exists an “outside option” that is represented by a trip
that involves only one rider (m) and no road segments, gives rider m the valuation of zero, and has
the cost of zero. We also assume that for every trip t and every subset of riders involved in trip t,
there exists a trip t0 that involves exactly this subset of riders, involves the same segments as trip
t, has cost c(t0 ) ≤ c(t), and to every rider m in the subset, gives valuation vm (t0 ) ≥ vm (t). I.e.,
intuitively, we can drop any rider from a trip without increasing the physical cost of the trip and
without making other riders worse off. Finally, we assume that each trip creates non-negative net
P
value to its participants: m∈t vm (t) − c(t) ≥ 0, where “m ∈ t” denotes the riders who participate
in trip t.
An assignment is a set of trips A such that each rider is involved in exactly one trip in A (some
of these riders may of course be assigned to their outside option). Assignment A is feasible if for
each road segment s, the number of trips in A that include road segment s does not exceed its
capacity qs .
An observation about our modeling assumptions is in order. By definition, there is no traffic
congestion in a feasible assignment. Obviously, in practice, setting tolls too low (e.g., at zero) can
lead to traffic delays, as cars may have to wait in queues in order to pass through road segments
that lack capacity to meet demand. However, for our purposes, we do not need to model traffic
congestion, much like general equilibrium models do not need to model consumer response to
shortages. Our assumptions say that as long as an assignment is feasible (i.e., the number of cars
on each road segment does not exceed that segment’s capacity), the speed of cars on that road
segment and hence each rider’s utility from a trip does not depend on the number of other cars
using the same road segments. In other words, we implicitly assumed that when traffic congestion
slows down the flow of traffic, the throughput of the road does not increase relative to maximum
throughput that is attainable at speed limit. While this is of course an approximation, it is in
fact largely consistent with the findings from the literature on traffic and road throughput. For
high levels of traffic congestion, overall road throughput is actually reduced relative to throughput
available at higher speeds (this phenomenon is known as “hypercongestion,” see Walters (1961),
who calls this phenomenon “the bottleneck case,” and Small and Chu (2003)). Thus, at high
congestion levels there is no trade-off between speed and throughput. For moderate levels of traffic,
there is a trade-off between the speed of traffic and throughput, however, assuming this trade-off
away is a reasonably accurate approximation of the real world traffic flows, which substantially

9

simplifies the analysis without losing much realism. For example, the highest possible throughput
on highways is attained at speeds that are close to speed limits (Hall, 1996; Varaiya, 2005).10 We
further discuss this assumption in more detail in Section 5.
We now introduce monetary transfers in our model. First, a non-negative vector p ∈ RM
specifies the price paid by each rider m. If a rider m is charged price pm and is assigned to trip tm ,
his utility function is quasilinear in money:
Um (tm , pm ) = vm (tm ) − pm .
Second, a non-negative vector r ∈ RS specifies the tolls imposed by a regulator. Note that tolls are
segment-specific (rather than route-specific): the cost of using a route is equal to the sum of the
tolls for its individual segments. Note also that tolls are imposed on cars rather than on passengers,
and so in particular are not affected by the number of passengers in a car. We discuss the possibility
of more complex tolls that depend on the entire route or on the number of passengers after the
proof of Theorem 1.
An outcome is a triple (A, p, r) that specifies an assignment, the payments made by the riders,
and the tolls imposed by the regulator. An outcome is feasible if the corresponding assignment A
is feasible. An outcome is budget-balanced if the sum of prices paid by the riders for their trips is
greater than or equal to the sum of the total physical costs of those trips and the total tolls on the
road segments involved in those trips. An outcome is stable if no coalition of riders can organize
a trip by themselves (taking the physical cost of that trip and the underlying tolls as given) that
would give each of them a strictly higher utility than what they are getting in the outcome.
The social surplus of assignment A is equal to the sum of the valuations of all the riders from
the trips to which they are assigned in A minus the sum of the costs of the trips in A. Note that
prices p and tolls r do not enter this calculation.
The regulator is interested in maximizing social surplus. Note that feasibility, stability, and
budget-balancedness are not sufficient to guarantee that social surplus is maximized. For instance,
if all tolls are set at a very high level, the outcome that assigns every rider to his outside option and
charges him zero is feasible, stable, and budget-balanced – but is not in general surplus maximizing.
Intuitively, the problem with such a high level of tolls is that it leaves roads underutilized: high
tolls push riders away even from segments that have plenty of capacity. Our last condition rules out
such a possibility. Formally, we say that an outcome is market-clearing if for every road segment
such that the number of trips in A that include it is less than its capacity, the corresponding toll
is equal to zero.
We are now ready to state the first main result of the paper.
10

From Varaiya (2005): “There are 26,000 sensors buried under the pavements of California freeways. Every thirty
seconds, those sensors send data to our computers here in Berkeley. The data tell us about the number of cars driving
on that freeway and their speeds at that time. . . . We’ve already learned quite a lot from all those data. For example,
we’ve found the error in the old belief that an average speed of 40 to 45 mph maximizes traffic capacity; we now
know for a fact that maximum capacity occurs at around 60 mph.”

10

Theorem 1 If an outcome (A, pA , rA ) is feasible, stable, budget-balanced, and market-clearing,
then assignment A has the highest possible social surplus across all feasible assignments.
Proof. Suppose a different feasible assignment, B, generates a higher social surplus than does
assignment A. Take any trip t in assignment B, and all riders m involved in trip t. Since by
assumption outcome A is stable, this coalition of riders cannot benefit from organizing trip t by
themselves, given prices pA and tolls rA in outcome A. Thus, summing the utilities of all riders
involved in trip t, we get
!
X


A

vm (tA
m ) − pm ≥

m∈t

X

vm (t)

− c(t) − rA (t),

(1)

m∈t

where tA
m denotes the trip in which rider m is involved under assignment A, and, slightly abusing
notation, rA (t) denotes the sum of the tolls on the segments involved in trip t in outcome (A, pA , rA ).
Adding up equations (1) across all trips t in assignment B, we get
M
X

vm (tA
m)

M
X

−

m=1

pA
m

≥

m=1

M
X

vm (tB
m)

−

m=1

X

c(t) −

t∈B

S
X

rA (s)k B (s),

(2)

s=1

where k B (s) denotes how many trips in assignment B use segment s.
Since outcome (A, pA , rA ) is by assumption budget-balanced, we have
M
X

pA
m

m=1

≥

X

c(t) +

S
X

rA (s)k A (s).

s=1

t∈A

Thus, equation (2) implies that
M
X
m=1

vm (tA
m) −

X
t∈A

c(t) −

S
X

rA (s)k A (s) ≥

s=1

M
X
m=1

vm (tB
m) −

X
t∈B

c(t) −

S
X

rA (s)k B (s).

(3)

s=1

P
P
A
The social surplus of assignment A is equal to M
m=1 vm (tm )−
t∈A c(t), while the social surplus
PM
P
B
of assignment B is equal to m=1 vm (tm ) − t∈B c(t). To show that the former is greater than
P
P
or equal to the latter, it is now sufficient to observe that Ss=1 rA (s)k A (s) ≥ Ss=1 rA (s)k B (s),
which follows from the market-clearing property of outcome (A, pA , rA ): for every segment s with
rA (s) > 0, k A (s) is equal to the capacity of segment s, and is thus greater than or equal to k B (s).

The above result has a number of implications for how to set efficient tolls. Until recently
the only technology available for collecting tolls was to charge tolls per road segment. Thus, a
technological constraint necessitated that tolls be additive, i.e., the toll for the entire trip is the
sum of tolls, calculated per road segment, that the trip consists of. With technological advances
made over the last decade, it will soon be possible to seamlessly charge time-dependent tolls for each
11

road segment and to even make these tolls non-additive. Examples of non-additive tolls include
discounting tolls for individuals with long commutes or discounting tolls for one of the routes
available to commuters who have a choice between two reasonable routes. How much economic
gain can be realized from charging non-additive tolls? The above theorem answers this question:
the efficient outcome can be implemented with simple tolls that are additive in road segments, and
hence, charging more complex, non-additive tolls does not generate any economic gain.
Another natural question is how tolls should depend on the number of people in the car. Theorem 1 shows that efficient outcomes can be obtained with tolls that do not depend on the number of
passengers. This result depends on the assumptions that commuters have utility functions quasilinear in money and that the social planner’s objective is to maximize the total social surplus. Relaxing
these assumptions (e.g., incorporating distributional considerations into the planner’s utility function) may change this conclusion (e.g., leading to discounted tolls to carpoolers if lower-income
individuals are more likely to carpool).11,12
The above observations on the structure of tolls also depend on the assumption that the regulator is able to set the tolls systemwide. If that is not feasible, and the regulator can only set tolls
on some set of segments, then the efficient toll structure may be more complex—but only if some
other segments (on which the regulator cannot set tolls) are congested.

3.2

Existence and Quasi-Outcomes

A feasible, stable, budget-balanced, and market-clearing outcome may fail to exist. For example,
suppose there are 101 commuters who want to travel from one town to another one. Each car can
fit two people, and the cost of the trip is $10, regardless of the number of travelers. Each traveler
has a disutility of $2 from carpooling. The road has plenty of capacity (e.g., more than 101 cars
can pass through it during the time desired by the commuters). In this market, a feasible, stable,
budget-balanced, and market-clearing outcome does not exist: each commuter would prefer to
carpool rather than riding on his own, but the total number of commuters is not divisible by 2.
To deal with the non-existence issue, we introduce quasi-assignments and quasi-outcomes, which
are “fractional” analogs of assignments and outcomes, respectively. We will show that feasible,
stable, budget-balanced, and market-clearing quasi-outcomes exist and are socially efficient. We
can then consider outcomes that are close to these socially efficient quasi-outcomes, and are thus
approximately efficient.
Formally, a quasi-assignment G is a vector in [0, 1]T that assigns a number in the interval [0, 1]
11

Many tolls in the US are discounted for carpoolers. Our paper does not imply that efficiency would be enhanced
if the discounts for carpoolers that are currently in place were removed. Currently, tolls are not set at the efficient
level—on most road segments there are no tolls (i.e., a zero toll) and on many road segments that have tolls, the
tolls are set below the market-clearing level (as evidenced by traffic congestion on those segments). In such cases,
discounting tolls for carpoolers is likely to be welfare-enhancing even without distributional considerations.
12
Of course, our finding that efficient tolls do not depend on the number of passengers in the car does not at all
mean that carpooling and tolls are unrelated. As we discussed in Section 2.3, tolls and carpooling are complementary
and interdependent. With tolls, there is a stronger incentive to carpool. In turn, carpooling impacts the overall
demand for road segments, which then affects the level of efficient tolls.

12

to each trip t, such that for each rider m, the sum of numbers G(t) over all trips t that involve rider
m is equal to 1. (In particular, every assignment can be viewed as a quasi-assignment in which each
G(t) is equal to either 0 or 1.) The notion of social surplus for a quasi-assignment is generalized
accordingly. The social surplus of quasi-assignment G is equal to the sum of the valuations of all the
riders from the trips to which they are assigned in G minus the sum of the costs of the trips in G,
both weighted by the masses of the trips in G. Formally, the social surplus of quasi-assignment G

P
P
is equal to t∈T
m∈t vm (t) − c(t) G(t), where slightly abusing notation, we denote by “m ∈ t”
all riders m involved in trip t. Note that when G is an assignment (i.e., all weights are zero or one),
the definition of social surplus coincides with that of social surplus for an assignment.
A quasi-outcome is a triple (G, u, r), where G is a quasi-assignment, r ∈ RS is a vector of
non-negative tolls (one per segment), and u ∈ RM is a vector that specifies the utility of each rider
m. Utility u(m) pins down the payment that rider m would need to make for any trip t in which
he is involved and which has a positive weight G(t). Note that the definition of a quasi-outcome
implicitly implies that rider m is indifferent among all positive-weight trips in which he is involved.
A quasi-assignment G is feasible if for each segment s, the sum of G(t) over all trips t that
involve segment s is less than or equal to capacity qs . A quasi-outcome (G, u, r) is feasible if
the quasi-assignment G in it is feasible. A quasi-outcome (G, u, r) is market-clearing if for every
“underutilized” road segment s (i.e., a segment for which the sum of G(t) over all the trips t that
involve it is strictly less than its capacity), the toll r(s) is zero. A quasi-outcome (G, u, r) is stable
if it is not possible to organize a trip t that makes all the riders involved in it strictly better off than
they were under (G, u, r) (taking the physical cost of trip t and the corresponding tolls as given).
P
P
Formally, a quasi-outcome (G, u, r) is stable if for every trip t, m∈t u(m) ≥ m∈t vm (t)−c(t)−r(t).
Finally, a quasi-outcome (G, u, r) is budget-balanced if the sum of payments of all the riders for
their trips, weighted by the weights G(t) of those trips, is greater than or equal to the sum of the
physical costs of those trips and the total tolls on the road segments involved in those trips, both
P
P
P
again weighted by G(t):
t∈T
m∈t (vm (t) − u(m)) G(t) ≥
t∈T (c(t) + r(t)) G(t).
We are now ready to state and prove the second main result of the paper.
Theorem 2 There exists a feasible, stable, budget-balanced, and market-clearing quasi-outcome.
Any such quasi-outcome is socially efficient.
Our model blends together elements of matching and coalition formation theory (e.g., the notion
of stability) with elements of Walrasian equilibrium theory (e.g., the notion of market-clearing tolls)
that interact in a subtle way: the coalitions (i.e., trips) that get formed depend on the tolls—while
the tolls that need to be set to clear the market in turn depend on how coalitions get formed (and
thus how much demand there will be for various segments).
To handle this interdependence, the first step of our proof is to map our economy into an
auxiliary one that can be analyzed in the standard competitive equilibrium framework. We then
observe that the auxiliary economy has a competitive equilibrium. Finally, we show how to translate
the competitive equilibrium of the auxiliary economy into a feasible, stable, budget-balanced, and
market-clearing quasi-outcome.
13

Proof of Theorem 2.
Step 1 We begin by introducing an auxiliary economy. The consumers in this economy are new
agents called “trip organizers.” There are T types of those agents, one type for each trip in the
original economy. There are two trip organizers of each type. (Any other number greater than one
would also work; we only pick two for concreteness.)
The goods in this economy are the M riders and the S road segments from the original model.
The supply of every “rider good” is equal to one, and the supply of every “segment good” is equal
to the capacity of the corresponding segment. Price vector ρ ∈ RM +S assigns a price to every good
in the economy. We restrict prices to be non-negative.
Consumers (i.e., trip organizers) in this auxiliary economy can consume bundles of goods b ∈
[0, 1]M +S . Note that consumption of any good can be any number between zero and one. The
key building block in the model is the utility function of the consumers. Specifically, given a price
et (b, ρ) = Vet (b) − ρT b,
vector ρ, the utility of a consumer of type t for a bundle of goods b is equal to U
where

!
Vet (b) =

X

vm (t) − c(t)

m∈t

× min b(g).
g∈t

(4)

The expression in parentheses is the surplus from trip t (i.e., the sum of the utilities from the trip
obtained by the riders involved in it, minus the physical cost of the trip). The expression outside
of the parentheses is what fraction of the trip “can be organized” if one has access to bundle b: it is
the minimum of b(g) over all goods (riders and segments) g involved in t. Note that we implicitly
assume free disposal: goods not involved in trip t do not affect the valuation, and goods involved
in t that are available in an amount greater than ming∈t b(g) also do not affect the valuation.
Step 2 We have now defined the auxiliary economy. We did not specify the initial allocation of
goods, because it does not affect equilibrium prices, due to the quasilinearity of utility functions. We
next turn to the question of the existence of a competitive equilibrium. Crucially, in the auxiliary
economy, consumers’ preferences are convex: for each consumer, the expression in the parentheses
in equation (4) is a constant, and so the utility function is linear in money and Leontief in other
goods. Thus, for ever vector of prices ρ ≥ 0, for any consumer, the set of optimal consumption
bundles given prices ρ is convex.13 In the rest of the proof, using standard fixed-point arguments,
13

Note that the convexity of consumers’ demand sets is due to the fact that they are allowed to consume fractional
bundles. If they could only consume integer quantities, the demand sets would not be convex, and the equilibrium
would not necessarily exist. In essence, allowing for fractional bundles “convexifies” our original economy in a
similar way as how considering economies with a continuum of agents convexifies non-convex preferences in models
of large markets going back to the the classical sequence of papers in the Journal of Political Economy (Farrell,
1959; Rothenberg, 1960; Bator, 1961; Koopmans, 1961) and subsequent literature on the topic (see, e.g., Aumann
(1964, 1966); Shapley and Shubik (1966); Starr (1969); Azevedo et al. (2013); and Azevedo and Hatfield (2015)).
Note, however, that simply considering a continuum of agents at a finite number of transportation nodes would not
result in an appropriate framework for our setting. In such a model, every agent would have a continuum of perfect
carpooling partners, with the framework thus essentially assuming away the key question of carpool matching: all
partners in a given carpool will have identical origins and destinations. By contrast, in practice, much richer types of
carpooling arrangements need to be accommodated. Our framework makes it possible to study such arrangements.

14

we will show that this economy therefore has a competitive equilibrium: a set of prices ρ∗ ≥ 0
and an allocation of bundles of goods B ∗ to the consumers such that the total amount of goods
allocated is equal to the initial aggregate endowment, and such that each consumer is allocated an
individually optimal bundle given the prices.

P
Specifically, let Ve ∗ = maxt∈T
m∈t vm (t) − c(t) denote the largest possible surplus from any
trip, and define set W ⊂ RM +S of possible price vectors as W = [0, Ve ∗ + 2T ]M +S . Define the
tâtonnement correspondence for price vectors ρ in W as follows. Take a price vector ρ ∈ W . For
each consumer, pick an optimal bundle given this price vector ρ, and let D ∈ RM +S be the sum
of these bundles. Let Q ∈ RM +S denote the available supply of all items (1 for riders and qs for
road segments). Define the tâtonnement price adjustment function τ (ρ, D) = max{0, ρ + (D − Q)}:
price ρ adjusts by the amount of excess demand, but is restricted to remain non-negative. Note
that for all ρ ∈ W and all corresponding D, we also have τ (ρ, D) ∈ W .14
We now define the correspondence ϕ from W to W as follows: for every ρ, ϕ(ρ) is the set of
price vectors ρ0 ∈ W such that for some profile B of bundles that are optimal for consumers given
price vector ρ, for the sum of those bundles D, we have ρ0 = τ (ρ, D).
The correspondence ϕ satisfies all the requirements of Kakutani’s fixed-point theorem: Set W is
a non-empty, compact, and convex subset of RM +S . Correspondence ϕ(ρ) is non-empty and convex
for all ρ ∈ W . Finally, correspondence ϕ(ρ) has a closed graph.15 Thus, by Kakutani’s fixed-point
theorem, correspondence ϕ has at least one fixed point. Take a fixed point ρ∗ ∈ ϕ(ρ∗ ) and a profile
B ∗ of consumer-optimal bundles with aggregate demand D∗ such that ρ∗ = τ (ρ∗ , D∗ ). Then the
pair (ρ∗ , B ∗ ) constitutes a competitive equilibrium.16
Step 3 Take any competitive equilibrium of the auxiliary economy, (ρ∗ , B ∗ ). Observe that in
this equilibrium, the utility of every consumer is zero. This is because, by construction, there is an
“excess supply” of trip organizers: we have two of them for each trip t. At the same time, we only
have enough riders for at most one trip of type t. Thus, the only way to have market clearing is to
either have trip organizers be indifferent between organizing their trips (given the prices) and not
organizing them, or having them strictly prefer not organizing the trips. Since no trip organizer
will be losing money in a competitive equilibrium (because they can always choose to consume the
By construction, τ (ρ, D) is non-negative. For every good g with ρg ≤ Ve ∗ , τ (ρ, D)g ≤ Ve ∗ + 2T , because there
are 2T consumers in the economy and each consumer demands at most one unit of good g, so excess demand for
good g cannot be greater than 2T . Finally, for every good g with ρg > Ve ∗ , the demand from every consumer is zero,
and so τ (ρ, D)g ≤ ρg ≤ Ve ∗ + 2T .
15
Take any sequence of pairs of prices (ρk , ρbk ) such that for every k, ρbk ∈ ϕ(ρk ), and such that limk→∞ (ρk , ρbk ) =
∗
(ρ , ρb∗ ). For each k, take a profile Bk of consumers’ bundles of demands such that for the corresponding aggregate
demand Dk , we have τ (ρk , Dk ) = ρbk . Since each bundle belongs to the compact set [0, 1]M +S , and there is a finite
number 2T of bundles in each profile, the sequence of profiles has a subsequence that converges to a limit, B ∗ .
By the continuity of consumers’ demand functions, for the aggregate demand D∗ that corresponds to the profile of
bundles B ∗ , we have ρb∗ = τ (ρ∗ , D∗ ), and so ρb∗ ∈ ϕ(ρ∗ ).
16
Strictly speaking, this is not necessarily a competitive equilibrium according to the canonical definition, which
requires that the markets for all goods clear. In our case, for goods with zero prices, supply can exceed demand. For
the purposes of our proof, this difference is immaterial.
14

15

empty bundle and get the utility of zero), their utilities must be exactly zero.17
This observation allows us to go from a competitive equilibrium in the auxiliary economy to a
feasible, stable, budget-balanced, and market-clearing quasi-outcome in the original one, as follows.
For each segment s, its toll r∗ (s) in the original economy is set equal to the competitive equilibrium
price ρ∗ (s). Likewise, for each rider m, the utility u∗ (m) in the original market is set equal to
ρ∗ (m). To construct the quasi-assignment G∗ , take first all riders m whose utility u∗ (m) = ρ∗ (m)
is greater than zero. See to which types of trip organizers, and in what quantities, these riders were
allocated under B ∗ . These will be the measures of trips of these consumers in quasi-assignment
G∗ .18 Finally, for riders whose utilities are zero, assign them to their outside options with such
measures that the aggregate mass of trips in which they are involved is equal to 1.
The resulting quasi-outcome is feasible by construction: in the competitive equilibrium (ρ∗ , B ∗ ),
the aggregate demand for each segment s does not exceed its supply, qs , and thus the same is
true for quasi-assignment G∗ . To see that the quasi-outcome is budget-balanced, we need to
P
P
P
show that t∈T m∈t (vm (t) − u∗ (m)) G∗ (t) ≥ t∈T (c(t) + r∗ (t)) G∗ (t). Rearranging the terms,

P
P
P
the expression is equivalent to t∈T G∗ (t) ( m∈t vm (t) − c(t)) − m∈t u∗ (m) − r∗ (t) ≥ 0, which
follows (with equality) from the fact that for each t such that G∗ (t) > 0, the utility of each trip
organizer of type t, in equilibrium (ρ∗ , B ∗ ), is equal to zero.
To see that the quasi-outcome is stable, observe that if this it could be blocked by some trip t,
the immediate implication would be that in the competitive equilibrium (ρ∗ , B ∗ ) of the auxiliary
economy, there would be a way for a trip organizer of type t to receive a positive utility under prices
ρ∗ —which cannot be the case. To see that the quasi-outcome is market-clearing, observe that in
the competitive equilibrium (ρ∗ , B ∗ ), the prices are only positive for road segments s for which the
aggregate demand is equal to their capacity; for the road segments whose supply exceeds demand,
prices are zero.
Thus, we have constructed a feasible, stable, budget-balanced, and market-clearing quasioutcome, completing the proof of the existence part of the theorem. We conclude with an observation that in this quasi-outcome, the implied payments paid by every rider for every trip that
he takes is non-negative, i.e., for every trip t with G∗ (t) > 0 and every m ∈ t, we have u∗m ≤ vm (t).
This property follows from the assumption that one can “drop” riders from a trip without increasing
the physical cost of the trip and without making other riders worse off.
In other words, if there is a trip organizer whose utility in the equilibrium (ρ∗ , B ∗ ) is strictly positive, he must
have demand 1 for each rider involved in his trip – and so will the other organizer of the same type. Thus, the
demand for each of the riders involved in their trip will be at least 2, while the supply of each rider is 1, and so
demand exceeds supply, which cannot happen in equilibrium.
18
In the auxiliary economy, there are two trip organizers of each type t. For the construction of quasi-assignment G∗ ,
the relative allocation of rider m between these two consumers does not matter; the only quantity that matters is
the total allocation of rider m to the consumers of type t. Note also that if in equilibrium, two riders with positive
utilities are allocated to a consumer of type t, they will be allocated with the same masses, because of the Leontief
form of trip organizers’ utility functions. Thus, for determining the measure G∗ (t) of trip t in the quasi-outcome, it
does not matter which positive-utility rider m ∈ t is used.
17

16

Step 4

The proof of efficiency of any feasible, stable, budget-balanced, and market-clearing quasi-

outcome is analogous to the proof of Theorem 1. Take any such quasi-outcome (GA , uA , rA ), and
take any feasible quasi-assignment GB . The social surplus of quasi-assignment GA is equal to
 A
P
P
t∈T
m∈t vm (t) − c(t) G (t). This expression, by the budget-balancedness of quasi-outcome

P
P
P
A
A
A
A
(GA , uA , rA ), is greater than or equal to
t∈T G (t)
m∈t u (m) + r (t) =
m∈M u (m) +
P
A
A
t∈T G (t)r (t).
P
P
Next, by the stability of (GA , uA , rA ), for every trip t we have m∈t uA (m) ≥ m∈t vm (t) −
c(t) − rA (t). Rearranging the terms and aggregating across trips in GB , we get an upper bound
 B
P
P
for the social surplus of quasi-assignment GB . Specifically,
t∈T
m∈t vm (t) − c(t) G (t) ≤
 P
P
P
P
B
A
A
A
B
A
t∈T G (t)
m∈t u (m) + r (t) =
m∈M u (m) +
t∈T G (t)r (t).
P
P
The last step of the proof is to observe that t∈T GA (t)rA (t) ≥ t∈T GB (t)rA (t), because by
the market-clearing of quasi-outcome (GA , uA , rA ), we have rA (s) > 0 only for segments s that are
utilized to full capacity under quasi-assignment GA .
In the above example with 101 commuters, there are many feasible, stable, budget-balanced,
and market-clearing quasi-outcomes. They all involve only trips that have two riders who carpool,
and each rider’s cost for every trip that he takes with a positive weight is equal to $5. Of course, a
“non-fractional” outcome with such properties does not exist, due to integer constraints. However,
there are outcomes that are close: the ones that involve 50 pairs of carpooling riders, and one rider
who commutes solo. The social welfare in this outcome is close to the upper bound provided by
the feasible, stable, budget-balanced, and market-clearing quasi-outcomes.
Note that the machinery developed in this section can be used to compute both efficient tolls
and prices for shared transportation in self-driving cars.

3.3

The world with human drivers

The model with carpooling and the main results (Theorems 1 and 2) can be easily adapted to
a world in which some or all of the cars have human drivers. Each trip now needs to specify which
(if any) of the people involved is the driver (with the rest being passengers), and we also need to
make some minor modifications to our modeling assumptions. E.g., the price paid by the driver
may be negative (i.e., his passengers pay him for the ride) or positive (when, e.g., he drives solo
and needs to pay tolls). But the essence of the model remains the same.
However, our model and results do not apply to a world with professional drivers (i.e., taxis,
Uber, Lyft, and so on). The reason for this distinction is that in the world with professional drivers,
we can no longer assume that the cost of a trip only depends on the characteristics of the trip itself.
In that world, a professional driver’s idle time of waiting for the next trip is costly, and someone
needs to cover that cost. In such a world, the costs of trips are interdependent: the tighter can the
trips be scheduled (i.e., the lower is the idle time of professional drivers), the lower is the average
cost per trip. At first glance, it may seem that the economics of trip costs are similar in the case
of self-driving cars: tighter scheduling of trips leads to a higher utilization of cars, which in turn
leads to a lower per-trip cost. However, as we show in the next section, in the case of self-driving
17

cars the savings from higher utilization are likely to be very small (in particular, much smaller than
the per-trip costs that depend solely on a trip’s characteristics), allowing us to abstract away from
them in our framework.

4

Cost Structure
In this section, we discuss the cost structure of transportation. Specifically, we focus on the

question of when and whether higher utilization (i.e., increasing a car’s annual mileage and thus
decreasing its idle time) leads to substantial cost savings. We start out by presenting our results
and numerical examples, and then discuss their implications for our analysis and other related
considerations.

4.1

Model and results

Our model of costs is deliberately very simple, to make the logic and takeaways as transparent
as possible. We make the following assumptions. A car costs C and dies after N miles or A years,
whichever comes first. The annualized real interest rate is r. A car is driven K miles per year;
its utilization rate is thus proportional to K. Fuel (or electricity), maintenance, and insurance are
variable costs, m per mile.
We define the cost per mile, G, as the number such that the present value of all costs of owning
and operating a car over its lifetime is equal to the present value of the flow cost G over all the
miles driven by the car. For example, if the interest rate is zero, then G is simply the total cost of
owning and operating the car over its lifetime divided by its lifetime mileage.
Proposition 1 For r > 0, the cost per mile G is equal to m +
For r = 0, the cost per mile is G = m +

Cr
,
K(1−e−rT )

N
where T = min{A, K
}.

C
KT .

Proof. Note that T is the age at which the car will die. The present value of all costs of owning
and operating a car over its lifetime is therefore equal to
T

Z
C+

mKe−rt dt.

(5)

0

The present value of the flow costs G is equal to
Z

T

GKe−rt dt.

(6)

0

The result of the proposition follows immediately from equating expressions (5) and (6).
Note that there is no discontinuity at r = 0 (because lim 1−er−rT =

1
T ).

Corollary 1 If r = 0 and N < AK (i.e., the real interest rate is zero and cars die from usage
rather than old age), an increase in annual mileage yields no cost savings.
18

Proof. If AK > N , then T =

N
K.

If, in addition, r = 0, then G = m +

C
N.

For any K 0 > K, we

C
also have AK 0 > N , and thus (for r = 0) G0 = m + N
. Thus, if the real interest rate is zero and the

utilization rate is high enough so that the car dies from usage, the cost per mile does not change
as the utilization rate increases.
To get a sense of the magnitude of savings from increasing car utilization, let us now consider
an example with parameter values that roughly match a typical American car.
Example 1 Suppose a car dies after N = 200,000 miles or 15 years, whichever comes first. A
new car costs C = $30,000. The real interest rate is r = 3%. The variable cost is m = 30¢ per
mile (which includes gas, maintenance, and insurance).
The following table reports cost per mile G as a function of annual mileage K.
Annual mileage

5,000

15,000

25,000

35,000

45,000

55,000

65,000

75,000

Cost Per Mile

79.67¢

48.20¢

46.87¢

46.32¢

46.02¢

45.83¢

45.70¢

45.61¢

39.50%

2.75%

1.17%

0.65%

0.41%

0.28%

0.21%

0.16%

Savings from increasing mileage by 10,000

Note that tripling the annual mileage from an unusually low 5,000 to a more typical 15,000
leads to savings of close to 40%. The savings are considerable because increasing utilization means
getting more miles out of the car over its lifetime. However, tripling the annual mileage again to
45,000 (which corresponds to a utilization rate of about 15%) leads to an additional reduction in
the per-mile cost of driving of less than 5%. Unlike many other types of capital, the returns to
increased utilization of cars rapidly diminish because cars usually do not “die of old age”: most of
the wear comes from the mileage driven. (Note that the probability of damaging or losing a car
in an accident is also proportional to mileage.) If a car dies from mileage, the gain from increased
utilization is not from the additional miles but rather from the “time value of driving a mile.” Thus,
with low interest rates, beyond a certain point there is very little gain from increases in utilization.

4.2

Implications and discussion

While the results in Section 4.1 are elementary accounting calculations, they have important
implications for the structure of the transportation market.
First, consider the commonly shared view that with the advent of self-driving cars, personal
car ownership will become too expensive relative to the much cheaper use of “Transportationas-a-Service” (TaaS) providers, and will largely disappear.19 Our calculations suggest that this
19

The typical argument can be found in, e.g., the colorful December 1, 2015 article in the Wall Street Journal,
“Could Self-Driving Cars Spell the End of Ownership”. The author says, “The absurdity of our century-old, ad
hoc approach to mobility is captured in one statistic: The utilization rate of automobiles in the U.S. is about 5%.
For the remaining 95% of the time (23 hours), our cars just sit there, a slow, awful cash burn, like condos at the
beach.” He then argues that the rate of utilization will be much higher with self-driving cars, and concludes by saying,
“Personal-vehicle ownership isn’t going away. Some people will own and cherish cars. But those people and their cars
will be considered classics. Rates of ownership will decline, an artifact of an era of hyperprosperity and reckless glut.

19

view may not materialize. Consider a typical consumer—someone who drives 15,000 miles a year
(corresponding to an approximately 5% utilization rate) and lives in an area where parking is free
and readily available. For this consumer, the efficiency gain from switching away from car ownership
to using a TaaS fleet with three times higher utilization rate is less than 5%. Such a consumer may
easily choose to forgo this modest cost saving in favor of various benefits of personal car ownership,
such as, e.g., having a tennis racket or golf clubs in the trunk. Of course, for other consumers (e.g.,
those who live in areas where parking is very costly20 or those who drive very little), it would make
sense to use TaaS. Our framework in Section 3 naturally incorporates both models and allows them
to co-exist.
A closely related point is that beyond a fairly minimal utilization level, it is cheap for self-driving
cars to wait for a good nearby match with a rider or a group of riders, instead of repositioning the
car after a trip.21 This observation drives a key feature of our model in Section 3 that the cost of
a car trip only depends on the characteristics of that trip and not on the characteristics of other
trips in the system (if a car needed to be repositioned by a substantial distance from the end of
one trip to the beginning of the next one, or if waiting after the end of one trip until the beginning
of the next one was expensive, then the costs of trips would not be “separable”).
Proposition 1 implies that car-sharing platforms cannot deliver significant reductions in the
cost per mile relative to a typical personal car.22 For the relevant parameter range, the returns
to increased utilization are modest. This is in contrast to the airline industry, in which increasing
utilization is a high priority. The reason for this difference is that at 20,000 miles a year (which
corresponds to less than a 7% utilization rate), cars die after about 10 years, while airplanes can last
for decades at much higher utilization rates. If car manufacturers find a way to build cars that can
last for 20 years at double-digit utilization rates, just like planes do, then increasing utilization will
become a priority for TaaS fleet operators. Since self-driving cars can be utilized more intensively
than regular cars, automakers will have a stronger incentive than before to build more durable
cars. If and when cars become significantly more durable than they currently are, the economic
Twenty-five years from now, the only people still owning cars will be hobbyists, hot-rodders and flat-earth dissenters.
Everyone else will be happy to share.”
Similarly, in a Bloomberg Television interview in November 2017, Jeff Holden, the chief product officer at Uber,
said: “Our view is that individual car ownership is something that will go away because it is very inefficient. Individual
owners use a car only 4 percent of the time, while with ride sharing a vehicle can be on the road 80 to 90 percent of
the time. When you get to those kinds of utilizations what you see happen is prices go way down. So why would you
own your own car? It’s just a hobby at that point. It just doesn’t make sense.”
20
Calculations similar to those in Section 4.1 show that in areas where parking is very costly, the economic benefit
of shared mobility (aside from that from carpooling, discussed below) is likely to come primarily from saving on the
cost of parking rather than from getting more value out of the car.
21
In most metropolitan areas, traffic flows are not perfectly balanced: e.g., in the mornings more cars are coming
from suburbs to the downtown than in the opposite direction, and vice versa in the evenings. It is possible to
increase the utilization rate at the cost of having cars drive empty miles to get to high-demand areas. In light of
our calculations, even if it were possible to triple the utilization rate at the cost of increasing the number of “empty”
miles by 5% of the total number of miles driven, such a trade-off would not be economically valuable.
22
Indeed, in order to cover the overhead of operating the platform, car-sharing fleets such as Zipcar, Getaround,
and Car2Go charge a significant premium relative to the cost per mile of a personal car. These car-sharing platforms
create economic value not because of more intensive use of a car, but because of the more intensive use of the parking
spot that the car occupies. For this reason, car-sharing platforms appear to succeed in areas where parking is scarce.

20

gain from increasing utilization may become significant, and so the economics and structure of the
transportation industry would also change.
There is another possible reason why car utilization may be more important than our example
suggests. We assumed that over the relevant time horizon, the cost of cars in real dollars remains
constant. Outside of the steady state, during times when the cost of making a car is expected
to decline, the cost decline can be incorporated into the model by increasing the interest rate
parameter by the expected annual cost reduction of self-driving cars. During the times when the
real price of new cars is expected to decline rapidly, increasing utilization may lead to significant
cost savings.
We conclude this section by highlighting the distinction between two ways of thinking about
“increasing car utilization.” One way is increasing the percentage of time the car is being used—
and that is the usual interpretation, and the one we considered in this section. The other way,
which we emphasize in Sections 2 and 3, is increasing the number of car seats that are utilized at
the times when the car is driving. As we have seen, doubling (or even tripling) the number of miles
a typical car is driven in a year reduces the cost per mile by less than 5%. In contrast, doubling
the average number of riders in the car reduces the cost per passenger by 50%. Thus, the potential
economic benefits of carpooling (higher seat utilization) are an order of magnitude greater than the
economic benefits of increasing the fraction of time each car is being used—even before we count
the positive externalities that carpoolers impose on other drivers by reducing traffic.

5

Concluding Remarks
We conclude with several remarks on our framework and results and their potential extensions

and generalizations.
One simplifying assumption in our model is that as long as the number of cars on a road segment
is below the segment’s capacity, the speed of the flow does not depend on the number of cars. In
other words, as long as the number of cars trying to go on a road segment is at its capacity or
below, there is no additional benefit to anyone from trying to reduce that number further (by further
raising the tolls, or by other means). As we discussed in Section 3.1, this approximation is very
accurate for highways: the maximum throughput is achieved at speeds close to the speed limit. For
cities, the relationship between the number of cars and traffic speed is more gradual. However, as in
the case of highways, the key consideration for efficient traffic management is to keep the demand
for travel below the level of hypercongestion, where both the speed of traffic and overall throughput
drop. This is the approach that our framework naturally incorporates. This approach, while only
an approximation of full social welfare maximization, has an important advantage that it can be
implemented based purely on data on traffic flows, without having to estimate or make judgments
about riders’ preferences. And implementing this approach would already be a major improvement
over the status quo. So we view this approach of focusing on the optimization of the overall flow of
traffic (as opposed to incorporating much more intricate utility trade-offs between speed and flow)

21

as the right first step for systemwide toll systems.23 Having said that, we should point out that our
framework also easily allows the regulator to implement more flexible traffic management policies.
While a traffic regulator cannot artificially increase the capacity qs of segment s, he can of course
artificially decrease it to any lower level qs0 < qs . And our framework allows the same street to have
different capacities at different times of day. So if a regulator believes that at certain times and on
certain roads, it would be optimal to have traffic flows that are lower than those roads’ physical
capacities, our framework is flexible enough to accommodate this objective.
Another simplifying assumption made in our paper is that matches among carpooling partners
can be made frictionlessly. In other words, we implicitly assume that riders have access to a platform
that makes it easy to organize carpools. How such platforms will operate and compete is an open
question for future research.
Next, our model allows for time-varying demand for transportation, and accommodates timesensitive tolls. However, it assumes that demand fluctuations are known. A natural question is
how the model would change in a world with uncertainty, with unpredictable fluctuations in transportation demand or road capacity. While the analysis of this question is beyond the scope of this
paper, we note that in many locations, traffic is quite predictable, occurring with regular patterns
(e.g., morning and evening commute times on weekdays). Thus, even if we restrict attention to
deterministic (but time-sensitive) tolls, and set the tolls in accordance with those regular patterns
to ensure that traffic flows freely a high fraction of the time, this deterministic policy may capture
much of the potential upside (relative to fully flexible stochastic tolls that adjust to demand and
supply fluctuations in real time).
Also, the presence of uncertainty raises the question of how much information should be disclosed
to commuters. Das et al. (2017) consider a model of congestion with solo drivers and no tolls, and
show that under uncertainty, suppressing some information may improve overall social welfare and
mitigate congestion. We leave to future research the analysis of the interplay between agents’
information sets, tolls, and carpooling in the presence of uncertainty.
We would like to conclude with a word of caution. Our paper proposes a “market solution” to
the question of designing an efficient transportation system: road prices are set by the regulator
at the market-clearing level, and a free coalition-formation market allows any groups of carpooling
partners to form. However, it is important to keep in mind that not all “market solutions” are
created equal: not every market solution would achieve an efficient outcome, or even get close to
it. For instance, privatizing roads and then letting road operators set prices freely would not work:
the revenue-maximizing profile of tolls may be very different from the efficiency-maximizing one.
Our approach proposes a market-based solution that does achieve a socially efficient outcome.

23
In addition to being technically easier to implement, this approach is also more straightforward to communicate
to the public, and may thus be more politically feasible.

22

References
Aumann, R. J. (1964). Markets with a continuum of traders. Econometrica 32 (1/2), 39–50.
Aumann, R. J. (1966). Existence of competitive equilibria in markets with a continuum of traders.
Econometrica 34 (1), 1–17.
Azevedo, E. M. and J. W. Hatfield (2015). Existence of equilibrium in large matching markets with
complementarities. Working Paper .
Azevedo, E. M., E. G. Weyl, and A. White (2013). Walrasian equilibrium in large, quasilinear
markets. Theoretical Economics 8 (2), 281–290.
Bator, F. M. (1961). On convexity, efficiency, and markets. Journal of Political Economy 69 (5),
480–483.
Das, S., E. Kamenica, and R. Mirka (2017). Reducing congestion through information design. In
Proceedings of the 55th Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, pp.
1279–1284.
Farrell, M. J. (1959). The convexity assumption in the theory of competitive markets. Journal of
Political Economy 67 (4), 377–391.
Hall, F. L. (1996). Traffic stream characteristics. Traffic Flow Theory. US Federal Highway Administration.
Hall, J. D. (2017). Pareto improvements from Lexus lanes. Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.
Koopmans, T. C. (1961). Convexity assumptions, allocative efficiency, and competitive equilibrium.
Journal of Political Economy 69 (5), 478–479.
Rothenberg, J. (1960). Non-convexity, aggregation, and Pareto optimality. Journal of Political
Economy 68 (5), 435–468.
Shapley, L. S. and M. Shubik (1966). Quasi-cores in a monetary economy with nonconvex preferences. Econometrica 34 (4), 805–827.
Small, K. A. and X. Chu (2003). Hypercongestion. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 37 (3), 319–352.
Starr, R. M. (1969). Quasi-equilibria in markets with non-convex preferences. Econometrica 37 (1),
25–38.
Varaiya, P. (2005). What we’ve learned about highway congestion. Access Magazine 1 (27).

23

Vickrey, W. S. (1969). Congestion theory and transport investment. American Economic Review 59 (2), 251–260.
Walters, A. A. (1961). The theory and measurement of private and social cost of highway congestion.
Econometrica 29 (4), 676–699.

24

