                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS
                                 OF PRICE CONTROLS:
                           THE ROLE OF MARKET STRUCTURE




                                  Elhanan Helpman




                              Working Paper No. 2434




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 1987




I would like to thank Richard Brecher, Allan Drazen, Leo Leiderman and two referees
for comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #2434
                                              November 1987




               Macroeconomic Effects of Price Control:

                    The Role of Market Structure




                              ABSTRACT




     Price controls were part of Israel's stabilization program of
July 1985. Some results of the program seem to be inconsistent
with competitive macroeconomic models. It is suggested that these
results are consistent with an economy that has an oligopolistic
market structure. The paper explores the effects of market
structure on macroeconomic performance in the presence and absence
of price control.




                                             Elhanan Helpman
                                             Department of Economics
                                             MIT
                                             Cambridge, MA 02139
                                             (617) 253—2655
        The iirpetus for the current study cones from an attenpt to understand the
 results of Israel's        stabilization   program of July 1985. The program consisted
 of   a sharp reduction in aggregate spending        riia   an increase   in    net   taxes   and a
 fliDderate reduction in gorlernnent spending, a devaluation fo11od by a fixed

 exchange rate, and price and ge controls. The results of the program are

 reported in Table 1. In the first quarter that             folloed   the inpienentation of

 the program, i.e., the third quarter of 1985, aggregate spending declined,

exports increased, inports declined, the real ge rate declined, and

enployi-rent    declined. These   results   can be explained by    a con'entional

conpetitive nacroeconomic nodel, as I will show in Section                II.
       During    the next   six months all the variables reversed         their course.' This
uld he easy       to explain    with   a conventional   coirpetitive node! if         the price
controls   had   been reiroved. Houer, they re not, and               it is     difficult to
reconcile   the conDuenent of the reported variables in their presence.




1The Table reports the consunption ge rate; i.e., the nominal ge rate
divided by the cost of living index. Hover, the product 'ge rate; i.e., the
nominal qe rate divided by the o lesa le price index, shows a similar
pattern, axcept for the first t quarters of 1985 thich are before the
stabilization program. This is seen from the following data on the quarterly
rates of price increase (taken from Table C—3 in the Bank of Israel ilnnual
Report, 1996):
                                      85—I     85—Il   85—Ill 85—IV 86—I
               consuner prices        297.     47/.    487.    97.    17.
                   olesale
                         prices       27/.     367.    447.    7/.    47.
The enpicynent data in the Table concerns total enploynent. Hoeuer, the sane
pattern energes from the data on enployuent in the buisiness sector or in
nanufacturing. In nanufacturing, £ or exarrple, the euclution of the
corresponding seasonally adjusted euploynent data from the first quarter of
1985 to the first quarter of 1986 is (taken from in Israel Economic Data,
Research Departnent, Bank of Israel, Nay 26, 1985): 312, 310, 305, 311, 315.
                                             —2—



Especially intriguing is the        sinultaneous      increase in the real ge rate and

enplovnent. This is so, because        in   a conpetitive rnxlel price controls lead to

excess demand. In this case increased          spending     has   no   price or esploynent

effects, thile a ge increase reduces               enployuent.     The difficulty is further

aggravated by the      fact   that contrary to the irodel's prediction, alnost no

shortages have been observed. In addition, as sho;xi in Section II, partial

relaxation of price controls is also incapable of explaining the                   data   with

this type of a nodel. This lead ne to study a macroeconomic nudel with

oligopolistic markets. I have chosen to rk with                    a   particular form of

iiiperfect con-petition, thich proves to be useful for the purpose at hand.                      It
is.   houer, possible         to think about alternatives thich are also of interest.

Clearly, it is pointless to cover all these alternatives in a single article.

              the current investigation vs irotivated by the Israeli
       hlthough

experience, its results are of wider interest. This stems from the
                                                                     fact that
price controls have also been used in the recent stabilization efforts in
argentina and     Brazil,     and they are seriousely considered by           other couctries

that   contenplate stabilization, such as !xico.
       It turns out that both the conpetitive and the nonconpetitive nodels

generate similar predictions in the absence of price controls, but that in
their presence the nodels' predictions differ substantially. The details of
these differences are interesting; they show how macroeconomic performance may
depend   on   market   structure.   This   issLe   is the   main thene of the paper.
       The next    section is devoted to a study of          the   effects of price controls
on    a single   conpetitive and nonconpetitive industry. This partial equilibrium
                                      —3-.




 analysis clarifies a njor effect of nBrket structure. In the following

 section (Section II) I construct a siule, conpetitiie, ntzltisector economy,

and study its inlicat ions for the contuirent of uariables in the presence of

price controls. In Section III I construct a nDdel with oligopolistic

con-petition and study the sane set of questions. The reader can see in Table

2 soire of the resulting differences. £n application of these theoretical

findings to the Israeli case is illustrated in Section IV.       It is argued that

the mn-plications of the corrpetititie nodel are inconsistent with the data,

v.tiile the inplications of the nonccmpetitiue nodel are consistent ;nth them.



                            I. Partial FuiIibrjum

     fin inportant insight into the effects of price controls tn-ider different

irerket structures can be obtained from a partial equilibrium analysis.

Consider Fig. 1. Panel (a) describes a conpetititye industry. Without price

controls the equilibrium price is p, viich is determined by the intersection

of the nrg inc I cost cur'e !t and   the   denBnd curt,e D. Now, if price

controls reduce the price to p°, then there is an excess denund fiB. In this

case the actually transacted quantity is determined by point f, thich

represents the short side of the nurket. Hence, output is supply determined,

and price controls bring about a contraction of output.

     Now consider panel (b), kich describes    a   firm with sone degree of

nonopoly poer. Curie D describes the dei-rand curi,e faced by the firm, with

the associated nurginal re'enue curue PIR.    Its nurginal   cost curt.ve   is

Without price controls the equilibrium quantity    of output   and sales    is
                                    —4-.




determined by the intersection of      with ?t, and the equilibrium price is

found on the demand curve at the point that corresponds to this quantity.

Hence, p is the equilibrium price. Now suppose that price controls are

iapasad, with p being the price ceiling. Then the £ irm' s marginal revenue

cur.'e becorres the horizontal line at the level p up to point C, then it

drops to F, and coincides with NR for larger output levels. In this case

profit maximization makes the firm supply the entire demand at the controlled

price. This is true for euery price ceiling above point E. Hence, as long as

the price ceiling is aboue E, there is no excess demand, output is demand

determined, and price controls bring about an expansion of output. These

results are radically different from those derived for the conpetitir.e case.

Only en price controls are severe enough to reduce the price below E will

shortages appear. Take, for exaiple, p to be the price ceiling. Then the

reletiant marginal ret7enue curve becorres the horizontal line up to B, dropping

from B to G, and coinciding with !IR £ or higher output levels. In this

case point     represents the intersection of the marginal revenue with the

marginal cost curve, vhile point B represents the demanded quantity at the

controlled price. Hence, there is an excess demand equal to . Observe,

hot.ier, that in this case too output is higher than in the uncontrolled case,

despite there being shortages. Only then the price ceiling falls below the

intersection of 1R with It do price controls bring about shortages with a

lor level of output.

     This analysis shows that in a conpetititie market price controls lead to

shortages and a decline of output, with the output level supply determined. On
                                         —5—




 the other    hand, in a narket with oligopolistic firms, nuderate price controls

 do not lead to shortages,    and output——thich    is denund determined—-increases.

      harve, therefore, a potential explanation of the lack of shortages in the

 Israeli economy, that '.s discussed in the introduction. In order to see that

 this explanation is also consistent with the data reported in Table 1,          need

 to derelop a nore elaborate nudel, taking into account sonu general

equilibrium interactions. Hou'er, since it is not the purpose of this paper

to study in detail the Israeli economy, but rather to point out the inportance

of narket structure for macroeconomic performance in the presence of price

controls, I first discuss in sonu detail the perfectly conpetitive case.



                              II.   Perfect   Conpetition

       Consider a conpetitire economy that produces tw coimuxlities: a traded

product that is exported but not consuned donestically, arid a nontraded

product. Their production functions are f.(.e.),        i=X,M, respectively, ere
.e.   is   labor use of a representatir.ie firm in sector i. The functions f.(.)

are strictly concave, thich can be justified by the existence of firm specific

inputs. Sector i is conposed of n. firms and aggregate labor supply is

L.    (The nunter of firms plays no essential role in this section; it is

introduced in order to facilitate a conparison with the next section.)

       Domastic consuners have honothetic preferences over the nontraded product

arid the iirported product. These preferences inply that the share of spending

on product i,      i=N, I (iiere I stands for inports) is an honogeneos

function of degree zero of consuner prices p., i=N,I. The share functions
                                                      —6—



are   represented   by                         In vtat follows prices and   aggregate   denand are

weasured   in terms of foreign currency. Hence,                 if   E represents aggregate

spending in terms of foreign currency, then the foreign currency value of

spending on good i is si(PN,PI)a

       Foreign demand     for    donestic exports is H(p7). The price elasticity of

export demand is assuned to be larger than one (in absolute value).                      The

foreign   supply price of donestic irrports is p.

       fl conpetitive equilibritnn is represented by the              following   conditions:



                =                                                                        (1)


                           =   vi ,        i    =   X,M,                                 (2)




                     +
                         %CN
                                =     L,                                                 (3)




                      =
             H(px)        T1xf'xtCx)


                                      = 1N1'N(CN),                                       (5)


             T pxH(P) —                                                                  (6)




tthere w is the nge rate and T is the trade balance surplus, both neasured

in terms of foreign currency. Equations (1)-(2) represent the conpetitive

pricing conditions, ;chile (3)—(5) represent clearing conditions in the labor
                                       —7—



market, the export market, and the market for nontraded goods, respectively.

Equation (6) defines the sw-plus in the trade account. Given the level of

spending E, this system provides a solution for the equilibrium values of

prices                the vage rate w, labor allocations x'N' and the
surplus in the trade account T.

     Aggregate spending can   be nodeled in many vnys. It can, for exanple, be

derived from intertenporal optimization subject to an intertenporal budget

constraint only——provided capital markets are perfect—-or with additional
                                                                                    2
constraints if capital markets are inperfect (such as liquidity constraints).

An extrene form energes if no borrowing and lending are possible, in kiich

case spending has to equal incone. Naturally, v are interested in the

effects of changes in aggregate spending. These may result from policy changes




2The following is an exanple of an expenditure function that is derived from
interternporal maximization in the presence of perfect capital markets. Let
the intertenporal utility function be        exp(-pt)[ln cN(t) +   In   c1(t)]dt,
vAiere p is the subjective discount rate, t is a tine index! cN(t) is
consunption of nontradeables at tine t, and c1(t) is consunption of
inportables at tine t. Then the maximization of this function subject to the
intertenporal budget constraint Cexp(—rt)[pN(t)cN(t) +      p1(t)c1(t)Jdt
vtere r is the interest rate (assuned to be constant) and               is the
present value of future net incone plus current bond holdings, yields the
expenditure function E(t) = p exp[(r -          ttere
                                           p)tJ140,
E(t) e PN(t)cN(t) +                 Hence, expenditure is rising over tine if the
                      p1(t)c1(t).
interest rate is larger than the private discount rate and it is declining
over tine if the interest rate is smaller than the private discount rate.
Another representation of this expenditure function is by neans of
E(t) = p14(t), ;tere 14(t) =exp{(r -p)t]140 is the present value of future
incone plus current bond holdings in period t.
                                         —8-



or from changes in economic circumstances          It is, houer,     alys possible to
deconose    a change in aggregate spending into an autonous conponent and a
couponent   that   is   generated by feedbacks from the   economic   system. Since   the

details of this deconposition introduce technical conplications without adding
insights to the problem at hand, I hac'e chosen to treat aggregate spending as

exogeneous. The technical difficulties inuolved in a detailed nodelling of

these interactions can he seen by considering the feedback from price controls

to spending, ;thich is of particular interest in the curent contex. Clearly,

price controls affect incon in the tine interal in ;thich they apply, thereby

affecting ;alth thirh consists partly of the present tjalue of incone. Since

spending depends on alth price controls affect spending                this channel.

Ibreouer, as a result of shortages in periods of price controls consuners are

typically not able to attain the nest desirable allocation of spending across

goods. Under these circumstances they ny choose to reallocate spending Oxier

tine in order to minimize the trntility loss from these constraints. This

represents another channel through ich price controls affect spending. It

is clear from this discussion and from further reflection that spending

depends on price controls in a conplicated y; it depends on the nature of

controls, on the preuailing rationing mschanism in case of shortages, their

timing, and the like. For this reason I ha.'e chosen to treat spending as

exogeneous   for the purpose     of this st.dy.3



3Taking, for exanpie, the expenditure function described in the precJious
footnote it is straightforrd to see that an unexpected increase in tax rates
at tine t   has a direct effect on W(t) through the reduction of the present
ualue of' future net incone, and an indirect effect through changes in the
present tTalue of gross incone flows. Price controls change W(t) through
         In the unrestricted couipetitit,e equilibrium described by (l)-(6)              an
 increase in aggregate spendinQ          brings    about an expansion of the   nontraded
 goods   sector   and a contraction of the exportables sector (labor shifts from

 the latter to the      forrrer);    the price of exports and the price of nontradeables

 increase, with the foriir rising proportionately less than the latter. Inorts

 increase and exports decline, bringing about a decline in the trade account

surplus. These are standard responses. HoeTer, in anticipation of the

analysis of price controls, it is convenient to use for this analysis a

reduced    form   system, kiich I detielop in          at follo
       Let R(pX,pN;L) he the dourestic product ftiction for this economy,

defined by

       ff(PH,PN;L) =    iix       {pnf(.) + PNrINE(.CN)      s.t.      +
                                                                           n4N L}.
                              C
This   function   en-bodies conditions (2)—(3), it is positiuely linear

honngeneous in prices, conoae in labor input, its partial deriuatiue with

respect    to a price equals the output        level   of the corresponding connDdity, and

its partial deriuatiue with respect to labor input             equals the conpetitiue ge
rate. Now the conirndity market clearing conditions (4)—(5) can be

represented by:



             X(p1,) =   Hx(pX,pN;L)                                                (7)




             DNN,pI)N =             IIN(PX,PN;L)                                   (8)




their effet on gross incone flows.
                                         - 10   -




kiere    JI.(.)   is   the partial derii,atiue of Jl()    with respect to p1 and p1
satisfies (1). Giien the price of isports and aggregate spending, conditions

(7)-(8) determine the price of exports and the price of nontradeables This

solution is depicted in Fig. 2. The ci..u'ue        XX   describes (7) Jiile the

curie MN describes (8). Both ct,es are uprds sloping; /N declines
along XX and rises along NM (see Nrndel1 (1971, clip. 9) for a similar

diagram). Point            is the equilibrium point.

        Now suppose that aggregate spending increases. Then the NM curue

shifts to the right and the new equilibrium point is B. t B both prices

are higher, hut the relati'e price of exports is 1or. Hence, the price of

exports increases proportionately less than the price of nontradeailes. It is

now clear from (7)—(8) that at B exports are lo;r and output of

nontradeables is higher than at l. The increase in the price of

nontradeables relati've to ixports increases the share of spending on inports.

Together with the initial increase in aggregate spending this increases the

talue of inparts. Since the higher price of exports reduces export earnings

(under the assunpt ion that the price elasticity of export demand is larger

than one) the trade account surplus declines. Finally, since both prices of
                                                                            ——   also
donestic output increase, the ge rate -- gi7en by w =

increases.

        The next step is to consider price controls. is explained in the

introduction, the nntiiation for this analysis comas from the use of price

controls in stabilization programs. This takes typically the following form.

There is a currency deualuation, vhile domastic currency prices are not
                                    — 11 —




allod to be raised by the full extent of the deialuation. The exchange rate
is frozen and price controls are neintained. In this case prices of

controlled products decline in terms of foreign ctu"rency. If, for exanple,

donestic inport prices and prices of nontradeables are frozen following the

deualuat ion, then p1 and       decline by the sane proportion, Iiich equals

the rate of deualuation. If only nontraded goods are under price controls,

p1 does not change ile         declines. The price of exportables is assuned

to be uncontrolled.

     If inport prices are controlled, then inporters cease inporting, because

the donestic price does not couer unit costs.4 This generates an excess

demsnd for iirports and disequilibrium in the inort nerket. The forced

reduction in the price of nontradeabies generates also disequilibrium in the

market for nontraded goods, thich not.,es into a state of excess demand. If

there is no decline in desired agaregate spending, the economy experiences

forced satYings. In this case one expects to obserue shortages of the type

that appeared in Brazil after the iirplenentation of its stabilization program




4The result that ider conpetition price controls lead to the ceasation of
inports depends on the y the inporting actiuity is nDdelled. I use in the
text the standard nodelling procedure. If, houer, one assunes that
inportables haue to be con-Iined with donestic inputs in order to supply
donestic demand (as, for exanpie, in Sanyal and Jones (1982)), then price
controls only reduce inports. This can be nodelled, for exanpie, by assuming
that there are inputs specific to the inport industry, so that final output of
inportables is giuen by F 1(m), there ni is the quantity iirported and

is strictly concaue. Then inporters maximize p1f1(m) —          and a reduction
                                                          pm,
in p1 does not lead to m = 0. The nodel in the text assunes F 1(m) = m.
Obser"e, hoveuer, that our main results do not depend on the .ey inports are
being nodelled.
                                        — 12   —




in   1986. In terms of Fig. 2 (in vtich point A describes               the   equilibrium

without    price controls), if price controls lead to the decline of the price of

nontradeables to p, then the econony ends up at point C, at vtich there

is clearing of the export irarket (vtich is not controlled) and there is excess

delTand for nontraded goods. Hence, price controls lead to a decline in the

price of exportables, but proportionately less than the price of

nontradeables. The result is that       exports      increase and   inports    decline (to

zero), bringing about an inprovenent in the trade accotmt. Naturally, the

expansion of the export industry is associated with a contraction of the

nontraded goods sector, thereby aggrauating excess denand in that narket.

Finally,    since both prices of donestic output decline, so does the vage rate
w=
     Lx'N'-4          If labor resists vage reductions, there is tmenploynent.

       Itreover,   since     declines proportionately irore than
                                                                              p,   and   w

declines    by a vighted atverage of the decline in               and         then w

declines proportionately less than                 Therefore, if                   is the

consuner    price index (there the   ftrnction      Q(')   is honogeneous     of degree one),

then   the real consuirpt ion vage rate   w/Q increases as a result of price

controls.

       It is now easy   to see that the analysis does       not    change nuch if inport

prices are not controlled. Naturally, in this case there is no excess denand

in the market for inportables, but      there      is still excess demand for

nontradeables. In terms of Fig. 2, point C still describes the new

equilibrium point. Hence, the price of exportables declines proportionately

less than the price of nontradeables, exports expand and output of
                                          — 13 —




nontradeables contracts. The difference arises in the trade accout. Now

inports do not drop to zero. In fact, giten aggregate spending E, the

trnsatisfied denand for nontradeables spills over to inports, so that the

inport bill becones E -                         Hovver, using the equilibrium
                              PNN(PX,PN;L).
conditions (7)—(8), in this case the         trade   accotrnt surplus can be represented

as

                                  T =                - E
                                        T(PH,PN;L)


Hence, since p and N decline, donestic product declines and there is a

deterioration in the trade accotrnt. Now w/PN increases hut w/p1              declines,
so that w/Q nay increase or decline.

        Naturally,   if the initial situation is one with effective price controls,

then partial relaxation of these controls has opposite effects. These are

presented in the first row of Table 2 for the case in ttich inport prices are

also controlled (vkiich is the relevant case for Israel).

        The next set of issues to be considered concerns the effects of shifts in

aggregate spending and labor stqply in the presence of price controls. First,

consider aggregate spending. If both inports and nontradeables are

controlled, then with effective price controls in place, snaIl changes in

aggregate spending do not affect prices or sectoral allocations, nor do they

affect the trade account. Rather, an increase in aggegate spending          brings
about   larger forced savings vtile a decline in aggregate spending brings about

snaller forced savings. If, on the other hand, inport prices are not

controlled, changes in aggregate spending do not affect prices and resource
                                     — 14 —




allocation    as ll. This tine, hoei,er, they do affect the trade account,

because all of the change in aggregate spending is reflected in inports.

Hence, an increase in aggregate spending increases inports, bringing about a

decline in the trade accotmt stu-plus.

     Since (7)     is satisfied also in the   presence   of price controls1 an

increase in labor input L, ihich leads to an excess supply of exportables if

prices do not change, brings about a decline in the price of exports (in terms

of Fig. 2, the cur'e XX shifts dovxrds, and so does point C) and an

expansion of output in the exporting industry. The v.ge rate w =
                                                                       HL(PX,PN;L)
declines as a result of both the increase in L and the decline in p.

Hence, the real consuvrption ge rate w/Q also declines. Therefore, output

of nontradeables rises (see (2) for i=N), thereby reducing the excess demsnd

for them. Inports do not change if inport prices are controlled and they

decline if inport prices are not controlled (due to the fact that additional

supply of nontradeables reduces the spilloer of excess denend into

inportables), thile export earnings increase. The result is an inprot.iemsnt in

the trade accouct. Natt-ally, the sane results obtain if the ge rate is

reduced and enplcyner-it is a.l1od to adjust. These results are sunrized in

the upper part of Table 2 for the case in thich inport prices are also

controlled.




                           III. Inperfect Coupetiticwi

     Now consider an identical econow, except for the fact that the nontraded

and the inportab Ia products are differentiated. (I could haue assuned that
                                                    — 15 —




 the exportable          is also a differentiated product, but              this vzuld      haure added no

new dirrrension to the problem at hand.) Let                      there   be n1 uarieties of the
 inportable, each one            being   inported by a different agent.             fl typical irrporter

has   the exclush'e         right to market one 7ariety. The ntnther of inporters and

producers        of nontraded .arieties is constant in the                 short rti, ich is the
releurant tima span for the ctz'rent discussion. Consumar preferences for

urarieties are syrnietrical and of the Spence-Dixit-Stiglitz type (see Spence

(1976) and        Dixit    and   Stiglitz   (1977)). Hence,        the elasticity of        demand for a

single uariety in sector i, i=N,I, is constant, say , and                                 marginal
retyenue    is ap.,        there:
                                                              1
                                                            — —
                                                    =   1
                                                1
                                                              S

Since      E.     is   larger than one, o.           is positiue     and smaller     than   one (see the
Lippendix for a precise deriurat ion of the                  demand elasticities      and   the spending
share   £Trnctions).
      The       market   £ or inportables is oligopolistic, and              so   is the market for

riontraded goods.           typical conpetitor in one of these markets sets its price,

taking as giuren prices of riuals, total spending                     on the product, and       the    ge
rate. Hence, prices are set so as to equate marginal reuenue                         to   marginal
costs. Defining                    the pricing equations (l)-(2) are now replaced by:
                           a,a1,

                 alp]: =                                                                        (I')

                                 = w,       i   = X,N
                                                                                                (2')
                                        — 16 —




.hile   conditions (3)-(6) renain "alid. This describes the equilibrium

without price controls.

       fis before, it is possible to use a reduced form representation of this

equilibrium by neans of the function H(), despite the fact that it no longer

describes donestic product (see Helpyran (1984)). The counterparts of (7)-(8)

are:



                                                                              (7')
             X(p.,) =    flX(pH,PN;L)


                                                                              (8')
             SN(PN,pI)EIPN



ere )T(.) stands for the partial deriuat i',e of 1i( )            with   respect to the

second argirnerit (i .   e.,
        Fig. 2 can be used again, with           representing points that satisfy (7')

and NM representing points that satisfy (8'), and the intersection point fi

describing the resulting equilibrium. fn increase in aggregate denend shifts

the NH ctu-'.'e to the right and the equilibrium point to B. The results are

the sane as in the ccmpetitive economy: exports decline, output of nontraded

goods expands, prices of exportables and nontradeables increase, with the

forner rising proportionately less. The tialue        of   exports declines ile the

uralue of inports increases, and there is a decline in the trade account

stnp lus.

        Now consider price controls. Suppose that a det.ialuation and controls on

nominal prices lead to an equiproportional decline of               and p1 (the reader
                                            — 17 —




is   encouraged to also consider the        case   in thich price controls apply only to

nontradeables). hs long        as   p1 renins larger than p, inporting remains a

profitable acti,ity (renenber the discussion in Section 2 and that                initially
p1 =   p/a.   ) p), so that     inporting    does not   cease.   Noreouer, mder    these
circumstances it is profit nexinüzing to inport as nuch as can be sold, so

that inports are demand determined. Similarly, a cut in the price of

nontradeables plus price controls make their producers supply the demanded

quantity at the new price. This is profit maximizing. Hence, the                output    of

nontradeables is also demand determined. 1ll this neans that                conditions
(3)—(6) remain 'alid in the face of price controls. (If p1 ( p, inports

cease, and (5) is replaced with        T = p.X(p.)).     Consequently, (5) inplies        art
expansion   of   output in the nontraded goods sector, leading (uia (3))           to a
contraction   of the exportables sector. The contraction of exports requires a

higher export price (see (4)), leading to lor export ret.7enue. Point C' in

Fig. 2 describes the resulting price configuration. Since inports increase

;thile export rexyenue declines,     the    trade accout rsens. The effect on mages

is fotn-id by obseruing that price controls int.ialidate (2')         for   nontradeables

only, and that it    remains   ualid for exportables. Therefore, a higher price of

exportables and lor enplovnent         in   their production requires a higher wsge

rate w, and inplies a higher real consnmt ion cage w/Q.

       The economic story that energes from this analysis is as follows. fn

equiproportional    reduction   of inport prices and prices of nontradeables

expands demand for inports and       for   nontradeables. ?tmopolistic suppliers find

it   profitable to supply the entire demand. Consequently, producers of
                                     — 18 —




nontradeables   increase their deilEnd   for   labor, thereby bidding up the ;ge

rate. The ige hike increases irginal costs in the production of

nontradeables and exportables. Ho',er, as long as rginal costs of producing

the higher denwid of nontradeahies does not exceed the controlled price, the

incentive to supply the entire denerid does not change. In the export sector

increased nrginaI costs lead to 1or output and a higher price. Nattu'ally,

the export surplus declines.

     These results of price controls are oust the opposite from the results

for a conpetitite economy. The irein reason for the difference is that "thile

Lulder price controls in a conpetiti.ie economy output is supply constrained, in

an oligopolistic entjironnent with price setting firms it is denend

constrained, as explained in Section 2. Since price reductions increase denand

and reduce coiietitiue supply, they are contract ionary in a conpetitive

en'ironnent and expansionary in an oligopolistic ent.iironnent. The results for

a relaxation of price controls, thich are opposite to the results of their

iirposition, are reported in the fourth row of Table 2.

     How consider the results of an increase in aggregate spending in the

presence of price controls. Renener that in a conpetitit,e ent.;ironnent this

leads to only larger forced sa'ings *ien inport prices are also under control,

and to only larger inports if inport prices are riot under control. In the

current settup things differ substantially. Higher aggregate spending brings

about the expansion of the nontraded sector (see (5)) and the contraction of

the exporting sector (see (3)). Consequently, the price of exportables rises

and inport ret.ienue declines. Higher aggregate spending also increases inports,
                                            — 19 —




 so   that   the export surplus declines. The v.ge rate w rises (see (2') for

 i=X), and so does the real ge rate w/Q. The sane results obtain then

 iiiport prices are not controllech

         Next consider an increase in labor use L vkule the price controls

remain effectitie. It is clear that in this case output of nontradeables does

not change, because it is demand determined and denand has not changed (see

 (5)).   Hence, all of the additional labor is absorbed in the exporting sector

 (see (3) and (4)),    bringing   about an expansion of exports and a decline of its

price. Inparts do not change. The vge rate declines, as one can see from

(2) for i=H, and so does the real ge rate w/Q. Clearly, if the source of

the disturbance is shifted from enlaynt to 'ages. then an exogeneous

decline in ges with an endogenous enp loynent ad justuent           will   a i so   produce
the   aboue described results. The results for the oligopolistic narket

structure are sunaarized in the lor part of Table 2.

       It is now clear that in the presence of setveral industries, sone of thich

are conpetitiue and wiie    of    thich are oligopolistic, the net effect of price

controls will depend on the relatit.ie size of the conpetiti'e part of the

economy. In an economy with high concentration rates and a few snaIl

conpetiti,e sectors the outcone will be closer to that has been described in

this section. On the other hand, in         an economy   with a few highly concentrated

industries and nany large conpetitiue sectors the outcone will be closer to

;that has been described in the pre!iious section.




                                  IV,.   An Illustration

      The usefulness of our theoretical analysis can be         denenstrated by

applying it    to the interpretation of the Israeli data reported in Table 1.
                                           - 20    -



Recall    that the   Israeli   program consisted of a sharp    reduction in aggregate
spending,      a de'ialuation follovd by a fixed       exchange rate, and price and     vge
controls. The letiel of controlled prices s fixed in domastic currency

units,    as   s the tinE pattern of ges. L:Ilthough         prices   vre controlled to

soiie extent at small retail outlets, rnst of the controlling v.s done at the

large nHrketing chains and directly on vkiolesale prices of large producers.

Giuen the large      concentration     ratios in Israel's industries, this 'as an

efficient xuthod      of   price controls. Due to an agreenent with        the labor
unions, real ges re scheduled to increase after a period of set,eral

nnnths.

       One can see in the first coltmn of the table that indeed during the third
quarter of 195 aggregate spending declined substantially, but that it began
to increase in the fourth quarter. Real ges also declined sharply in the
third quarter, remained approximately at the sane level in the fourth quarter,
and rose sharply in the        first   quarter of 1986. On the   other   hand,   en'ploymant
dropped in the third quarter, and          began   to rise thereafter. Finally, exports

rose   initially and declined subsequently, ile iirports declined initially and
increased subsequently.
       The conpetitiue as ll as the nonconpetitive rnDdel predict that a
reduction in aggregate demand without price-ge rigidities brings about an
expansion of exports, contraction of inports, and a decline in the vge rate.
If the ;•ge rate is not allod to decline by the full extent required for
full enp loynent, the enploynent level declines. Hence, one reason for the
introduction of ge controls vs to iroderate the undesirable enployirent
effects. (To other reasons re: to effect a reduction in aggregate spending
                                          — 21 —




 via   lor ges and to eliminate the inertia from the inflationary process.

 See Brurio (1986) on the latter point.) Hence, the initial effects of the

 program can he explained by both nodels, provided the price controls re not

 effective or had only a sn 11 effect. Indeed, there are sone \tho might argue

 that the initial sharp reduction of aggregate spending brought about

 equilihrjthl-, prices below the inposed ceilings. It is, hover, reasonable to

 argue on the basis of the intensive activity of the Ninistry of Industry and

Coniierce in the inpienentation of price controls ——            including   law suits that

re filed against defiant sellers —-           that   even if the   price   controls v.re not

binding initially, they have certainly becone binding in            face    of rising
spending in the    following    nenths.

        Taking the view that price controls re effective starting at least with
the    fotn-th quarter of 1985, it is clear that the conpetitive nodel discussed

in Section II does not explain the data in the table. Eenether that in the

conpetitive flDdel    with price   controls   an increase in desired aggregate

spending   does not   change   sectoral enploynent levels,      prices or ges. flu             of
the additional desired spending translates into either forced savings or

higher inports. If, in addition, there is an exogeneous vge increase,

enplovnent declines. Hence, the reported increase in aggregate spending, the

real   ge rate, and enploynent are inconsistent with this nodel (see the upper

part of Table 2) reover, there is no evidence              of   significant shortages

dtn'ing that period, thich is also inconsistent with the conpet             it it.'e node 1.
       Now consider the alternative specification, with price setting sellers

operating in oligopolistic narkets. Given price controls, a rise in aggregate
                                     - 22 -



spending brings about an expansion of the nontraded sector and a contraction
of the exporting sector. 1u11 dernnd is satisfied, so that there are no

shortages. Exports decline and iports increase. The price of exportables

increases and so does the ge rate that nintains a constant level of

euployliEnt. If the ge rate does not rise by the extent required to sece

constant euiploynent, eiiployiint increases, thereby ircderating the decline of

exports. This description is consistent with the data, provided the increase

in spending dominates the other effects (see the lor part of Table 2).

Natally, this is also consistent with the lack of shortages. The evidence

on the deree of concentration in Israeli nnufacttn'ing industries supports

the assunption   of   substantial nnopoly po;r (see Brenn (1985, chp. 3)).

     It   see, therefore, that the   noncornetitive   iindel better explains this

episode. Nevertheless, one cannot be confident that the      sodel   constructed in

Section II is indeed the urist approapriate for the Israeli econou Houer,

my results nke the point that an analysis of nacroeconomic perforuance tnider

price controls has to take explicit accotrnt of narket structt'e.



Tel flviv University, Tel flviv, Israel and

MIT, Canbridge, Massachusetts, U.S.a.
                                                        — 23 -




                                                       AFFU1DIX



        This IIppendiR is de;oted to the specification of preferences, based on

Spence (1976) and Dixit and                     Stiglitz   (1977), which justifies a constant

elasticity dennd fiction for a representatitie seller. The ct.u-rent

presentation relies heavily on He1pnn and Krugnn (1985, ch.6).

        The utility £tmction is:



        U =
              U[t('),              u()]                                                                   (.1)


there     u.(     )       is   the subutility of product i. The                   ftniction U(') is
hthetic. The stibutility ftrnction u(') takes the form:


                                                  n.   /3. 11/3.
        u.(D.
         i  .il   ,   D.
                          i2
                             ,...D.
                                     in.   )   = (E.' D.)
                                                   j=l ij
                                                                ',    0       I
                                                                          < /3.   < 1                     (14.2)




where     D. is consTrnption of variety j.                           If E. represents aggregate

spendina on product i,                     then   the variety      specific dennd        ftrnctions      are:



                           -a.
                      r        1

    D..       =                     F.,     for all i, j, where             a. =          >    1.         ()
                  Ehlpih

The seller of variety j                    of product i takes E and                     p..,    h   j,    as
                                                                        — 24 —




giuen.     Therefore, his price elasticity of deiiand is:



                                                  1-a.
                                                           1
                              p.                      -


        s.1 =a.i. + (1—a..) ri.
                              1
                                 i                        i—a.
                                                                    1
                                        L'
                                         h= I
                                              ih


In a syntric equilibrium p.. =                                             for   all j,   and



                E.   = a.    —
                                 (a.1        —
                                                     1)/n.)             i = N,    I.
                 1      1                                      1.




Hence, the elasticity of deund is constant.
        jreouer, in this case (A.3) inpiies that D.. =                                       D.,    thich   toccether with

(4.2)    inpiies:



                                 11/3.—i
                                     '
        u. =
               n     D. =    n                   E./p..                                                          (11.4)




The allocation of aggregate expenditure                                      to    products can   now be determined

from:



                                              I//3i—l
        TIx
              U[n           EM/PM,           n1      E1/p1]



               st.                                   E.
                            EN + E1              .
                                               — 25 —




Homtheticity        of TJ(.) inplies that        there     exist share functions
=   N,I,   such   that   the   solution   to this problem can     be   represented by:



              E. =



with s. (.) being         a honDgeneous     fts-ict ion   of degree   zero.      Natt-al ly, the
share functions depend on U() and on n. and $                           i   =   M,I.
                                       REF4CEB


BregiiBn,    1.   (1986), Industry and Industrialization Policy in Israel

       Jerusalem: Bank of Israel Research Departnent. (Hebrew).

Brtn-io,   N. (1986). 'Sharp disinflation policy: Israel 1985.' Economic Policy,

o1. 2, pp. 379—102.
Dixit, l., and Stiglitz, J.E. (1977). '?tnopolistic coiipetition and optirrurn

       Droduct divorsity.' rrerican Economic Reuiew, vol. 67, pp. 297—308.

He1pnn, E. (198'fl. 'Increasing returns, inperfect nBrkets, and trade theory.'

       in Jones, R.W, Kenen P.B. (eds..) Handbook of International

       Economics.    vol. 1. fImsterdam: North   Holland.

Helpnn! S.. Rruc4man,      P.R.   (1965). rrket Structure and Foreicrn Trade.

       CaMridge: The NIT Press.

Nundell,     R.L.   (1971). Itnetary Theory. Pacific Palisades: Goodyear.

Sanval,     RE.,Jones, R.W. (1982). 'The theory of trade in middle

       products.' nrican Economic Review, vol. 72, pp. 16—31.

Sperace, N.E. (1975). 'Product selection, fixed costs, and       Trnnopolistic
       conpetition.' Review of Economics     Studies,   vol. 3, pp. 217—236.
                                        Table 1

                                          Israel



                   Index of    Exports2       Inports2    Index of   Enployed
                   aggregate                              real ;ge   persons
                   spending1                              rate3


1985—I             356           1335              1591     126         1364

    II             359           1397              1623    119          1352

   III             320           1432              1497    102          1333

    ItJ            331           1379              1673    101          1350

1986—I            344            1377              1714    115          1354


     1
          fkggreate spendinq is calculated as priuate real consunption
          plus public real cansunption plus real inuestnnt. The data     is
          seasonally adjusted.
          Source: Table B—i from Main Israeli Economic Data, Research
          Departnent, Bank of Israel (Septentier 2, 1986).

          Millions of dollars in 1980 prices. Exports excluding
          diaionds. luparts excluding diamnds and fuel.
          Source: Table C—S from Main Israeli Economic Data, Research
          Departnent, Bank of Israel (Septen-ber 15, 1985).

    3 nthly aterages.
      Source: Table (3—4 from Main Israeli Economic Data Research
          Departn'ent, Bank of Israel (Septeirber 8, 1986).


          Thousands, seasonally adjusted.
          Source: Table (3—S from Main Israel Economic Data, Research
          Departnent, Bank of Israel (Septenber 12, 1986).
                                        Table 2

                                 Conparat iue    Statics

                                                exports    inports1   real 'ge
                                                                      rate w/Q

                    Release of                                  0
                    Price Controls


 Perfect            Desired
 Conpet it   ion    Spending Increase              0            0           0


                    E1Tploynt Increase             +            0



                    Release of Price
                    Controls                       +


Oligopolistic       Desired                        —             +          +
Cnpet it   ion     Spending Increase

                    Dip loyiint Increase           +             0



1cissuming that    inport   prices are also controlled.
              price




          P


          PC
                          A



                                                      D


                                                               quantity
                                       (a)




          price

                                                    MC




 C
p1
      C
     P2




                                                           quantity
                                 (b)




                                   Fig. 1
              Price Controls:   Partial Equilibrium Analysis
px




           id

                        A




     x
                                /
                N
                            /
          C




                    Fig. 2

         General Equilibrium Effects
