                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          INDUSTRY INPUT IN POLICYMAKING:
                             EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE

                                       David C. Chan, Jr
                                      Michael J. Dickstein

                                      Working Paper 24354
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24354


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2018




We are thankful to Dan Barron, Panle Barwick, Steve Callander, Alice Chen (discussant), Jeff
Clemens, Zack Cooper, David Cutler, Wouter Dessein, Liran Einav, Ray Fisman, Bob Gibbons,
Ben Golub, Josh Gottlieb, Matt Grennan (discussant), Jon Gruber, Wes Hartmann, Alex Hirsch,
Zachary Hochstetler, Matt Jackson, Kei Kawai, Dan Kessler, Amanda Kowalski (discussant),
Keith Krehbiel, Jon Levin, Danielle Li (discussant), Shih En Lu, Ateev Mehrotra, Joe Newhouse,
Mike Powell, Jim Rebitzer (discussant), Al Roth, Ken Shotts, Sherry Smith, Bob Town
(discussant), Francesco Trebbi, Noam Yuchtman, multiple members of the RUC who participated
in detailed interviews, and many seminar participants. Sam Arenberg, Lulua Bahrainwala, Peter
Favaloro, Atul Gupta, Johnny Huynh, Michael Kobiela, Douglas Laporte, and Lindsay Yang
provided excellent research assistance. Chan gratefully acknowledges support from NIH
DP5OD019903-01, NIH L30 AG051189-01, and NIH P30AG012810. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by David C. Chan, Jr and Michael J. Dickstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Industry Input in Policymaking: Evidence from Medicare
David C. Chan, Jr and Michael J. Dickstein
NBER Working Paper No. 24354
February 2018
JEL No. D71,H57,I13,L51

                                          ABSTRACT

In setting prices for physician services, Medicare solicits input from a committee that evaluates
proposals from industry. We investigate whether this arrangement leads to prices biased toward
the interests of committee members. We find that increasing a measure of affiliation between the
committee and proposers by one standard deviation increases prices by 10%, demonstrating a
pathway for regulatory capture. We then evaluate the effect of affiliation on the quality of
information used in price-setting. More affiliated proposals produce less hard information,
measured as lower quality survey data. However, affiliation results in prices that are more closely
followed by private insurers, suggesting that affiliation may increase the total information used in
price-setting.


David C. Chan, Jr
Center for Health Policy and
Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
david.c.chan@stanford.edu

Michael J. Dickstein
New York University
Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center,7-78
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
michael.dickstein@nyu.edu
1        Introduction

In regulation and procurement, governments often face an information deficit. Industry partici-

pants know much more about key inputs for policy decisions, such as production costs, but have

incentives to provide selected or distorted information to direct policy in their own interests.

Thus, obtaining valuable information from industry to make policy decisions may also provide

a general pathway for “regulatory capture,” potentially biasing government decisions toward an

industry’s preferred policies (Stigler, 1971; Peltzman, 1976). Understanding and measuring this

trade-oﬀ between better information collected for decision-making and the distortion from reg-

ulatory capture seems particularly relevant given the US government’s reliance on hundreds of

advisory committees in many important policy decisions.1

        Our empirical work focuses on the US government’s procurement of health care services.

Medicare, the federal health insurance program for the elderly, sets administered prices for the

roughly $70 billion in annual payments it allocates for physician services.2 To do so, the govern-

ment relies on a committee of physicians convened by the American Medical Association (AMA),

known as the Relative Value Scale Update Committee (RUC). The committee evaluates propos-

als from specialty societies to determine the relative resource costs of services. The committee’s

recommendations influence not only Medicare’s direct expenditures, but also indirectly shape

pricing in the overall market for physician services, valued at $480 billion per year or 2.7% of the

US GDP (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2017). The prices of medical procedures can also drive larger

changes in physicians’ procedural choices (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014; Gruber et al., 1999) and

the specialty career decisions of future physicians (Nicholson and Souleles, 2001).

        We first assess whether the composition of the RUC leads to prices biased in favor of its

members, a concern raised by observers of this important committee (Laugesen, 2016). Using

novel data from the RUC on the universe of price-setting proposals discussed between 1992

and 2013, we focus on the RUC’s primary role of assessing the work involved for the service in
    1
      See Brown (2009) for an introduction. In 1972, Congress enacted the Federal Advisory Committee Act to
track the existence of a large number of federal advisory committees. In 2006, the US government maintained
916 such committees, with 67,346 members, at a cost of $384 million. While advisory committees may serve to
improve the quality of policy decisions, a key challenge for maintaining such committees is to ensure they are
“fairly balanced” and free of “inappropriate influence.”
    2
      Medicare payments to physicians totaled $70 billion in 2015, and the US Congressional Budget Oﬃce projects
spending of $82 billion in 2020, and $107 billion in 2025 (Congressional Budget Oﬃce, 2016).


                                                       1
each proposal and assigning a work-based relative value.3 To measure the eﬀect of connections

with the RUC, we develop a measure of aﬃliation, to reflect the closeness in global preferences

between specialties with many interests. Our measure exploits data on the services each speciality

performs, in a way that we show reflects the likelihood that the revenue of two specialties will

covary under any set of price changes. We then examine whether proposals by specialty societies

with higher aﬃliation with the RUC receive higher prices.

       We find that increasing a proposal’s aﬃliation by one standard deviation increases its price

by 10%. To interpret this relationship as causal, we rely on two sources of identifying variation.

First, the composition of RUC voting members changes across meetings, as the RUC has ex-

panded voting seats over time and as some specialty seats explicitly rotate. Second, and to a

larger degree, the specialties proposing to the RUC for a given procedure may vary widely. To

address the concern that the underlying price of a procedure may be correlated with aﬃliation,

either through the RUC’s composition or through the procedure’s likely proposers, we control

for RUC meeting identities and the shares of a procedure’s Medicare utilization across special-

ties. The remaining variation, from plausibly idiosyncratic costs of proposing and from barriers

to coordination among many potential proposers, may generate diﬀerent levels of aﬃliation for

procedures with the same intrinsic price. We provide support for this identifying assumption by

showing that, after controlling for meeting identities and specialty shares, the residual aﬃliation

is uncorrelated with exogenous measures of a service that predict its price.

       Our use of quasi-random variation in proposer identities complements previous research

on committees, which typically exploited the rotation of committee members (Zinovyeva and

Bagues, 2015; Li, 2017; Camara and Kyle, 2017). Our new source of variation aligns with a

mechanism from the literature on lobbying (Bertrand et al., 2014; Blanes i Vidal et al., 2012):

The identity of the lobbyist representing a special interest may be valuable because it lends cred-

ibility to the interest’s proposal, particularly when the lobbyist’s preferences align with those of

the decision-maker (Kessler and Krehbiel, 1996; Hirsch and Montagnes, 2015).
   3
    The work-related component of relative prices have received the most policy and research attention (e.g.,
Bodenheimer et al., 2007; Sinsky and Dugdale, 2013; Laugesen, 2016). According to the AMA (2017), this
component equals 51% of overall reimbursement. Two other components of relative price are professional liability
insurance (4%) and practice expenses (45%) (e.g., ancillary staﬀ labor, supplies, and equipment). The RUC also
determines the practice expense component, but via a separate process. We provide more details in Section 2.



                                                       2
    Because specialties have multiple, sometimes shared interests, the eﬀect of aﬃliation on spe-

cialty revenue requires careful analysis. We show in a counterfactual calculation that if aﬃliation

were equalized across proposals and if Medicare’s budget remained fixed, roughly 1.9% of rev-

enues would be reallocated across specialties, representing about $1.3 billion in annual Medicare

spending or $8.9 billion in annual health care spending accounting for both Medicare and pri-

vate insurance. Unpacking this average level of reallocation, however, we observe distributional

consequences by specialty. Emergency medicine would have the largest percentage revenue gain

(+17%) from equalizing aﬃliation, while infectious disease would have the largest loss (−5.8%).

Interestingly, specialties like internal medicine and family medicine are net beneficiaries of af-

filiation, because they share many services in common with RUC member specialties, including

the standard oﬃce visit. More than doubling the number of internal medicine seats on the RUC

would increase the specialty’s revenue by less than 1%.

    The possibility of bias in the RUC’s decision-making raises a central question of regulatory

design: From the government’s perspective, what is the oﬀsetting value of inviting industry input

in policymaking? In settings involving advisory committees, a key feature is the importance of

policy-relevant knowledge (e.g., the safety and eﬃcacy of a drug, or the benefits and costs of

electricity generation) held by industry participants. The government may form advisory com-

mittees with members that hold such knowledge directly. In other cases, committee members

may lack direct knowledge, but instead have the task of extracting and synthesizing information

from outside special interests. We thus explore whether allowing some bias in advisory commit-

tees may improve regulatory decisions, by facilitating the communication of information that

is neither verifiable nor independently discoverable. In our setting, we explore whether Medi-

care can extract more information about physician services and set more appropriate prices by

employing the RUC as an intermediary in decision-making.

    To address this question, we begin with a conceptual model, borrowing ideas from a large

literature on the extraction of information from biased experts.4 Following this literature, we

model two types of information that the government wishes to extract. If information is soft, or
   4
     See Grossman and Helpman (2001) for an extensive review. Some prominent examples of papers in this
large literature spanning political science and economics include Crawford and Sobel (1982), Calvert (1985),
Austen-Smith (1994), Dewatripont and Tirole (1999), and Li et al. (2001).



                                                     3
unverifiable, it must be credibly communicated (Crawford and Sobel, 1982). The government may

then benefit from delegating decision-making to an intermediary (the RUC) that has preferences

closer to the biased expert (the specialty), because aligned preferences improve communication

(Dessein, 2002). On the other hand, a committee with adversarial preferences incentivizes the

specialty to generate more information that is hard, or verifiable (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1999;

Hirsch and Shotts, 2015). The net eﬀect thus depends on the nature of information relevant for

decisions. In the Medicare setting and many others, some information (e.g., the average time

for physicians to perform a service) is conceivably verifiable, but much (potentially most) of the

relevant information is diﬃcult to verify and therefore soft (e.g., the “diﬃculty” or “complexity”

of a service relative to another).

   We then test the predictions of this model of information extraction using two unique and

objective measures of information quality. First, we test for the eﬀect of greater aﬃliation on hard

information using the quality of survey data presented to the RUC. Consistent with our model, we

find that higher aﬃliation corresponds to less hard information, in that proposals submitted to a

RUC with greater aﬃliation feature fewer physicians surveyed and fewer respondents, conditional

on specialty shares and other proposal and procedure characteristics. Also consistent with the

theory, greater hard information, conditional on aﬃliation, is not correlated with higher prices.

Thus, we find empirical support for the theoretical notion, as in Aghion and Tirole (1997),

Dewatripont and Tirole (1999), and Hirsch and Shotts (2015), that separation in interests can

provide motivation for an agent to provide costly but valuable information to a principal.

   Second, to examine a policy-relevant metric of the overall level of (hard and soft) information

Medicare collects through the RUC, we measure the degree to which Medicare price changes

correlate with private insurance price changes (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2017; Clemens et al.,

2017). We classify price changes depending upon whether they originate from RUC decisions,

and if so, whether they originate from high- vs. low-aﬃliation proposals. We find that price

changes in private insurance track those changes in Medicare more closely when the Medicare

price changes arise from RUC decisions. Further, we find stronger price-following for Medicare

price changes arising from more highly aﬃliated proposals to the RUC, relative to price changes

from low-aﬃliation RUC proposals. These findings suggest that aﬃliation may improve the


                                                 4
overall quality of information in Medicare pricing decisions.

        We organize the remainder of the paper as follows: Section 2 describes the institutional

setting. Section 3 introduces our data, measure of aﬃliation, and discusses our identification

strategy. Section 4 presents our main results on the eﬀect of aﬃliation on relative prices and

discusses our interpretation of bias. We move to the question of information extraction in Section

5. We introduce a theoretical framework and then present empirical evidence using data on

survey quality and on the transmission of Medicare prices to private insurance prices. Section 6

concludes.



2        Institutional Setting

We study the price-setting mechanism within Medicare’s Part B, which finances physician and

other clinical services as part of the federal health insurance program for the elderly. While in

private insurance, providers may negotiate prices directly with payers (Lewis and Pflum, 2015;

Ho and Lee, 2017), Medicare sets its prices using an administrative formula. This arrangement

is similar to price cap rules in regulated industries, including telephone service in past decades

(e.g., Braeutigam and Panzar, 1993), and to fee schedules for medical care in other countries.

Similar to these other regulated settings, Medicare’s formula attempts to set payments according

to the costs and eﬀort necessary to perform a service.

        To tie payments to costs, Medicare measures the level of costs for a service by summing three

distinct components: the intensity and eﬀort of the physician’s work (W ), the practice expense

required to perform the service (P E), and the professional liability insurance physicians must

carry (P LI). Each element has its own relative price, known as a “relative value unit,” or RVU.

The payment levels adjust for diﬀerences in the cost of practicing medicine in diﬀerent parts

of the country. To convert the relative value units into dollars, the sum of the (geographically

adjusted) cost components is multiplied by a common conversion factor; in 2014, the conversion

factor was approximately $35.83 per RVU (American Medical Association, 2015).5
    5
    The conversion factor is set administratively so that Medicare’s total payments for procedures in the US falls
within a budget determined by factors such as GDP growth and the number of Medicare beneficiaries. We provide
more details in Appendix A-1.




                                                        5
       In notation, for each service i performed in geographic area j in year t,
                                                                                     
                                                     ∑           (                  )
                    Reimbursementijt =                              RVUcit × GPCIcj  × CFt .                    (1)
                                                c∈{W,P E,P LI}


where RVUcit , is the relative value unit for service i in year t, GPCIcj is the fixed geographic

practice cost index, and CFt is the conversion factor.6

       With the adoption of this formula, Medicare’s administrators also created for themselves a

new and complex task: determining the relative values or RVUs. Judging the level of eﬀort

required for each medical procedure requires collecting information possessed by actual practi-

tioners. Medicare thus engages with a committee of the American Medical Association (AMA) to

collect physicians’ evaluations of the relative eﬀort and advise on proper RVU levels. This com-

mittee—the RUC—recommends relative values to Medicare, which Medicare’s administrators

adopt over 90% of the time (American Medical Association, 2017; Laugesen et al., 2012).


2.1      The RUC

The RUC considers evidence and makes recommendations for both the work and practice-expense

RVU components of the reimbursement formula, which together account for 96% of total RVUs.

We focus on work RVUs, which account for the majority of total RVUs across services and have

been the focus of increasing scrutiny.7 We henceforth use the term “RVU” or “relative price”

interchangeably with “work RVU,” unless otherwise specified.

       The main RUC committee, currently comprised of 25 physician specialty society represen-

tatives, considers all changes to work RVUs. Twenty one of these members occupy permanent
   6
     Medicare adopted this formula in 1992 (Hsiao et al., 1988). Prior to the current method, Medicare reim-
bursements were ill-defined and based on “usual and customary charges” that prevailed in each local (usually
state-based) insurance market as administered by the state Blue Cross Blue Shield insurer. These prices resulted
from negotiations between providers and insurers; they were thought to unfairly compensate certain specialists
and also contribute to rising Medicare spending (Laugesen, 2016).
   7
     The medical and health policy literatures have raised several potential sources of bias in the price-setting pro-
cess, although largely descriptively and without access to the data contained in RUC proposals (e.g., Bodenheimer
et al., 2007; Sinsky and Dugdale, 2013; Berenson and Goodson, 2016). The popular press has raised some of the
same points (e.g., Whoriskey and Keating, 2013; Pear, 2015), and the Aﬀordable Care Act explicitly funded more
systematic evaluations comparing external measures of physician time (work) and Medicare-adopted measures
(Wynn et al., 2015; Zuckerman et al., 2016). Recent work by Fang and Gong (2017) take stated times to perform
certain services as explicit and connect these times with work RVUs in order to detect physician over-billing.




                                                          6
seats, while the remaining four rotate.8 For example, a representative of the specialties of inter-

nal medicine, dermatology and orthopedic surgery maintain permanent seats, while specialities

including pediatric surgery and infectious disease rotate on and oﬀ the RUC. In Table 1, we

record the number of total meetings at which a particular specialty society had a voting member

on the RUC. Clear from this count, many specialties have had a representative on the RUC since

its founding in 1992, and some have had two representatives. In Figure 1, we show the number of

voting seats and a breakdown between “cognitive” and “procedural” specialties over time.9 Using

our definition, procedural specialties—i.e, those who chiefly carry out surgical services—have a

slightly larger share of the RUC’s voting members in every year since 1992. The composition of

the RUC has changed over time both because some of the seats explicitly rotate and because the

committee size has grown over time.


2.2    The Price-Setting Process

Each year, in three meetings, approximately 200-300 physician services appear for review before

the RUC. The committee will review all newly created services and will re-evaluate some existing

services. Evaluations for existing services occur when the description or content of the procedure

itself changes, when Medicare requests a revaluation, and, since 2006, when a workgroup from

within the RUC identifies a service as potentially misvalued.10 In addition, The Omnibus Budget

Reconciliation Act of 1990 requires Medicare’s administrators to review relative values at least

every five years, collecting public comments on potentially misvalued codes. The RUC has

advised Medicare in these “Five-Year” reviews, evaluating 1118 services in 1997, 870 codes in

2002, 751 codes in 2007, and 290 additional codes in 2012 (American Medical Association, 2014).
   8
     The rotating seats include two from internal medicine subspecialties not on the RUC, one primary care
rotating seat, and one seat from a speciality society that is not a permanent member of the RUC and not eligible
for one of the other three rotating seats. In addition, there are three voting seats that are not held by physician
specialties (American Medical Association, 2017).
   9
     Although the labels “procedural” and “cognitive” have been used frequently to describe specialties in the
policy debate on the RUC (see, e.g., Berenson and Goodson, 2016), there is no set categorization of specialties
according to these labels. We assign these labels to specialties based on conversations with the RUC. We provide
more detail in the note to Figure 1.
  10
     The RUC’s Relativity Assessment Workgroup identifies potentially misvalued services by objective screens,
such as when physicians bill for a service with low work RVUs in multiple units per patient, or when a service
that physicians commonly performed in inpatient settings moves to the outpatient setting (American Medical
Association, 2014). Specialties may also appeal to Medicare to request that the RUC review a service; such
specialty requests represent a small minority of cases.



                                                        7
    For each code under review, the evaluation process begins by identifying a specialty or set of

specialties to collect evidence and propose an RVU to the RUC. Any of the 122 specialty societies

in the American Medical Association’s House of Delegates may weigh in on the development of

an RVU proposal, but typically only those who perform the service will volunteer to collect

evidence and contribute to the proposal. We later exploit variation in the exact composition of

the proposing group in our empirical analyses.

    Briefly, the process from proposal to approval involves the following steps:

   1. The specialities developing a proposal conduct a survey of their members to collect data

      about the work and resource use involved in the given service.

        (a) If surveying, specialties decide on the number of physician members to survey. Physi-

            cians are asked to compare the service with “reference services” and to give estimates

            of the time and other measures of work required (e.g., mental eﬀort, technical skill,

            psychological stress). The survey contains a standardized vignette for the service, to

            ensure consistency of the estimates.

       (b) The one or more specialties who have conducted surveys present their evidence and

            arguments for a proposed relative price before the RUC.

   2. The RUC members discuss the proposal with each other and with the proposer(s). Pro-

      posals pass with at least a two-thirds vote of the committee.11

   3. The RUC forwards its recommendations to Medicare, which historically accepts the rela-

      tive prices 90% of the time (American Medical Association, 2017; Laugesen et al., 2012).

      Medicare, using formulas in Equation (1) and Appendix A-1, translates these relative prices

      into payment levels in dollars.
  11
     If a proposal is not approved, the proposer(s) may discuss their proposal with a smaller “facilitation commit-
tee”. In facilitation, the proposed value is often revised downward. The RUC must still pass any revisions. The
RUC may also independently recommend a relative price to Medicare if no proposal is successful.




                                                        8
3         Empirical Approach

We analyze the RUC’s role in the price-setting process using data from the committee’s delib-

erations. Our substantive goals are twofold. First, we measure the causal eﬀect of the RUC’s

aﬃliation with the proposing specialities on the prices recommended by the committee. Second,

we determine the eﬀect of aﬃliation on information transmission, measured either as survey

precision (hard) or the correlation between price changes in Medicare and in private insurance

(hard and soft). To do so, we need to define an empirical measure of aﬃliation, and then describe

the plausibly exogenous variation in this aﬃliation that allows us to identify the casual eﬀect of

aﬃliation on prices and on information transmission.


3.1        Data

Our empirical analyses rely on three sources of data. First, we use information on the RUC’s

deliberations, including the RUC membership at each decision and the details of the proposal for

each service evaluated by the committee. We accessed the same database RUC members use to

prepare for votes during meetings, with detailed proposal information for each service the RUC

evaluated from its inception in 1992 until 2013. For each proposal, we collect the identity of the

service, the meeting in which the RUC considered the proposal, the specialty society or societies

involved, the RVU level proposed, and the RVU level recommended by the RUC. We observe

4,423 proposals with known specialty proposers and other selection criteria. We describe details

of our sample creation in Table A-1.

         The RUC’s database also contains detailed characteristics of each proposal. We observe

the characteristics of the survey, a central component of proposals, including the number of

physicians surveyed and the number of respondents. We also collect summary statistics of the

survey responses regarding the time required for a service, as well as comparisons between the

service and a “reference” service along various qualitative dimensions (e.g., complexity of medical

decision-making, urgency, technical skill, physical eﬀort).12

         Second, in addition to the RUC database, we collect objective measures of the characteristics
    12
    In the survey questions on time, we observe time information broken into preparation time before the procedure
(median), the time for the actual service itself (25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles), any post procedure time, and
indicators for whether surgical procedures require additional oﬃce visits before or after the surgery.


                                                        9
of each service to use as controls in our analyses and to identify the types of physician specialities

that use each code. The data come from Medicare, including its annual utilization files and a

survey of Medicare beneficiaries. With these data, we define a set of service-specific character-

istics, including: (i) yearly Medicare utilization of a given service, broken out by the identity

of the specialty providing the service; (ii) average demographics of patients who receive a given

service; and (iii) the fraction of utilization of the service in diﬀerent medical settings, including

the emergency department, inpatient, outpatient care settings.

       To build even more detailed control variables to characterize each service, we merge in a

database of service descriptions.13 The description field includes a set of words that Medicare,

other payers, and clinicians use to categorize physician work for reimbursement and productivity

measurement. We identify keywords from this collection of descriptive terms and create variables

that reflect a service’s description.14

       Finally, third, we collect a time series of private sector prices for each service. We later com-

pare the changes in private prices to those in Medicare, to explore how private insurers respond

to information and possible bias in Medicare’s price setting mechanism. We use Truven Health’s

MarketScan data to measure prices for each service as paid by private insurers. We observe quan-

tities of use, the specialty of the billing physician, and a measure of the reimbursement paid to

the provider. We scale the Marketscan data by patient demographics in the Medical Expenditure

Panel Survey (MEPS) dataset, to find nationally representative estimates of private insurance

utilization for each procedure and for each specialty performing it.


3.2       Aﬃliation

We define a notion of aﬃliation to measure the alignment of preferences between specialties with

a diverse set of interests, characterized by the services they each perform.15 Two specialties

may be tightly linked, even if they are discussing a procedure only one performs. For example,
  13
     In Table A-2, we provide examples of these descriptions.
  14
     In detail, we identify word stems to account for inflected variations (e.g., “operate” and “operation”), of which
there are a total of 9,271 unique stem words from 11,123 original words, excluding stop words such as “the,” “and,”
and “only.” The median count of unique word stems across procedure code descriptions is 8, and the 5th and 95th
percentiles are 3 and 22, respectively. We use these word stems to create a vector of indicator variables reflecting
the content of a service’s description field.
  15
     This concept is similar to congruence in Caillaud and Tirole (2007), which they define as the “prior probability
that a given member benefits from the sponsor’s project.”


                                                         10
suppose the orthopedic surgery specialty proposes a value for a spinal surgery, and this service

represents only a small fraction of its specialty revenue. If hand surgery as a specialty holds

a committee seat, it may tend to agree with an orthopedic surgery recommendation, even if it

performs no spinal procedures, because it shares other procedures in common with orthopedic

surgery. The alignment of preferences (or lack thereof) will have implications for both the prices

set and the information transmitted in the process, as we detail later in Section 5.16

       To measure alignment in specialty preferences, we must capture the many pathways through

which price-setting decisions may aﬀect a specialty’s revenue (or any other function of quantities

and prices of services). For example, changing the RVU of a service may aﬀect the quantities

of that service and of complementary or substitute services. Changes in quantities or RVUs

will also aﬀect the conversion factor and therefore the real Medicare reimbursement for any

service. Finally, a price change may cause future prices of related services to change similarly,

particularly for services that might use the index service as a reference. These mechanisms

are complicated. However, by construction, two specialties with identical quantity shares across

services will experience the same proportional change in revenue from any arbitrary price change.

Thus, we focus on the similarity of services between two specialties, as a measure of the alignment

in interests when specialties seek to maximize revenue.

       Specifically, we denote the quantity utilization of service i by specialty s in year y as qisy .

We then construct the vector σs of specialty s utilization shares across all services, where the ith

element is σis , the share of specialty s’s utilization of i averaged across years:

                                                      ∑
                                                      y qisy
                                             σis = ∑ ∑          ,                                           (2)
                                                    y    i qisy


for each service i in the universe of 11,252 Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes that

physicians perform for reimbursement. We define aﬃliation between two specialties s and s′ as
  16
    We thus depart from previous empirical work on committee bias that is based on financial ties (Camara and
Kyle, 2017) or group membership (Zinovyeva and Bagues, 2015; Li, 2017), which focuses on bias and ex ante
information. By measuring connections between senders (proposers) and receivers (committee members), using
variation that is independent of the object of the proposal, we examine the relationship between preferences and
communication (or ex post information extracted from the sender).




                                                      11
a negative Euclidean distance:

                                    (     )   √
                                   a s, s′ = − (σs − σs′ ) (σs − σs′ )′ .                                    (3)


In Appendix A-2, we provide further discussion about this measure of aﬃliation as our preferred

statistic for the alignment of revenue maximization objectives between two specialties.17

       Figure 2 shows aﬃliation measures between specialties, among the 20 specialties with the

highest revenue, where we divide the measures into nine bins. Many aﬃliation measures are

intuitive: We find high aﬃliations for related pairs such as between internal medicine and family

medicine, between electrodiagnostic medicine and neurology, and between orthopedic surgery and

hand surgery. Perhaps surprisingly, internal medicine is aﬃliated with many surgical specialties

because many surgical specialties also rely on the same evaluation and management procedures

that internal medicine uses.18 In contrast, physicians in pathology use a set of codes rarely used

by other specialties, leading to low aﬃliations. Similarly, emergency medicine physicians provide

evaluation and management services using distinct codes specific to emergency patients, and thus

have low aﬃliations.

       Our definition of aﬃliation reflects pairwise comparisons of the similarity in procedure use

between two specialties. However, for our eventual empirical specifications, we need an aﬃliation

measure at the proposal level, since our outcomes measures are specific to a proposal. Thus, we

define set aﬃliation, a measure of aﬃliation between the set of specialities composing the RUC

and the set of specialties party to a proposal.19 The set aﬃliation between the set of proposing

specialties Si for proposal i and the set of RUC member specialties Rt at meeting t is

                                                     1 ∑
                                  A∗ (Rt , Si ) =         max a (r, s) ,                                     (4)
                                                    ∥Rt ∥ s∈Si
                                                            r∈Rt
  17
     In particular, we discuss the use of quantity shares vs. revenue shares as the vector space upon which to
base aﬃliation, and we discuss alternative distance metrics, such as Manhattan distance, correlation, and angular
distance. Although there are theoretical reasons to prefer our chosen aﬃliation measure, we nevertheless show in
Table A-3 that the aﬃliation eﬀect on prices is robust across other formulations.
  18
     Many important linkages between seemingly disparate specialties exist: Bronchoscopy is shared by otolaryn-
gology, pulmonary medicine, and thoracic surgery. Plain x-rays are shared between internal medicine, radiology,
and surgery. CT scanning of the head is shared by radiology, neurosurgery, and neurology.
  19
     Proposing coalitions exist in our sample. Of the 4,423 proposals in our baseline sample with known proposing
specialties, 63% are made by a single specialty, 23% are made by two specialties, and 14% are made by three or
more specialties.


                                                       12
where r ∈ Rt denotes a member specialty on the RUC, and s ∈ Si denotes a specialty on

the proposal. For each r ∈ Rt , we take the maximum aﬃliation between r and any proposing

specialty s ∈ Si . In this formulation, additional proposing specialties in Si can only increase

A∗ (Rt , Si ), based on the intuition in Krishna and Morgan (2001) that communication outcomes

improve when a receiver listens to the most closely aligned sender. We then take the average

across RUC members, to reflect that the RUC aggregates opinions across members, not only in

voting but also in the committee’s private and public discussions (Li et al., 2001). Finally, for

interpretation, we standardize A∗ (Rt , Si ) by subtracting the sample mean and dividing by the

sample standard deviation, and denote this standardized measure as A (Rt , Si ).20


3.3      Identification

To estimate the causal eﬀect of aﬃliation on RUC-recommended values, we need variation in

aﬃliation that is uncorrelated with the underlying value of a procedure. Our goal is thus to

condition on predicted prices and predicted aﬃliation, as a function of the RUC membership

and the likely specialty proposers for a given procedure, and to exploit the remaining variation.

Since prices are relative, we condition on an indicator for the RUC meeting at which a procedure

was valued. Further, because both underlying value and likely proposers are most obviously

related to the utilization of a procedure by specialties, we condition on 64 specialty utilization

shares:                                                ∑
                                                      y qisy
                                             wis = ∑ ∑          ,                                            (5)
                                                    y    s qisy

for service i, specialty s, and Medicare claim year y.

       Figure 3 shows substantial variation in aﬃliation even across proposals with the participa-

tion of a given specialty. A large part of this variation arises from the identities of the proposing

specialties when multiple specialties can possibly propose. As many as a dozen specialties are

eligible to be on the proposal a typical service, while 98% of the proposals involve five or fewer

specialties. This variation may be uncorrelated with underlying RVU if it relates to variation in

a specialty’s costs of proposing from meeting to meeting, which in turn depends on the resources
  20
    In some cases, described below, we will compute the counterfactual set aﬃliation for proposal i in a diﬀerent
meeting than the actual t. In these cases we continue to normalize with the mean and standard deviation of the
actual sample of A (Rt , Si ) in order to maintain comparability.


                                                       13
the specialty has available to administer surveys and send representatives to present a proposal.21

Further, in Appendix A-3, we show that with costly proposals and two specialties, there exists

no unique pure-strategy equilibrium for proposals, while new mixed-strategy equilibria are intro-

duced. When specialties cannot coordinate, mixing in equilibrium introduces another random

source of variation in the identities of proposing specialties.

       For identification, we require that proposals with (conditionally) higher aﬃliation are not for

services with (conditionally) higher intrinsic prices. In Table 2, we show balance in characteris-

tics for Medicare beneficiaries who receive services with high residual aﬃliation and those who

receive services with low residual aﬃliation. In Figure 4, we similarly show balance in predicted

price, as a function of these plausibly exogenous service characteristics, linearly controlling for

meeting dummies and specialty shares. Despite no relationship with residual aﬃliation, these

characteristics are nonetheless important: They alone explain about 25% of the variation in

prices and are highly correlated with aﬃliation unconditionally. Further, we consider below two

types of violations of our identifying assumption. First, specialties submitting proposals for pro-

cedures with intrinsically high prices may choose to submit these proposals at meetings with

more aﬃliated RUC members. Second, holding fixed utilization by specialties, procedures with

higher intrinsic prices may also be more likely to have more or particular proposing specialties,

which may increase aﬃliation.


3.3.1      Endogenous Timing

We look for evidence that specialties choose to propose when they are more aﬃliated with the

RUC. We compute the aﬃliation that each proposal i would have over all possible alternative

meetings t′ ∈ T \ t, generating a set of counterfactual aﬃliations, A = {A (Rt′ , Si )}. We then

test whether observed aﬃliations are statistically distinguishable from these counterfactual af-

filiations. As shown in Figure 5, the mean diﬀerenced statistic A (Rt′ , Si ) − A (Rt , Si ) over all

proposals and possible meeting dates (i, t′ ) is not statistically diﬀerent than 0. Further, control-
                                                              ∑
ling for average counterfactual aﬃliation, A (Si ) ≡ ∥T ∥−1 t∈T A (Rt , Si ), we find no correlation

between price predicted from service characteristics and the realized aﬃliation.
  21
   For example, we find that a specialty is less likely to propose if there is another procedure in the same RUC
meeting that has a higher predicted propensity of the specialty proposing.


                                                      14
3.3.2     Endogenous Proposing Specialties

Most of the variation in A (Rt , Si ) across i and t is due to the proposing specialties, Si , and not to

the RUC members, Rt .22 We thus assess whether specialty participation in proposals, conditional

on specialty utilization shares wi , is correlated with the service’s predicted price. We first

estimate the propensity of each specialty s to propose i, as a logit model of πis = Pr (s ∈ Si |s, wi ),

which has a pseudo-R2 of 0.67. Conditional on this propensity, actual participation in a proposal

is uncorrelated with predicted RVU, despite an adjusted R2 of 0.88 for the RVU prediction

equation (Figure 6).23 This result supports our identifying assumption that, conditional on

wi , the remaining variation in specialty-proposal participation is uncorrelated with underlying

price. Further, in Appendix A-4, we show that simulated aﬃliation, based on a richer model

of specialty-proposal propensities, πis , and Rt , exhibits wide variation centered around actual

aﬃliation (Figure A-5).24



4        Aﬃliation Eﬀect on Prices

4.1      Estimated Eﬀect

We estimate the eﬀect of aﬃliation on RUC-recommended RVUs with the following equation:


                             ln RVUit = αA (Rt , Si ) + Xi β + Tt η + wi ζ + εit ,                                   (6)


where RVUit is the relative price (work RVU) granted to proposal i at meeting t, and α is the

eﬀect of increasing set aﬃliation by a standard deviation.25 We include fixed eﬀects for the RUC

meeting t and control for specialty utilization shares wi . Thus we compare prices within the

same meeting and for services with the same (linear) composition of specialties performing the
                                    (                      )         (       )
    22
      Specifically, we compare V ari A (Rt , Si ) − A (Si ) and V ari A (Si ) relative to V ari (A (Rt , Si )). The vari-
ation due to t is only about 3.7% of the total variation, implying the variation due to proposing specialty identities
is about 27 times greater.
   23
      We predict RVU using procedure characteristics, including procedure code word descriptions, surveyed time,
prior RVU, and Medicare beneficiary characteristics.
   24
      In Appendix A-4, we further provide supporting evidence of wide variation in the propensity of proposing
among actual proposers and among the highest-propensity specialties.
   25
      We study the eﬀect of aﬃliation on log RVU, because relationships between components of price (e.g., time
and intensity of a service) are viewed as multiplicative (Hsiao et al., 1988).



                                                           15
service.

    We can potentially control for a large number of procedure code and proposal characteristics

Xi specific to a service i: (i) prior RVU, which exists for the roughly 50% of proposals made for

existing procedures, (ii) characteristics of Medicare beneficiaries who receive the procedure, (iii)

time and work characteristics of the procedure (e.g., total utilization, surveyed time), and (iv)

word stems in the procedure’s description.26

    In Table 3, we report results for a variety of control specifications. In the full specification,

reported in Column 4, we find that a standard deviation increase in aﬃliation increases relative

price by 10.1%.27 In Figure 7, we illustrate this result in a binned scatterplot of residualized

price on the y-axis and residualized aﬃliation on the x -axis. Increasing aﬃliation from the 10th

percentile to the 90th percentile would increase prices by 17%.

    In Column 5, we show a similar eﬀect when we control for predicted set aﬃliation, as a

function of the RUC membership, Rt , and the predicted propensity of each specialty to propose,

described in Appendix A-4, instead of linear wi . This prediction mechanically controls for any

variation in RUC membership over time. In Column 6, we show that our result is robust to

controlling for interactions of each specialty share with linear meeting year, which allows for

changes in the average intrinsic value of each specialty’s procedures over time. In Table A-3,

we show robustness of our results to 49 other formulations of aﬃliation.28 To the extent that

we measure aﬃliation with error, in that we may fail to capture important linkages between

specialties (e.g., between anesthesiology and surgery), our results can be interpreted as an lower

bound of the eﬀect of aﬃliation on prices.
  26
     In practice, because of the high number of procedure code characteristics relative to the number of proposals,
we employ methods to avoid overfitting. For example, for a code description’s word stems, we remove collinear
word stems and then select predictive word stems via LASSO. We also form jack-knifed RVU predictions using
the set of post-LASSO OLS controls and using only observations from meetings other than meeting t. Finally, we
form jack-knifed RVU predictions based on the procedure’s characteristics in (iii).
  27
     Consistent with robustness across control specifications, in an Altonji et al. (2005) framework we find that
selection on unobservables, controlling for meeting dummies and specialty shares, would need to be 3.9 times
greater than selection on observables in order to explain our estimated eﬀect.
  28
     We defend our preferred aﬃliation measure and discuss alternatives in Appendix A-2.




                                                        16
4.2      Counterfactual Revenue

Given the eﬀect of aﬃliation on recommended prices, we examine the revenue implications from

two counterfactual scenarios that change the aﬃliation of proposals. In the first scenario, we

equalize the aﬃliation of all proposals, so that no proposal has an advantage (or disadvantage)

under aﬃliation. In the second, we consider a counterfactual RUC, in which the 25 specialty

seats are apportioned based on specialty physician populations, as given in Table A-5. This

scenario, which generally reallocates RUC seats away from “procedural” specialties, has been a

common policy intervention advocated by critics of the RUC who wish to close the “primary

care-specialty income gap” (Bodenheimer et al., 2007; Laugesen, 2016).

       In both counterfactual scenarios, we hold fixed the timing of each proposal, the Medicare

budget, and the utilization of each service over time. We thus simulate changes in revenue at the

service level solely through the eﬀect of counterfactual aﬃliation on service prices. We further

aggregate counterfactual revenue reallocation to specialties and to types of services, defined by

Berenson-Eggers Type of Service (BETOS) codes. We provide details of the simulation algorithm

in Appendix A-5.

       Equalizing aﬃliation across proposals would reallocate $1.0 billion (or 2.9% of work-based

reimbursement) in yearly Medicare work-based revenue across procedures, or $1.9 billion in total

Medicare reimbursement, if we extend the aﬃliation eﬀect to practice-expense reimbursement

(also priced by the RUC). Assuming a proportional price change in private insurance, the cross-

service reallocation would be $13.4 billion yearly. We also evaluate which specialties and types

of procedures, grouped by BETOS categories, would see the largest revenue reallocations. We

illustrate those changes in Figure 8. Although internal medicine has a minority of seats, internal

medicine gains from aﬃliation because many other specialties, including surgical ones, also derive

a large share of revenue from the same evaluation and management services performed in oﬃce

and inpatient visits.29 Of specialties, emergency medicine would have the largest percentage

revenue gain (+17%), while infectious disease would have the largest loss (−5.8%). Overall,

1.9% of revenues would be reallocated across specialties, about $1.3 billion in Medicare spending
  29
    We do not investigate other mechanisms, such as the diﬃculty in raising prices for common procedures, that
may depress prices for oﬃce visits and therefore aﬀect the revenues of non-procedural specialties (Bodenheimer
et al., 2007).


                                                     17
or $8.9 billion in annual health care spending from Medicare and private insurance.

       Reapportioning RUC seats based on specialties’ relative physician populations would reallo-

cate $230 million in yearly Medicare work-based revenue across procedures, or $450 million in

total Medicare reimbursement. Overall, reallocation figures generally are only one-fifth of the

magnitude (and often opposite in direction) of the reallocation when equalizing aﬃliation. Even

though internal medicine would be given 4 seats, compared to the actual average of 1.5 seats on

the RUC, the specialty would gain less than 1 percent in revenue. Infectious disease would have

the largest percentage revenue gain (+1.4%), and ophthalmology would experience the largest

percentage revenue loss (−1.4%). We illustrate other individual specialty and BETOS code

reallocations in Figure 9.


4.3      Interpreting the Price Eﬀect as Bias

We interpret the finding that greater aﬃliation results in higher prices as evidence of a bias

among RUC members to recommend higher prices for aﬃliated specialties. This interpretation

is consistent with a recent empirical literature on political rents.30 However, preferences typically

correlate with the quality of information decision-makers hold. Could the higher prices we observe

be due to better ex ante information held by aﬃliated RUC members rather than bias?31 We

argue that this alternative is less plausible.

       First, we observe that if the RUC were unbiased but held diﬀerent ex ante levels of infor-

mation across diﬀerent decisions, then its price recommendations should not vary on average in

a Bayesian equilibrium. For example, if the RUC were to systematically underestimate prices

when uninformed, it would benefit from adjusting its recommendations upward by the average

level of its underestimate. This feature holds true in standard models of decision-making under

asymmetric information.32 More recent models allow for information rents to be held by an
  30
      For notable examples in the economics literature, see Fisman (2001); Khwaja and Mian (2005); Faccio (2006);
Ferguson and Voth (2008). This literature generally views relationships between firm valuations and political
actors as prima facie evidence of rents and corruption. In medical price-setting, Bertoli and Grembi (2017) study
regional-government inpatient prices for obstetric admissions in Italy, as a function of the number of physicians in
government positions. Recent papers of committee decision-making, by Li (2017) and Camara and Kyle (2017),
explicitly consider information alongside bias. Their frameworks would also interpret decisions systematically
skewed toward or against randomly assigned applicants (i.e., equal expected quality) as bias.
   31
      It is important to distinguish ex ante information held by the RUC, before a proposal, from information that
is extracted in the proposal process. The latter is the focus of Section 5.
   32
      This intuition is most straightforward when decisions are continuous. In the RUC context, we can think


                                                        18
asymmetrically informed sender, e.g., when the sender’s message cannot be fully expropriated to

the receiver’s advantage (Callander, 2008).33 Second, and more importantly, because the ex ante

information story relies on the RUC possessing greater information for procedures with higher

prices, we would need changes in RUC membership to observe changes in information. In our

empirical setting, however, the main source of identifying variation comes from the identities of

the proposing specialties, not changes to the RUC’s composition. Our use of proposer variation

relates to a literature on lobbying, in which lobbyists (proposers) and may lead to favorable deci-

sions by their very identity (Blanes i Vidal et al., 2012; Bertrand et al., 2014) and the alignment

of their interests with those of their audience (Kessler and Krehbiel, 1996; Hirsch and Montagnes,

2015).34

    In Appendix A-6 and Table A-4, we empirically investigate alternative mechanisms behind the

price eﬀect. Specifically, we consider signaling “buy-in,” in which services with higher underlying

prices should have more proposers (and therefore higher aﬃliation). We also consider whether

the RUC recommendations for a service are explained by service-specific revenue or utilization by

RUC member specialties. We show that the eﬀect of aﬃliation on prices is robust to controlling

for number of proposers and measures of service-specific interests (or information) held by RUC

specialties.
of decisions as continuous in the following way: RUC members often publicly voice their view of “reasonable”
prices; members discuss and renegotiate rejected prices in “facilitation committees” (see Section 2.2); and the
RUC may unilaterally recommend a price to the government if no reasonable proposal is made. Even in a discrete
context, the same intuition applies. With a fully informed RUC, proposed prices would always equal the true
price. An uninformed RUC will have a threshold price above which it chooses to reject a price recommendation.
In equilibrium, all proposals should then be at this price. Therefore, the Bayesian equilibrium RUC threshold
will equal the RUC’s prior, which equals the expectation of the true price.
  33
     The view that asymmetric information benefits experts is intuitive. Without this asymmetry, experts would
have no incentives to acquire knowledge. On page 232 of Weber (2009): “Under normal conditions, the power
position of a fully developed bureaucracy is always overtowering. The ’political master’ finds himself in the
position of the ’dilettante’ who stands opposite the ’expert.” ’ This Weberian view of expertise is well-known in
political science and sociology: for example, Bendor et al. (1985, p. 1042) notes, “A bureau’s influence rests not
on its formal authority—its ability to manipulate the rules—but as Weber noted, its control of information, its
ability to manipulate ... information about the consequences of diﬀerent alternatives.”
  34
     In Appendix A-4, we present regression specifications to test two alternative mechanisms behind the aﬃliation
result. First, we examine a signaling hypothesis in which aﬃliation simply reflects the intrinsic value of a procedure,
and the unbiased RUC reacts to that signal. Second, we look for informational mechanisms at the procedure level
by testing whether the aﬃliation eﬀect is driven by procedures performed often by specialties with seats on the
RUC. We find little evidence that either of these mechanisms explains our main aﬃliation eﬀect.




                                                          19
5     Aﬃliation Eﬀect on Information Extraction

Given the evidence of bias due to aﬃliation, we return to a broader question posed by the

prevalence of advisory committees: Why would the government involve an intermediary that

may be biased toward industry? In this section, we first introduce a conceptual model that

illustrates a trade-oﬀ between bias and information extraction. In our framework, the specialty

society is a biased expert who has information about the true value of a service to be priced.

We show that the quality of information extracted and used in price-setting may improve with

aﬃliation between the RUC and the specialty society. We then test the predictions of this model

using two unique and objective measures of information quality. First, we test for the eﬀect of

greater aﬃliation on the quality of survey information presented to the RUC. Second, we use

data on prices from private insurers to evaluate how price-following from Medicare to the private

sector depends on aﬃliation.


5.1    Conceptual Framework

Consider a government that procures a service at price p, ideally set at θ ∼ U (0, 1). A specialty

society knows θ but may also have bias. The government may delegate price-setting to the RUC,

which then evaluates information from the specialty about θ.35 Information can be communicated

in two forms: “hard” and “soft.” Hard information is verifiable and interpretable but costly to

produce. In this setting, hard information includes the data reported in physician surveys, for

example. Soft information, as in “cheap talk” (Crawford and Sobel, 1982), includes aspects of

the service that cannot be verified by evidence, such as the “diﬃculty” or “complexity” of one

service relative to another.

    The government chooses the specialty composition of the RUC, so that the RUC may be

more or less aﬃliated with the proposer. The degree of bias in price-setting and the quality of

information will depend on this aﬃliation between the RUC and the speciality society.
  35
     We follow a standard setup from Dessein (2002). This modeling assumption may be supported by the fact that
Medicare follows the RUC price recommendations 90% of the time. More recent cheap talk models study sequential
cheap talk and are more complicated. If the government undoes bias from high-aﬃliation RUC decisions, then
informational advantages from communication will in general be nullified (Ambrus et al., 2013).




                                                      20
5.1.1     Timing and Payoﬀs

The timing and payoﬀs are as follows:

   1. The government delegates to a RUC intermediary with bias bR .

   2. The specialty may produce hard information verifying that θ uniformly lies on a subinterval
                              ( )
      of length L (i.e., θ ∼ U θ, θ , L ≡ θ − θ ∈ [0, 1]), via a technology that comes at cost

        c (L).36 c (1) = 0, c′ (L) < 0, and c′′ (L) > 0.

   3. The specialty observes θ, and then transmits a cheap talk message m about θ.

   4. The RUC sets price p. Non-transferrable payoﬀs are as follows for the specialty (uS ), RUC

        (uR ), and the government (uG ):


                                         uS = − (θ + bS − p)2 − c (L) ;

                                         uR = − (θ + bR − p)2 ;

                                         uG = − (θ − p)2 ,


        where bS and bR are biased preferences for the specialty and RUC, respectively, and bS > 0

        without loss of generality.

As in the standard cheap talk model, bias bS and bR enter the specialty and RUC utilities,

respectively, such that even though these agents may prefer higher or lower prices than the

government, neither prefers to raise or lower prices without bound.37


5.1.2     Comparative Statics

We consider the comparative statics of changing the RUC’s bias, bR , with details in Appendix

A-7. First, if all information is soft (i.e., L = 1 regardless), outcomes follow Dessein (2002): If
                                                                           ( )
  36
     In this exposition, we treat θ − θ as known and assert that θ ∼ U θ, θ . However, this is not technically
                                                                                              [     ]
correct for all values of L. In Appendix A-7.4, we consider θ − θ as random, i.e., L = E θ − θ , which allows θ
to remain uniformly distributed in the posterior interval. Neither the uniform distribution of θ nor fixed θ − θ is
required for the intuition of this model.
  37
     This can be interpreted as a common preference held by all agents for “sensible” prices that are neither too
high nor too low; they may directly value this sensibility or they may value credibility to the government to ensure
they continue to have a role in setting prices.


                                                        21
the government chooses a RUC with preferences biased toward the specialty (i.e., bR close to

bS ), the expected price will move away from the government’s ideal, but more information is

communicated. The optimal RUC bias is b∗R ∈ [0, bS ]. If bS is suﬃciently large, then b∗R = 0; if

bS is suﬃciently small, then b∗R = bS . But it is never optimal to have b∗R < 0 or b∗R > bS , because

this worsens both bias and communication.
                                                                                      [ ]
    Second, when we allow the specialty to produce hard information—reducing the space θ, θ

to length L < 1 with verifiable evidence—such evidence eliminates the need to communicate a

service’s value through soft channels. Hard information is most valuable when soft communica-

tion is least feasible, such as in settings in which the RUC and specialty proposer have divergent

preferences. This implies that greater b = bS − bR (i.e., low aﬃliation between the RUC and

the specialty) induces the specialty to produce more hard information. Since hard information

increases the government’s utility, the optimal RUC has preferences closer to the government’s

(b∗R is closer to 0) when hard information is easier to produce. As the technology to produce

hard information improves (i.e., c (L) becomes smaller), the optimal b∗R moves closer to 0.38

    In summary, our model predicts that higher aﬃliation will allow better communication of soft

information between proposers and the RUC. Hard information provision, by contrast, decreases

with aﬃliation. Thus, the overall information content of prices as a function of aﬃliation depends

on how much each type of information adjusts. When the cost (or feasibility) of producing hard

information falls, the degree of aﬃliation that maximizes information extraction will decrease.

We next test these comparative statics using our empirical measures of information quality.


5.2    Aﬃliation Eﬀect on Hard Information

Unlike many other settings, our dataset contains an objective measure of hard information. As

we describe in Section 2, when specialties propose a new RVU, they present survey evidence

about the work involved in delivering a service, particularly the time needed (Zuckerman et al.,

2016; Burgette et al., 2016). We use this survey data as our measure of hard information—the

more physicians that a specialty or a coalition of specialties surveys about physician work, the
  38
     In Appendix A-7, we show that it is never optimal to have bR < 0. In Figure A-6, we illustrate this relationship
between welfare (government expected utility) and bR , letting the cost of hard information, c (L), vary.




                                                         22
more concrete is the evidence presented in a proposal to the RUC.39 However, surveying more

physicians is costlier to specialty societies.

    Using per-specialty survey sample size and the number of respondents as measures of hard

information, denoted Hit , we estimate the aﬃliation eﬀect on hard information measure with the

following regression:40


                              ln Hit = αA (Rt , Si ) + Xi β + Tt η + wi ζ + εit ,                              (7)


We use the same controls as in Equation (6). The coeﬃcient of interest, α, reflects the eﬀect of

aﬃliation on the endogenous decision to provide hard information. The number of specialties on

a proposal may also aﬀect survey samples, e.g., through coordination issues. Therefore, to isolate

empirically the mechanism of aﬃliation on hard information, we may also control for indicators

of the number of specialty proposers.

    We present results in Table 4. We see strong negative eﬀects: In our preferred specification,

controlling for proposer utilization of the a procedure, in Column 2, a one standard-deviation

increase in aﬃliation decreases per-specialty survey sample size by 33.2% and per-specialty num-

ber of respondents by 41.3%. Figure 10 shows these results in a binned scatterplot of residual

log survey counts against residual set aﬃliation. The negative eﬀect persists when controlling

for the number of specialty proposers, shown in Column 4 of Table 4, although the eﬀect is not

statistically significant for the outcome of survey respondents.


5.3    Price Transmission to Private Insurance

As a second measure of information quality, we examine how private prices track changes in

Medicare prices, depending on the source of the Medicare price and the aﬃliation of the proposal

that led to a given RUC-recommended price. Recent research documents strong price-following
   39
      The RUC often focuses on the distribution of survey outcomes and the number of survey respondents, as a
marker of the credibility of a proposal. Although any given survey respondent may exaggerate his or her response,
it is more diﬃcult to do so (and generally more costly to lie) in aggregate when there are many respondents, along
the lines of (Kartik, 2009).
   40
      While the total surveyed information is obviously relevant from the perspective of the RUC, there are mechan-
ical rules that require specialties to survey a minimum number of physicians, conditional on surveying (American
Medical Association, 2017). Therefore, for proposals with more than one specialty, we consider the eﬀect of
aﬃliation on per-specialty hard information.



                                                        23
from Medicare to private insurance prices (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2017; Clemens et al., 2017).

This literature notes two potential mechanisms behind price-following: Medicare may serve as an

outside option in bargaining between private insurers and physicians, or Medicare may provide

a “knowledge standard” with information content.

    We focus on the latter mechanism and test the overall informational content of Medicare

prices. If Medicare price changes serve solely as a bargaining benchmark, then the degree to

which they are followed should not depend on their source and, in particular, on the aﬃliation of

a proposal at the time of the RUC’s vote. Private insurers may choose to respond diﬀerentially to

Medicare price changes if they believe some changes result from a more informed committee, or,

alternatively, if their own internal due-diligence agrees with the RUC’s assessment.41 Secondarily,

we assess whether Medicare price changes from higher-aﬃliation proposals are also discounted

uniformly by private insurance, suggesting private insurers may adjust to possible bias.

    We first construct private and Medicare prices by dividing total charges by total number of

claims observed in MarketScan and Medicare data for a given procedure code in a given year.

To allow for lagged price transmission to private insurance, we normalize log prices within payer

and then match private prices for each code i and year y to a Medicare price for the same code

in the year y M (i, y) ∈ {y, y − 1, y − 2}.42 We then estimate variants of the following regression

to assess average price transmission:


                             ln PricePi,y = β ln PriceM
                                                      i,y M (i,y) + Tiy η + ξi + εiy ,                           (8)


where Tiy is a vector of time dummies (year y, Medicare year y M , and the RUC meeting, for

Medicare prices associated with a RUC decision) and ξi is a service fixed eﬀect for the procedure
  41
     In interviews with RUC members, one described an informal process in which private insurance administra-
tors consult with trusted clinical sources (often friends) who perform procedures, asking whether prices seemed
reasonable.
  42
     In detail, we normalize log prices to have a frequency-weighted mean of 0 within payer (private or Medicare)
and year, and we then match private prices for each code i and year y to a Medicare price for the same code in
the year y M (i, y) ∈ {y, y − 1, y − 2} with the closest log price change:

                             y M (i, y) =                                i,y − ∆ ln Pricei,y ′ .
                                                               ∆ ln PriceP               M
                                               arg min
                                            y ′ ∈{y,y−1,y−2}


          i,y ≡ ln Pricei,y − ln Pricei,y−1 is a change in the normalized log private prices for service i in year y,
∆ ln PriceP               P           P

and ∆ ln PriceMi,y is the  analogous Medicare  log price change.



                                                               24
code. The service fixed eﬀect implies that we focus on changes in private insurance prices in

response to changes in Medicare prices, holding constant any characteristic of the service. We

also estimate pooled regressions across categories of Medicare prices:

                            ∑(                            )
            ln PricePiy =                        i,y (i,y) · 1 (C (i, y) = C) + Tiy η + ξi + εiy ,
                                 αC + βC ln PriceM  M                                                           (9)
                            C


where C references one of three categories of Medicare price by source: (i) Medicare prices for

a code in a year with an associated RUC decision and an above-median proposal aﬃliation, (ii)

prices with a RUC decision and a below-median proposal aﬃliation, and (iii) prices not associated

with a RUC decision. Most Medicare prices fall in the last category, but, as shown in Figure A-7,

prices changes in this category are smaller.43 To facilitate closer comparison of the “non-RUC”

and “RUC” Medicare prices in the pooled regressions, we restrict attention to non-RUC log price

changes of at least 0.3 in absolute value.

       In Table 5, our estimates suggest that private prices follow RUC-based Medicare prices to

a much larger extent than non-RUC Medicare prices. Estimating Equation (8) separately for

RUC and non-RUC Medicare prices and including service fixed eﬀects shows this result most

starkly. Within procedure code, log price changes in Medicare originating from the RUC are

transmitted to private insurance with a coeﬃcient of 0.892 (Column 1), while those that have no

associated RUC recommendation are transmitted with a coeﬃcient of 0.399 (Column 2) or 0.300

(Column 3), depending on whether the sample includes all non-RUC changes or is restricted to

larger changes. Further RUC-based Medicare prices originating from high-aﬃliation proposals

show slightly higher following than those from low-aﬃliation proposals.44

       Figure 11 shows pooled results, both without and with service fixed eﬀects, corresponding to

Columns 4 and 5 of Table 5. The figure reproduces diﬀerences in the slopes of the lines tracing

private prices to Medicare prices that depend on the source of the Medicare price. This suggests
  43
     Medicare average price changes with no associated RUC recommendation in our dataset may occur for a
variety of reasons, including changes in the geographic composition of claims, changes in the facility vs. non-
facility composition of claims, conversion factor adjustments, and changes in the practice expense component of
RVUs alone.
  44
     We also analyze this question in a specification with private log price changes regressed on Medicare log price
changes and find similar results. As shown in Figure A-8, high-aﬃliation RUC price changes result in steeper
private price changes than low-aﬃliation RUC price changes.




                                                        25
that Medicare price changes that originate from RUC decisions, and in particular from high-

aﬃliation RUC decisions, appear more informative for private insurance. In addition to steeper

slopes, the lines are generally lower in levels for RUC Medicare prices (and further for those from

high-aﬃliation proposals). These uniformly lower private insurance price changes suggest that

private insurance may, to an extent, reverse the bias induced by aﬃliation.45



6         Conclusion

We find evidence of bias or regulatory capture in Medicare’s price setting process. Increasing

aﬃliation between the specialties proposing a value and the RUC from the 10th to the 90th

percentile would result in a 17% higher relative price recommendation. However, we also find

that involving a committee of physicians in setting prices can improve the quality of information

used in the process. We find patterns suggesting that private insurers follow Medicare prices

more closely when the public prices originate from a RUC vote. The private sector appears to

adjust downward in levels for bias in the RUC’s recommendations, but nonetheless reacts more

strongly in terms of slope to price changes from more highly aﬃliated RUC votes.

         Our findings suggest Medicare faces a balancing act in setting prices. Inviting input from

the RUC may introduce bias in prices, but it may also improve the information extracted from

specialties. We show in counterfactuals how undoing this bias, either by equalizing aﬃliation or

by changing the RUC’s membership, reallocates revenue across specialties and creates winners

and losers within medicine. These analyses, however, ignore likely quantity eﬀects from price

changes, which generate real welfare eﬀects beyond transfers in revenue. To the extent physicians

are imperfect agents for their patients and deviate toward procedures with greater reimbursement

levels (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014; Gruber et al., 1999), and if physicians-in-training avoid

specializing in fields with lower procedural income, the actions of the RUC may have broader

welfare consequences for health care.
    45
    In Appendix A-8, we consider alternatives to our interpretation that aﬃliation facilitates better information
through communication. First, the RUC may have more information on high-aﬃliation decisions, even without
communication, because its members are more likely to perform the services in question. Second, Medicare and
private insurance are more likely to get the price “right” for high-volume procedures, which are also more likely to
have RUC decisions and high-aﬃliation proposals. Third, there may be some other unspecified predictor of price
transmission that could be correlated with aﬃliation. We find that our results are robust, accounting for these
potential alternative mechanisms.


                                                        26
References
Aggarwal, C. C., A. Hinneburg, and D. A. Keim (2001): “On the surprising behavior of
  distance metrics in high dimensional spaces,” in ICDT, Springer, vol. 1, 420–434.

Aghion, P. and J. Tirole (1997): “Formal and real authority in organizations,” The Journal
  of Political Economy, 105, 1–29.

Altonji, J. G., T. E. Elder, and C. R. Taber (2005): “Selection on Observed and Unob-
  served Variables: Assessing the Eﬀectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 113, 151–184.

Ambrus, A., E. Azevedo, and Y. Kamada (2013): “Hierarchical cheap talk,” Theoretical
  Economics, 8, 233–261.

American Medical Association (2014):            AMA/Specialty Society RVS Update Process,
  Chicago: AMA.

——— (2015): The Physicians’ Guide: Medicare RBRVS, Chicago: AMA.

——— (2017): AMA/Specialty Society RVS Update Process, Chicago: AMA.

Association of American Medical Colleges (2016): “Physician Specialty Data Report,”
  Tech. rep., Washington, DC.

Austen-Smith, D. (1994): “Strategic Transmission of Costly Information,” Econometrica, 62,
  955.

Bendor, J., S. Taylor, and R. V. Gaalen (1985): “Bureaucratic Expertise versus Legislative
  Authority: A Model of Deception and Monitoring in Budgeting,” American Political Science
  Review, 79, 1041–1060.

Berenson, R. A. and J. D. Goodson (2016): “Finding Value in Unexpected Places: Fixing
  the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule,” New England Journal of Medicine, 374, 1306–1309.

Bertoli, P. and V. Grembi (2017): “The political economy of diagnosis-related groups,”
  Social Science & Medicine, 190, 38–47.

Bertrand, M., M. Bombardini, and F. Trebbi (2014): “Is It Whom You Know or What
  You Know? An Empirical Assessment of the Lobbying Process,” American Economic Review,
  104, 3885–3920.

Blanes i Vidal, J., M. Draca, and C. Fons-Rosen (2012): “Revolving Door Lobbyists,”
  American Economic Review, 102, 3731–3748.

Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen (2013): “Identifying Technology
  Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 81, 1347–1393.


                                              27
Bodenheimer, T., R. A. Berenson, and P. Rudolf (2007): “The Primary Care-Specialty
  Income Gap: Why It Matters,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 146, 301–306.

Braeutigam, R. R. and J. C. Panzar (1993): “Eﬀects of the Change from Rate-of-Return
  to Price-Cap Regulation,” The American Economic Review, 83, 191–198.

Brown, M. B. (2009): “Federal advisory committees in the United States: A survey of the
  political and administrative landscape,” in Scientific Advice to Policy Making: International
  Comparison, Opladen, Germany, and Farmington Hills, MI: Verlag Barbara Budrich., 17–39.

Burgette, L. F., A. W. Mulcahy, A. Mehrotra, T. Ruder, and B. O. Wynn (2016):
  “Estimating Surgical Procedure Times Using Anesthesia Billing Data and Operating Room
  Records,” Health Services Research.

Caillaud, B. and J. Tirole (2007): “Consensus Building: How to Persuade a Group,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 97, 1877–1900.

Callander, S. (2008): “A Theory of Policy Expertise,” Quarterly Journal of Political Science,
  3, 123–140.

Calvert, R. L. (1985): “The Value of Biased Information: A Rational Choice Model of Political
  Advice,” The Journal of Politics, 47, 530–555.

Camara, F. and M. Kyle (2017): “Experts and Financial Ties: Evidence from FDA Advisory
  Committees,” Tech. rep., University of Southern California.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2014): “Estimated Sustainable Growth
  Rate and Conversion Factor, for Medicare Payments to Physicians in 2015,” Tech. rep.

Clemens, J. and J. D. Gottlieb (2017): “In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s Influence on
  Private Physician Payments,” Journal of Political Economy, 125, 1–39.

Clemens, J., J. D. Gottlieb, and T. L. Molnar (2017): “Do health insurers innovate? Ev-
  idence from the anatomy of physician payments,” Journal of Health Economics, Forthcoming.

Clemens, J. P. and J. D. Gottlieb (2014): “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Aﬀect
  Medical Treatment and Patient Health?” American Economic Review, 104, 1320–1349.

Clough, J. D. and M. McClellan (2016): “Implementing MACRA: Implications for Physi-
  cians and for Physician Leadership,” JAMA, 315, 2397.

Crawford, V. P. and J. Sobel (1982): “Strategic information transmission,” Econometrica,
  50, 1431–1451.

Cutler, D., E. Glaeser, and J. Vigdor (1999): “The Rise and Decline of the American
  Ghetto,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 455–506.



                                              28
Dessein, W. (2002): “Authority and Communication in Organizations,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 69, 811–838.

Dewatripont, M. and J. Tirole (1999): “Advocates,” Journal of Political Economy, 107,
  1–39.

Esteban, J., L. Mayoral, and D. Ray (2012): “Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical Study,”
  The American Economic Review, 102, 1310–1342.

Faccio, M. (2006): “Politically Connected Firms,” American Economic Review, 96, 369–386.

Fang, H. and Q. Gong (2017): “Detecting Potential Overbilling in Medicare Reimbursement
  via Hours Worked,” American Economic Review, 107, 562–591.

Ferguson, T. and H.-J. Voth (2008): “Betting on Hitler: The Value of Political Connections
  in Nazi Germany,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 101–137.

Fisman, R. (2001): “Estimating the Value of Political Connections,” American Economic Re-
  view, 91, 1095–1102.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2011): “Ideological Segregation Online and Oﬄine,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 1799–1839.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (2001): Special interest politics, MIT press.

Gruber, J., J. Kim, and D. Mayzlin (1999): “Physician fees and procedure intensity: the
  case of cesarean delivery,” Journal of Health Economics, 18, 473–490.

Hirsch, A. V. and B. P. Montagnes (2015): “The Lobbyist’s Dilemma: Gatekeeping and
  the Profit Motive,” Tech. rep., California Institute of Technology.

Hirsch, A. V. and K. W. Shotts (2015): “Competitive Policy Development,” American
  Economic Review, 105, 1646–64.

Ho, K. and R. S. Lee (2017): “Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets,” Econometrica,
  85, 379–417.

Hsiao, W. C., P. Braun, D. Dunn, and E. R. Becker (1988): “Resource-based relative
  values. An overview,” JAMA, 260, 2347–2353.

Jaffe, A. B. (1986): “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R & D: Evidence from Firms’
  Patents, Profits, and Market Value,” The American Economic Review, 76, 984–1001.

Kartik, N. (2009): “Strategic Communication with Lying Costs,” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 76, 1359–1395.

Kessler, D. and K. Krehbiel (1996): “Dynamics of Cosponsorship,” The American Political
  Science Review, 90, 555.

                                               29
Khwaja, A. I. and A. Mian (2005): “Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms? Rent
  Provision in an Emerging Financial Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 1371–
  1411.

Krishna, V. and J. Morgan (2001): “A Model of Expertise,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 116, 747–775.

Laugesen, M. J. (2016): Fixing Medical Prices, Harvard University Press.

Laugesen, M. J., R. Wada, and E. M. Chen (2012): “In Setting Doctors’ Medicare Fees,
  CMS Almost Always Accepts The Relative Value Update Panel’s Advice On Work Values,”
  Health Aﬀairs, 31, 965–972.

Lewis, M. S. and K. E. Pflum (2015): “Diagnosing Hospital System Bargaining Power in
  Managed Care Networks,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7, 243–274.

Li, D. (2017): “Expertise versus Bias in Evaluation: Evidence from the NIH,” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 9, 60–92.

Li, H., S. Rosen, and W. Suen (2001): “Conflicts and Common Interests in Committees,”
  American Economic Review, 91, 1478–1497.

Nicholson, S. and N. Souleles (2001): “Physician Income Expectations and Specialty
  Choice,” Tech. Rep. w8536, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Pear, R. (2015): “Federal Investigators Fault Medicare’s Reliance on Doctors for Pay Stan-
  dards,” The New York Times.

Peltzman, S. (1976): “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” The Journal of Law and
  Economics, 19, 211–240.

Potters, J. and F. van Winden (1992): “Lobbying and Asymmetric Information,” Public
  Choice, 74, 269–292.

Sinsky, C. A. and D. C. Dugdale (2013): “Medicare Payment for Cognitive vs Procedural
  Care: Minding the Gap,” JAMA Internal Medicine.

Stigler, G. J. (1971): “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” The Bell Journal of Economics
  and Management Science, 2, 3.

Weber, M. (2009): From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, Routledge, google-Books-ID:
  lIb69vVaQRUC.

White, M. J. (1986): “Segregation and Diversity Measures in Population Distribution,” Popu-
  lation Index, 52, 198.




                                             30
Whoriskey, P. and D. Keating (2013): “How a secretive panel uses data that distorts doctors’
  pay,” Washington Post.

Wynn, B. O., L. F. Burgette, A. W. Mulcahy, E. N. Okeke, I. Brantley, N. Iyer,
  T. Ruder, and A. Mehrotra (2015): “Development of a Model for the Validation of Work
  Relative Value Units for the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule,” Research Report, RAND
  Corporation.

Zinovyeva, N. and M. Bagues (2015): “The Role of Connections in Academic Promotions,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 264–292.

Zuckerman, S., K. Merrell, R. A. Berenson, S. Mitchell, D. Upadhyay, and
  R. Lewis (2016): “Collecting Empirical Physician Time Data: Piloting an Approach for
  Validating Work Relative Value Units,” Tech. rep., Urban Institute.




                                             31
                             Table 1: Specialty Seats on the RUC

     Specialty                        Meetings         Specialty                      Meetings
     Anesthesiology                     63             Oncology                         12
     Cardiology                         63             Ophthalmology                    63
     Child Psychiatry                    6             Orthopedic Surgery               63
     Colorectal Surgery                  6             Otolaryngology                   63
     Dermatology                        63             Pathology                        63
     Emergency Medicine                 63             Pediatric Surgery                12
     Family Medicine                    63             Pediatrics                       63
     Gastroenterology                   20             Plastic Surgery                  63
     General Surgery                    63             Psychiatry                       63
     Geriatrics                         30             Pulmonary Medicine               18
     Infectious Disease                  9             Radiation Oncology                5
     Internal Medicine                  63             Radiology                        63
     Nephrology                          6             Rheumatology                     17
     Neurology                          50             Spine Surgery                     6
     Neurosurgery                       63             Thoracic Surgery                 63
     Nuclear Medicine                    7             Urology                          63
     Obstetrics and Gynecology          53             Vascular Surgery                 18

Note: This table shows the numbers meetings during which a specialty had a member on the RUC from
May 1992 to April 2013. There were a total of 63 meetings during this time period. Each year generally
had three meetings, except for the years 1992, 2001, and 2013, which each had two meetings. There were
oﬃcially four meetings in 1993, but we considered the April and June meetings as one meeting. Each
of the specialties listed had one seat at each of its meetings, except for internal medicine, which had
two seats in 25 meetings. In our analysis, we considered child psychiatry as psychiatry, since there is
no specialty code for child psychiatry in the Medicare data. Similarly, we considered nuclear medicine
as radiology. Three meetings had either no services reviewed or had no observations remaining after
the sample selection procedure described in Table A-1. Finally, the American Medical Association, the
American Osteopathic Association, and Health Care Professional Advisory Committee (HCPAC) each
had a permanent voting seat throughout this time period; we did not include them in our analysis.




                                                  32
                    Table 2: Balance in Medicare Beneficiary Characteristics


            Medicare Beneficiary             Aﬃliation          Aﬃliation
                                                                                     p-value
            Characteristic                  above mean         below mean
                                               0.471              0.470
            Male                                                                      0.371
                                              (0.107)            (0.101)
                                               0.794              0.792
            Rural                                                                     0.784
                                              (0.052)            (0.054)
                                               0.405              0.416
            Age > 75                                                                  0.366
                                              (0.109)            (0.106)
                                               0.131              0.135
            Age > 85                                                                  0.745
                                              (0.067)            (0.067)
                                               0.767              0.782
            Medicare aged                                                             0.463
                                              (0.126)            (0.108)
                                               0.155              0.147
            Medicare disabled                                                         0.426
                                              (0.062)            (0.058)
                                               0.063              0.054
            Medicare ESRD                                                             0.903
                                              (0.114)            (0.079)
                                               0.828              0.837
            White race                                                                0.148
                                              (0.077)            (0.074)
                                               0.111              0.105
            Black race                                                                0.989
                                              (0.059)            (0.052)
                                               0.025              0.024
            Hispanic race                                                             0.109
                                              (0.012)            (0.013)
                                               0.038              0.036
            Other race                                                                0.018
                                              (0.015)            (0.015)

Note: This table shows average Medicare beneficiary characteristics for procedure codes in proposals
with above- versus below-mean aﬃliation. We residualize each characteristic, controlling for meeting
identities and specialty shares wi . In each cell, we present averages of this residual, conditional on either
above- or below-mean aﬃliation, adding back the unconditional mean to aid in interpretation. Standard
deviations of each residualized characteristic are given in parentheses. The last column lists the p-value for
the null hypothesis that the average residual characteristic is not significantly diﬀerent between samples
corresponding to above- and below-mean aﬃliation.




                                                     33
                                                          Table 3: Aﬃliation Eﬀect on Prices


                                                          (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                                                           Log RVU
                                                       0.158***       0.118***       0.108***    0.101***          0.119*        0.111***
                  Standardized set aﬃliation
                                                        (0.027)        (0.023)        (0.033)     (0.029)          (0.066)        (0.033)
                  Prior log RVU                            Y              Y              Y              Y             Y              Y
                  Medicare beneficiary                     N              Y              Y              Y             Y              Y
                  Surveyed characteristics                 N              N              Y              Y             Y              Y
                  CPT code description                     N              N              N              Y             Y              Y
                  Specialty shares                         Y              Y              Y              Y             N              Y
                  Meeting fixed eﬀects                     Y              Y              Y              Y             Y              Y




34
                  Predicted set aﬃliation                  N              N              N              N             Y              N
                  Specialty shares × linear year           N              N              N              N             N              Y
                  N                                      4,401          4,401          4,401          4,401         4,401          4,401
                  Adjusted R-squared                     0.754          0.792          0.889          0.891         0.866          0.897
                  Sample mean log RVU                    1.567          1.567          1.567          1.567         1.567          1.567

     Note: This table shows results of regressions of log RVU on standardized set aﬃliation, as stated in Equation (6). Medicare beneficiary indicates
     average characteristics of Medicare beneficiaries who receive the service (CPT code); surveyed characteristics includes objective characteristics
     (e.g., total utilization, surveyed time intervals, and oﬃce visits or other E&M CPT codes bundled into the code) and subjective characteristics
     reflecting the diﬃculty, riskiness, or physician stress involved in the procedure; and CPT code description indicates word stems predictive of RVUs,
     as selected by LASSO. Specialty shares wi are defined in Equation (5) and are controlled for linearly, except in Column 5. Column 5 controls for
     predicted set aﬃliation, formed from the simulated distribution of set aﬃliation based on each specialty’s probability to participate in the proposal
     (Figure A-5), and described in detail in Appendix A-4. Standard errors, clustered by RUC meeting, are in parentheses; * denotes significance at
     the 10% level, and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.
                        Table 4: Aﬃliation Eﬀect on Hard Information


                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)

                                                 -0.228***      -0.332***      -0.146**
                Standardized set aﬃliation
                                                  (0.071)        (0.076)        (0.070)
                Baseline controls                    Y              Y              Y
                Utilization among
                                                     N              Y              Y
                proposers
                Proposer count dummies               N              N              Y
                N                                  4,407          4,219          4,219
                Adjusted R-squared                 0.329          0.332          0.348
                Sample mean outcome                4.660          4.619          4.619

                                                 -0.219***      -0.413***        -0.082
                Standardized set aﬃliation
                                                  (0.076)        (0.049)        (0.055)
                Baseline controls                    Y              Y              Y
                Utilization among
                                                     N              Y              Y
                proposers
                Proposer count dummies               N              N              Y
                N                                  4,407          4,219          4,219
                Adjusted R-squared                 0.220          0.253          0.304
                Sample mean outcome                3.067          3.071          3.071

Note: This table shows results of regressions of survey measures of hard information on standardized set
aﬃliation, based on Equation (7). Survey sample regressions are shown in Panel A, and survey respondent
regressions are shown in Panel B. The outcomes are per-specialty measures, constructed by dividing the
total survey measures by the number of proposing specialties. Baseline controls are the same as in Column
5 of Table 3. Columns 2 and 3 control for the log annual utilization of the service among all specialties
and the log annual utilization of the service among proposing specialties, dropping observations for which
these values are missing. Column 3 also includes dummies for the proposing specialty count. Standard
errors, clustered by RUC meeting, are in parentheses; ** denotes significance at the 5% level, and ***
denotes significance at the 1% level.




                                                   35
                                                 Table 5: Price Transmission to Private Insurance


                                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                                                     Log private price
                                                              0.892***      0.399***     0.300***
                         Log Medicare price
                                                               (0.091)       (0.003)      (0.012)
                                                                                                          0.688***      0.331***
                             × not RUC
                                                                                                           (0.016)       (0.022)
                                                                                                          0.838***      0.520***
                             × RUC, low aﬃliation
                                                                                                           (0.006)       (0.023)
                                                                                                          0.917***      0.642***
                             × RUC, high aﬃliation
                                                                                                           (0.015)       (0.041)
                                                                                                         -0.420***        -0.016
                         RUC, high vs. low aﬃliation
                                                                                                           (0.040)       (0.067)
                         Service fixed eﬀects                    Y              Y             Y              N              Y
                         Sample                                 RUC         Not RUC       Not RUC          Both           Both
                             Restrict non-RUC prices




36
                                                                N/A             N             Y              Y              Y
                             changes?
                         N                                      3,179        184,910         4,003         7,182          7,182
                         Adjusted R-squared                     0.986         0.987          0.992         0.852          0.987
                         Sample mean log private price          4.241         3.980          3.391         4.097          4.097
                         Sample mean log Medicare               3.466         3.412          2.426         3.290          3.290
                         price

     Note: This table shows results of regressions of log private price on log Medicare price. Private and Medicare prices are defined as the total
     charges divided by the total volume of claims, for a given service (CPT code) and year, in MarketScan and Medicare, respectively. The regressions
     use normalized log private price, which is demeaned by the average log private price across services in a given year that is weighted by frequency
     of claims in the MarketScan data. We repeat the same procedure using Medicare data to calculate the normalized log Medicare price. Regression
     observations are weighted by frequency of Medicare claims. Normalized private prices are merged onto the closest normalized Medicare prices for
     the same service, possibly lagged up to 2 years. Column 4 does not include service (CPT code) fixed eﬀects, while other columns do. Relevant
     samples, noted in the table, depend on whether the Medicare price change is associated with a RUC decision. Column 1 includes only Medicare
     prices set by the RUC, Columns 2 and 3 include only non-RUC price changes, and Columns 4 and 5 include both RUC and non-RUC observations.
     In Columns 3 to 5, to improve comparability with the RUC-only sample, we include only those non-RUC CPT-code-year observations in which
     the absolute change in the normalized log Medicare price from the previous year is greater than 0.3. Standard errors are in parentheses. * denotes
     significance at the 10% level, and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.
                              Figure 1: Committee Seats Over Time


          25




          20




          15




          10




            5
                1991      1995             2000             2005             2010            2015



Note: This figures shows the numbers of voting seats on the RUC over time, in total (solid line) and
apportioned between “procedural” (dashed line) and “cognitive” (dotted line) specialties. Based on con-
versations with the RUC, we assign the “procedural” label to general surgery, orthopedic surgery, plastic
surgery, ophthalmology, pathology, otolaryngology, dermatology, thoracic surgery, radiology, anesthesi-
ology, gastroenterology, urology, cardiology, obstetrics and gynecology, neurosurgery, pediatric surgery,
vascular surgery, radiation oncology, hand surgery, and colorectal surgery. We assign the “cognitive” label
to emergency medicine, internal medicine, psychiatry, pediatrics, family medicine, geriatrics, neurology,
rheumatology, pulmonary medicine, oncology, infectious disease, and nephrology.




                                                    37
                                               Figure 2: Aﬃliation Between Specialties


          General Surgery

         Internal Medicine

          Family Medicine

           Anesthesiology

         Gastroenterology

     Hematology/Oncology

               Neurology

       Orthopedic Surgery

      Pulmonary Medicine

               Cardiology

                  Urology

           Otolaryngology

              Nephrology

       Radiation Oncology

                Radiology

           Ophthalmology

               Psychiatry

             Dermatology

      Emergency Medicine

                Pathology
                                                                                                                                                           Orthopedic Surgery

                                                                                                                                                                                Pulmonary Medicine




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Otolaryngology




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Psychiatry
                                               Internal Medicine




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dermatology
                             General Surgery




                                                                                     Anesthesiology

                                                                                                      Gastroenterology

                                                                                                                         Hematology/Oncology

                                                                                                                                               Neurology




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cardiology

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Urology



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Nephrology

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Radiation Oncology

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Radiology

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ophthalmology




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Emergency Medicine

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pathology
                                                                   Family Medicine




Note: This figure illustrates aﬃliation between specialties, where the particular formula used is a negative
Euclidean distance, described in Equation (3), for the largest 20 specialties. Aﬃliation values are divided
into nine bins with an equal number of specialty pairs. Darker shades signify stronger aﬃliations.




                                                                                                                                                              38
                       Figure 3: Within Specialty Variation in Aﬃliation



                             Cardiology                              Orthopaedic Surgery
            120                                           120


             80                                           80


             40                                           40


              0                                            0
                  −1   −.5       0          .5   1              −1     −.5         0        .5   1
                              Affiliation                                     Affiliation


                        Otolaryngology                                       Radiology
            120                                           120


             80                                           80


             40                                           40


              0                                            0
                  −1   −.5        0         .5   1              −1     −.5        0         .5   1
                              Affiliation                                     Affiliation


                        Plastic Surgery                               Vascular Surgery
            120                                           120


             80                                           80


             40                                           40


              0                                            0
                  −1   −.5        0         .5   1              −1     −.5         0        .5   1
                              Affiliation                                     Affiliation




Note: This figure shows examples of within-specialty variation in standardized set aﬃliation for proposals
that are made by one of six specialties. The figure displays in a histogram the distribution of aﬃliation
across proposals within each specialty. Dashed line denote the 25th and 75th percentiles of aﬃliation
overall.



                                                     39
       Figure 4: Balance of Medicare Beneficiary Characteristics across Aﬃliation
                  .2
                  .1
         Predicted log RVU
                 0−.1




                                                                              Coeff = 0.001 (0.014)
                  −.2




                                                                                         N = 4,302

                                 −1                          0                       1
                                                   Affiliation



Note: This figure is a binned scatterplot of residual predicted log RVU, based on Medicare beneficiary
characteristics, on residual aﬃliation, where each dot represents 5% of the data, ordered by residual
aﬃliations. Log RVU is first predicted by Medicare beneficiary characteristics, which are listed in Table
2. The R-squared of this prediction equation is 0.249. Residuals are formed by regressing predicted log
RVU and aﬃliation, respectively, on meeting dummies and specialty shares wi . The line shows the best
fit through the residualized data, with corresponding coeﬃcient and standard error clustered by meeting.




                                                   40
                              Figure 5: Random Timing of Proposals


                   10



                   8



                   6
         Density




                   4



                   2



                   0
                        −.4         −.2                  0                  .2                  .4
                                           Pseudo−affiliation difference



Note: This figure show the distribution of the diﬀerence between set aﬃliation in pseudo-meetings
and the actual set aﬃliation of each proposal. The distribution therefore includes 59 pseudo-aﬃliation
measures corresponding to pseudo-meetings for each of 4,432 proposals. The mean of these observations,
0.0017, is shown with the vertical line. The standard deviation of the distribution is 0.0898, which implies
that the standard error of the mean at the proposal level is 0.0013.




                                                    41
                           Figure 6: Balance of Proposal Probability on Predicted Price
                 .15
                 .1  .05
         Pr(propose)
              0  −.05
                 −.1




                                                                             Coeff = −0.0004 (0.0009)
                 −.15




                                                                                         N = 258,823

                           −3         −2           −1             0           1                2
                                                    Predicted log RVU



Note: This figure is a binned scatterplot of residual proposal probability on residual predicted log RVU,
where each dot represents 5% of the data, ordered by residual predicted log RVU. Each observation is a
proposal-specialty pair, and the outcome variable of interest is an indicator for whether the specialty was
part of that proposal. Log RVU is predicted from service (CPT code) characteristics, word descriptions,
and prior RVU, which are described in Table 3; the prediction equation has an adjusted R-squared of 0.88.
The specialty proposal indicator and predicted log RVU are both residualized by the proposal propensity,
which is calculated by a logit model of flexible functions of wi and specialty dummies alone. This
propensity model has a pseudo-R-squared of 0.67. The standard deviation of the proposal propensities
across proposal-specialty pairs is 0.13, so that the span of the y-axis is approximately 1 standard deviation
above and below. The line shows the best fit through the residualized data, with corresponding coeﬃcient
and standard error clustered by meeting.




                                                        42
                         Figure 7: Aﬃliation Eﬀect on Relative Price
            .2
            .1
         Log RVU
             0
            −.1
            −.2




                                                                           Coeff = 0.101 (0.029)
                                                                                      N = 4,401

                            −1                         0                      1
                                                 Affiliation



Note: This figure is a binned scatterplot of residual log RVU on residual aﬃliation, where each dot
represents 5% of the data, ordered by residual aﬃliations. Residuals are formed by regressing log RVU
and aﬃliation, respectively, on controls specified in Column 4 of Table 3. The line shows the best fit
through the residualized data, and the slope corresponds to the estimated coeﬃcient of interest α in
Equation (6), with standard errors clustered by RUC meeting.




                                                 43
                               Figure 8: Revenue Reallocation with Equal Aﬃliation



                                                                                                 A: Specialty
                    Counterfactual reallocation (millions $)    200                       Emergency Medicine

                                                                      Physical Therapy

                                                                                                        Ophthalmology
                                                                100
                                                                                            Radiology
                                                                                  Dermatology             Neuroradiology
                                                                  0                         Orthopaedic Surgery

                                                                                               Cardiology

                                                                                              Family Medicine
                                                               −100

                                                                                                                                Internal Medicine

                                                               −200
                                                                      0          1000           2000       3000                4000         5000
                                                                                              Spending (millions $)


                                                                                            B: Service Category
                                                                400
                    Counterfactual reallocation (millions $)




                                                                          Emergency room visits
                                                                                         Minor procedure

                                                                200
                                                                            Eye surgery
                                                                                   Ambulatory procedure
                                                                  0                                  Specialist / consultant



                                                               −200


                                                               −400                                                              Hospital visits

                                                                                                                                  Office visits
                                                               −600
                                                                      0             2000            4000           6000                  8000
                                                                                              Spending (millions $)




Note: This figure shows counterfactual yearly revenue reallocation by equalizing the aﬃliation of all pro-
posals in each year. Panel A shows reallocation across specialties; Panel B shows reallocation aggregated
across Berenson-Eggers Type of Service (BETOS) categories. Average annual spending for each specialty
is on the x -axis, while the counterfactual reallocation setting aﬃliation to the mean for all proposals is
on the y-axis. Utilization quantities for each service (CPT code) is held fixed, and the annual Medicare
budget for physician work is set at $70 billion ×51% = $35.7 billion. Details are given in Section 4.2.



                                                                                                  44
          Figure 9: Revenue Reallocation with Proportional RUC Representation



                                                                                                  A: Specialty
                   Counterfactual reallocation (millions $)    40                                                                   Internal Medicine




                                                               20                                         Family Medicine

                                                                             Emergency Medicine
                                                                                                         Cardiology

                                                                0                   Gastroenterology
                                                                                           Orthopaedic Surgery
                                                                           Dermatology
                                                                                                            Neuroradiology
                                                              −20
                                                                                             Radiology

                                                                                                          Ophthalmology

                                                              −40
                                                                    0            1000           2000        3000                4000            5000
                                                                                               Spending (millions $)


                                                                                             B: Service Category
                                                              100                                                                     Office visits
                   Counterfactual reallocation (millions $)




                                                                                                                             Hospital visits


                                                               50


                                                                                    Emergency room visits

                                                                0             GI endoscopy
                                                                                         Minor procedure

                                                                        Ambulatory procedure         Specialist / consultant


                                                              −50
                                                                    0               2000             4000           6000                       8000
                                                                                               Spending (millions $)




Note: This figure shows counterfactual yearly revenue reallocation by changing the RUC membership to
be constant and proportional to the population of physician specialties in the US, as given in Table A-5.
Panel A shows reallocation across specialties; Panel B shows reallocation aggregated across Berenson-
Eggers Type of Service (BETOS) categories. Average annual spending for each specialty is on the x -axis,
while the counterfactual reallocation setting aﬃliation to the mean for all proposals is on the y-axis.
Utilization quantities for each service (CPT code) is held fixed, and the annual Medicare budget for
physician work is set at $70 billion ×51% = $35.7 billion. Details are given in Section 4.2.



                                                                                                    45
                         Figure 10: Aﬃliation Eﬀect on Hard Information



                                                    A: Survey Sample
                                 .4      .2
                       Log survey sample
                         −.2      0
                                 −.4




                                                                        Coeff = −0.332 (0.039)
                                                                                    N = 4,219

                                              −1   −.5         0       .5             1
                                                         Affiliation


                                                     B: Respondents
                                 .5
                       Log respondents
                                0−.5




                                                                        Coeff = −0.413 (0.030)
                                                                                    N = 4,219

                                              −1   −.5         0       .5             1
                                                         Affiliation




Note: This figure is a binned scatterplot of the residual log per-specialty survey sample (Panel A) and
log per-specialty survey respondents (Panel B) on residual aﬃliation, where each dot represents 5% of
the data, ordered by residual aﬃliations. We form residuals by regressing the survey variables of interest
and aﬃliation on the controls specified in Column 3 of Table 4. Lines show the best fit through the
residualized data, and the line slopes correspond to the estimated coeﬃcient of interest α in Equation
(7), with standard errors clustered by RUC meeting.




                                                         46
                      Figure 11: Price Transmission to Private Insurance



                                                  A: Cross Section


                                 0      −1
                       Log private price
                       −3      −2−4




                                             −6   −4                −2            0
                                                   Log Medicare price


                                                  B: Within Service
                                 0
                                 −.5
                        Log private price
                       −2   −1.5 −2.5−1




                                             −6   −4                −2            0
                                                   Log Medicare price




Note: This figure is a binned scatterplot of the relationship between normalized log Medicare price and
normalized log private price, as described in the note for Table 5. Panel A shows the relationship without
controlling for service (CPT code) and corresponds to Column 4 of Table 5, while Panel B shows this
relationship controlling for CPT code and corresponds to Column 5 of Table 5. In each panel, residuals
of the relevant regression are added to predictions of normalized log private price based on normalized log
Medicare price and the following Medicare price categories: not associated with RUC proposal (triangles),
associated with RUC proposal with lower aﬃliation (hollow circles), and associated with RUC proposal
with higher aﬃliation (solid circles). Each marker represents 5% of the data conditional on the relevant
Medicare price category. Lines show the best fit through the markers and by construction have slopes
equivalent to the relevant interaction terms in Table 5.



                                                       47
Appendix

A-1     Setting the Medicare Budget
This appendix summarizes the process that sets the overall Medicare budget for physician ser-
vices, which equivalently determines the conversion factor, or CFt in Equation (1). We focus
on the period between the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and the Medicare Access and CHIP
Reauthorization Act of 2015. A more extensive discussion of this process can be found elsewhere
(e.g., American Medical Association, 2015; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2014).
During this period, CMS set CFt according to this formula:

                           CFt = CFt−1 × (1 + MEIt ) × (1 + UAFt ) × BNt ,

where MEIt is the Medicare Economic Index, UAFt is the Update Adjustment Factor, and BNt
is the Budget Neutrality adjustment.
   MEIt is the weighted-average price change for inputs required to operate a self-employed
physician practice in the United States. The measure indexes inflation for medical services. There
are two broad categories of inputs: the physician’s own time and his or her practice expense.
The MEI Technical Advisory Panel continually reviews and updates the index, recommending
changes to ensure that MEIt appropriately meets its statutory purpose.
   UAFt is a mechanism that keeps Medicare spending at an acceptable level given real gross
domestic product per capita and year-to-year changes in fees and beneficiaries. The current
year’s target expenditures are equal to target expenditures in the previous year adjusted by
the Sustainable Growth Rate (SGRt ). The update also compares actual expenditures with
target expenditures from April 1, 1996 through the preceding year. By federal statute, UAFt ∈
[−7%, 3%], and the formula for the UAFt is based on the following identities, relating target and
actual spending:

                    ∑
                    t                     ∑
                                          t
                           Targett′   =           Actualt′ ;
                   t′ =1                  t′ =1
                           Actualt = Actualt−1 × (1 + SGRt ) × (1 + UAFt ) ;
                           Targett = Targett−1 × (1 + SGRt ) .

These identities yield
                                                               ∑t−2
                 Targett−1 − Actualt−1                                        − Actualt′ )
                                                                t′ =1 (Targett′
          UAFt =                       × 0.75 +                                            × 0.33,
                       Actualt−1                                Actualt−1 × (1 + SGRt )

after being modified by “dampening” weights of 0.75 and 0.33, between components from the
previous year and all other years before that, respectively.


                                                       A-1
   The Sustainable Growth Rate (SGRt ) used above is calculated according to four factors: (i)
the estimated percentage change in fees for physicians’ services, (ii) the estimated percentage
change in the average number of Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries, (iii) the estimated 10-
year average annual percentage change in real gross domestic product per capita, and (iv) the
estimated percentage change in expenditures due to changes in law or regulations.
   The Budget Neutrality adjustment oﬀsets expenditure changes that result from updates to
the relative value units of medical services and ensures that RVU inflation does not change the
Medicare budget:                            ∑
                                               RV Ui,t−1 × qi,t−1
                                       BNt = ∑i                   ,
                                               i RV Ui,t × qi,t−1

which is closely related to the condition in Equation (A-5.4) we use in simulating counterfactual
revenue in Section 4.2. Historically, BNt adjustments have been relatively minor considerations
in setting CFt , compared to MEIt and UAFt . Changes to the relative value of medical services
via BNt are also limited by statute to $20 million annually.
   Despite scheduled reductions in the CF according to the SGR formula, the most recent
year with a CF reduction was 2002. Since then, Congress has annually overridden scheduled
reductions (colloquially known as the “doc fix”). Most recently, the Medicare Access and CHIP
Reauthorization Act of 2015 removed the SGR formula used to determine the CF. In its place,
the act provided a half-percent increase in the physician fee schedule rate until 2020 (Clough
and McClellan, 2016).


A-2      Measuring Aﬃliation
In this appendix, we provide an economic foundation for measuring aﬃliation as a negative
distance in the space of quantity shares or revenue shares. We then discuss our choice of distance
metric, providing context with other eﬀorts in the economics literature to quantify relationships
between groups.

A-2.1     Specialty Objective Rationale for Vector Space
Our goal for measuring aﬃliation is to quantify the degree to which specialties with many inter-
ests may share preferences (Caillaud and Tirole, 2007). A natural benchmark for a specialty’s
objective is its revenue. Consider the revenue of specialty s as
                                                     ∑
                                              Rs =         pi qis ,
                                                      i

or the sum of revenues from each service i, which in turn is the price of i, pi , multiplied by the
quantities of i provided by s, qis .
   The interests of two specialties then may be linked via prices changes in several ways. A


                                                     A-2
change in price for any service may lead to changes in the price of many other services, because
by nature, prices are relative and can be used to justify prices of comparable services. Further,
the fixed budget implies that any given price change mechanically aﬀects all prices. Finally,
if physicians (or patients) are responsive to price in their decisions, a price change or changes
can lead to changes in quantities provided (and demanded) of the service undergoing the price
change. The quantities of substitute or complementary services may adjust as well.
    To capture this combination of mechanisms, we can write the first-order eﬀect of a vector p
of price changes on Rs as                     (                  )
                                        dRs ∑      dpi      dqis
                                            =  qis     + pi        .                                      (A-2.1)
                                         dp        dp       dp
                                                 i

While qiA and pi are observed, dpi /dp and dqis /dp are generally unknown. In order to capture
similarity in the eﬀects of p on the revenue of two diﬀerent specialties, as in Equation (A-2.1),
we need to make simplifying assumptions. We discuss two such assumptions below that allow us
to link the vector space of a distance metric to alignment between two specialties’ objectives.

A-2.1.1     Quantity Shares

Under the assumption of fixed quantities (i.e., quantities are completely inelastic to price), the
derivative in Equation (A-2.1) reduces to

                                               dRs ∑ dpi
                                                   = qis    .
                                                dp       dp
                                                           i

Further, fixed quantities allow us to scale revenue to be per-service; we can then compare spe-
cialties of diﬀerent overall volume:
                                               drs ∑ q dpi
                                                  = σis    ,
                                               dp       dp
                                                           i
                  ∑                                            q            ∑
where rs ≡ Rs /       i qis   is the per-service revenue, and σis ≡ qis /       i qis   is the quantity share of i
relative to other procedures that s performs.
    The diﬀerence in the eﬀect on per-service revenue between specialties A and B is

                                      drA drB   ∑( q     q ) dpi
                                         −    =   σiA − σiB      .                                        (A-2.2)
                                      dp   dp                dp
                                                       i
                                                       ( q q)
Distances in the vector space of quantity shares, i.e., σA , σB , thus capture this diﬀerence for
any arbitrary set of price changes (i.e., any arbitrary p and the corresponding dpi /dp for all i).
    In addition, this diﬀerence in derivatives equivalently represents diﬀerences in the response
of per-service profit, where “profit” is price minus a concept of service-specific cost.46 For any
arbitrary set of procedure costs that vary by i and specialty, the derivative of profit with respect
  46
     This cost can be a cost of eﬀort, a financial cost, or an opportunity cost, such as when time used to perform
service i detracts from time performing other procedures.


                                                      A-3
to price changes remains the same.

A-2.1.2    Revenue Shares

If we instead assume that quantities are allocated across specialties in fixed proportion, then we
may use the vector space of revenue shares to measure similarity in percentage change in revenue.
                                                                                   ∑
To see this, first assume that qis = wis qi , where wis is fixed regardless of qi ≡ s qis . Then note
that percentage revenue change is
                                              (                      )
                        dRs /dp        1 ∑          dpi        dqis
                                  =             qis       + pi
                          Rs           Rs           dp           dp
                                           i
                                       ∑ qis pi qis · dpi /dp + pi · dqis /dp
                                  =             ·
                                           Rs                    pi qis
                                        i
                                       ∑
                                           R qi · dpi /dp + pi · dqi /dp
                                  =       σis ·                           ,
                                                            p i qi
                                        i
                                       ∑
                                           R d (pi qi ) /dp
                                  =       σis ·                ,
                                                    p i qi
                                        i

       R ≡ (p q ) /R is the quantity share of i relative to other procedures that s performs,
where σis    i is   s
and the third line derives from dividing wis from the numerator and the denominator. The term
             R is a constant for each service i; it does not depend on the identity of s.
multiplying σis
   The diﬀerence in the percentage revenue change between specialties A and B is then

                       dRA /dp dRB /dp ∑ ( R        )
                                                 R d (pi qi ) /dp
                              −       =   σiA − σiB               .
                        dRA     dRB                    p i qi
                                                 i

                                                       ( R R)
Distances in the vector space of revenue shares, i.e., σiA , σiB , correspondingly capture this
diﬀerence in percentage revenue changes.
   Whether this is a meaningful vector space for distance depends on the plausibility of the
assumption that quantities for a given service i are allocated across specialties in fixed propor-
tions, regardless of qi . In addition, this vector space does not allow us to measure similarity in
specialty interests other than revenue. In particular, measures in this vector space would not
capture any concept of specialty profit.

A-2.2     Distance Metrics
In economics, several threads of literature have developed quantitative measures of relationships
between groups. The literature on segregation has developed measures of isolation and dissimi-
larity to reflect the interaction between groups (White, 1986; Cutler et al., 1999; Gentzkow and
Shapiro, 2011; Esteban et al., 2012). Another literature on technological spillovers has sought
to measure the likelihood that productive entities in multiple fields may aﬀect each other (Jaﬀe,


                                                A-4
1986; Bloom et al., 2013). In our application, we seek to measure closeness in preferences between
specialties with many interests.
    This goal motivates our choice of using distance metrics in vector spaces (quantity and revenue
shares) that reflect specialties’ interests.47 As our baseline distance metric, we use the standard
Euclidean distance:                                   √
                                   a (sA , sB ) = −       (σA − σB ) (σA − σB )′ ,

where σs is the vector of quantity or revenue shares for specialty s across services or BETOS
categories of services. The Euclidean distance between the two vectors σA and σB corresponds to
the diﬀerence in total eﬀects on the revenue of the two specialties, particularly if the component
                                              d(pi qi )/dp
eﬀect from each service—dpi /dp or               pi qi       on quantity or revenue shares, respectively—is
orthogonal (independent) and equal (identical).
    We also consider a Euclidean distance metric weighted by the Gini coeﬃcient of each service:
                                                 √
                                 a (sA , sB ) = − (σA − σB ) G (σA − σB )′ ,

where G is a diagonal weighting matrix, such that G (i, i) = Gi is the Gini coeﬃcient across σis
for services i, which places more weight on services that diﬀer in shares across specialties. This
Gini-weighted metric will naturally result in greater variation in distances.
    Finally, we consider Manhattan distance, in L1 space:
                                                             ∑
                                        a (sA , sB ) = −           |σiA − σiB | ,
                                                              i

    In addition to these distance metrics, we also consider two measures similar to correlation
notions, akin to those in the literature on technology spillovers (Jaﬀe, 1986; Bloom et al., 2013):
angular distance and correlation. Angular distance is in arc space, with aﬃliation
                                                             (                       )
                                              2                        σA · σB
                              a (sA , sB ) = − cos−1              √       √              .
                                              π                    σA · σA σB · σB

Our correlation measure is
                                               ∑
                                                   (σiA − σ̄A )(σiB − σ̄B )
                             a(sA , sB ) = − √∑ i              ∑                 ,
                                               i (σiA − σ̄A )    i (σiB − σ̄B )
                                                             2                 2


which is not a distance metric, as it does not satisfy the triangle inequality property. These
   47
      In addition to quantity shares and revenue shares based on individual services defined by CPT codes, we also
consider quantity shares and revenue shares in 107 Berenson-Eggers Type of Service (BETOS) categories. This
formulation is more restrictive but uses prior knowledge to group services into categories that likely covary. In this
sense, this vector space may improve the characterization of aﬃliation if BETOS categories capture a suﬃciently
large amount of information about CPT codes in terms of the price or quantity eﬀects of p. On the other hand,
if there remains substantial heterogeneity in eﬀects within BETOS categories, then aﬃliation measures based on
this vector space will perform less well.



                                                          A-5
metrics, along with Manhattan distance, are also often invoked in the statistical and computer
science literatures in settings in which sampling noise over many features can be magnified
by Euclidean distances (Aggarwal et al., 2001). In our setting, however, we perfectly observe
Medicare quantity shares (from the universe of data) and prices and therefore do not share this
concern. Furthermore, and more importantly, because both angular distance and correlation
normalize vectors to have a length of 1, they may distort the meaning of elements of σs away
from shares:48 A large diﬀerence in the quantity or revenue share of a particular service is a
meaningful economic concept, while a re-normed element of σs has no meaningful interpretation.


A-3         Mixed Strategies in Endogenous Proposals
In this appendix, we sketch a simple signaling model of proposals to provide intuition for the
random variation we observe in the endogenous decisions of specialties to propose. As in our
main conceptual framework, in Section 5.1, we assume a specialty society may be biased, but
for tractability, we rule out any downstream communication or any potential bias of the RUC.49
The first important feature of the model is that proposals to the RUC are costly. Second, if there
is more than one proposing specialty that would have proposed alone, then there cannot be a
unique (or symmetric) pure strategy equilibrium that determines specialty proposals. In other
words, if specialty societies cannot fully coordinate, then we will have random variation in the
identities of proposing specialties. In this sketch, we ignore the possibility that costs may vary,
often quasi-randomly, in order to clarify the latter source of random variation.
       Specifically, consider specialty society utility

                                         uS = − (θ + bS − p)2 − cDS ,

where θ ∈ {0, 1} is the true price, bS > 0 is the specialty’s bias, p is the price recommended by
the RUC (and set by the government), c is the cost of proposing, and DS ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator
for the specialty proposing. The RUC’s (and the government’s) utility is uR = − (θ − p)2 . We
assume that Pr (θ = 1) = 21 .
       In a separating pure strategy equilibrium with a single specialty, the specialty will propose
if and only if θ = 1, and the government will set p = DS . The specialty must then have bias
     [         ]
bS ∈ c−1   c+1
       2 , 2 . If bias is too low (or cost too high), then the specialty will not want to propose
even if θ = 1; if bias is too high (or cost too low), then the specialty will want to propose even
if θ = 0.50
  48
     The argument inside of the angular distance formula is called the cosine similarity, or cos (σA , σB ). Denoting
Euclidean distance between σA and σB as ∥σA − σB ∥2 , ∥σA − σB ∥22 = (σA − σB ) (σA − σB )′ = ∥σA ∥22 + ∥σB ∥22 −
2σA · σB . If ∥σA ∥22 = ∥σB ∥22 = 1, then ∥σA − σB ∥22 = 2 (1 − cos (σA , σB )). In Figure A-1, we find that in our
data, Euclidean distance and weighted Euclidean distance are quite similar, while the other metrics tend to shrink
larger distances.
  49
     We could introduce these features, but the intuition we wish to formalize would remain the same.
  50
     Potters and van Winden (1992) also point out that there exists a mixed strategy equilibrium, in which


                                                        A-6
    We then consider two specialties S ∈ {1, 2}, and assume that bS >                  c−1
                                                                                        2    for both specialties.
Both specialties would propose if θ = 1 had the other one not existed, yet neither would propose
if it knows that the other specialty’s strategy is to propose when θ = 1. Thus, there is no unique
pure strategy equilibrium of proposals by the two specialties. In the case that b1 = b2 , this
implies that there is no symmetric pure strategy equilibrium.51 There are at least two types of
mixed strategies over the range of this bias-cost space: (i) Neither specialty proposes if θ = 0 and
mix (i.e., propose with some probability πS ∈ (0, 1)) if θ = 1 , and (ii) both specialties propose
if θ = 1 and mix if θ = 0.
    Because the number of actual specialty-proposals relative to potential specialty-proposals is
empirically low, we focus on the former type of mixed strategies.52 When specialties mix when
θ = 1, the RUC knows that θ = 1 and sets p = 1, if either D1 = 1 or D2 = 1. If D1 = D2 = 0,
the RUC sets
                                                                 (1 − π1 ) (1 − π2 )
                             p (π1 , π2 |D1 = D2 = 0 ) =                               ,
                                                               1 + (1 − π1 ) (1 − π2 )
which is the probability that θ = 1 if D1 = D2 = 0. For a mixed-strategy equilibrium to exist,
specialties must be indiﬀerent between proposing and not. In Figure A-2, fixing c = 1 for the
specialties, we show whether a mixed-strategy equilibrium exists in (b1 , b2 ) space and, if so, the
mixing probabilities for the specialties (when θ = 1) that sustain it.
    We first find that if specialty bias is suﬃciently low, then there exists no mixed-strategy
equilibrium. Failure to coordinate and the temptation to free-ride results in no proposals, re-
ducing signaling equilibria relative to the one-specialty standard. However, if both specialties
are suﬃciently biased (or equivalently, have low costs), then their equilibrium mixed strategies
will involve fairly high πS , and signaling is possible even when it was not in the one-specialty
case (due to bias being too high relative to costs). Finally, and intuitively, when specialty are
asymmetric in their bias, signaling occurs mostly through the lower-bias specialty. As the bias of
the higher-bias specialty approaches infinity, the equilibrium resembles a single-specialty pure-
strategy equilibrium and is possible at levels of bias (of the lower-bias specialty) close to those
                                                 c−1
in the one-specialty case (i.e., as low as        2 ).

the specialty
      (         certainly
                   )      proposes if θ = 1 and proposes with some probability π ∈ (0, 1) if θ = 0 for biases
bS ∈ c+12
           , c + 14 if c > 12 .
  51
     There may exist, for example, a perfect Bayesian equilibrium with two players in which both would choose to
propose if the RUC believed θ = 1 only if it observes both specialties proposing. We could rule out an equilibrium
of this form by refining the equilibrium concept such that if the RUC observes only one specialty proposing, it
will nonetheless consider that specialty’s incentives to propose and update its prior probability that the value of
θ = 1 (Grossman and Helpman, 2001).
  52
     Parallel results obtain for the latter type, which correspond to the mixed strategy in the single-specialty case
noted by Potters and van Winden (1992), in footnote 50.




                                                         A-7
A-4      Specialty-Proposal Propensity and Simulated Aﬃliation
Our measure of aﬃliation is determined mechanically by specialties on the RUC, Rt , and spe-
cialties on a proposal, Si . To assess our identifying assumption—that aﬃliation is uncorrelated
with underlying price, conditional on observable characteristics of a proposal—we examine the
probability of specialty participation in proposals, as this is an endogenous object. As we discuss
in Section 3.3, the key intuition for our assumption on aﬃliation is that a variety of factors
determine the specialty cost of proposing and that, with many potential proposers and costly
proposing, there exist multiple pure- and mixed-strategy equilibria.
   In Figure 6, we show evidence that actual specialty proposals are uncorrelated with predicted
price, conditional on specialty-proposal propensities. Originally, we estimate proposal propensi-
ties for each specialty using a logit model, conditioning on specialty identities and functions of
specialty shares of the procedure’s utilization wi . Here, we enrich our propensity model to (i)
show substantial residual variation in proposals and (ii) form a basis to simulate aﬃliation. Fur-
thermore, we will use simulated measures of aﬃliation to (iii) demonstrate unbiasedness in our
prediction of aﬃliation based on proposal propensities and (iv) use predicted (mean simulated)
aﬃliation as a control for robustness.
   We first estimate a logit propensity model of specialty-proposal participation, using specialty
                                                                                                   R
identities, flexible functions of wi , and the procedure’s share of specialty revenue, defined as σis
in Appendix A-2.1.2. While the logit model is fairly predictive, with a pseudo-R2 of 0.73 and
a log-likelihood of −8, 661.35 over 248, 735 observations, we find substantial residual variation
in specialty proposals. To illustrate this, in Figure A-3, we show the propensities of 6,929
actual specialty-proposal pairs over 4,199 proposals. While there are many propensities with
high values, more than half of the actual specialty proposals have propensities lower than 0.8,
and about a quarter have propensities less than 0.5. Similarly, in Figure A-4, we show the first-
, second-, third-, and fourth-ranked specialty propensities for proposals with at least as many
proposers. Although there are 64 specialties to rank, propensities quickly diminish: The average
first-ranked propensity is 0.86, while the average second-, third-, and fourth-ranked propensities
are 0.76, 0.69, and 0.54, respectively.
   Based on estimated specialty-proposal propensities, π̂is , and the known specialties of RUC
members at each meeting, Rt , we can simulate aﬃliation. We proceed as follows:

  1. Use estimated specialty-proposal propensities, π̂is . Drop any specialty-proposal pair with
      π̂is < 0.01.

  2. For each proposal i, identify number of remaining specialty-proposer candidates, ni , and
      the number of actual specialty proposers, ki . This yields ∥Si ∥ = C (ni , ki ) as the number
      of potential proposer sets Si for i, constraining the number of simulated proposers in each
      set to be the same as the number of actual proposers. For example, if there remain ten
      specialty-proposer candidates for a proposal with only one actual specialty proposer, there

                                                A-8
      are C (10, 1) = 10 (singleton) sets to draw from. However, if there are fifteen specialty-
      proposer candidates for a proposal with four actual proposers, there are C (15, 4) ≈ 7.57 ×
      107 sets to draw from.

       (a) For proposals i such that ∥Si ∥ ≤ 50, collect all such potential proposer sets.
       (b) For the remaining proposals, randomly draw ki proposers from ni , oversampling
           specialty-proposer candidates from those with higher π̂is . Specifically, generate ris ∼
           U (0, 1) and subtract this from π̂is . Within each i, sort specialty-proposer candidates
           by π̂is − ris , and choose the top ki candidates to include in Si . Repeat until some
           stopping rule (e.g., based on the number of unique sets sampled for each i and the
           lack of new sets sampled for any i in a draw).
       (c) Denote as S∗i ⊆ Si the collection of simulated sets for each proposal i. For each
           Si ∈ S∗i , calculate a simulated set aﬃliation A (Rt , Si ) for each Si , using known Rt
           and the formula in Equation (4).

   3. Given π̂is , and assuming independence of specialty proposals, the probability of drawing
      Si from Si is                                 ∏                 ∏
                                                               π̂is     s∈S      (1 − π̂is )
                           Pr ( Si | S∗i )              (∏                                         ).
                                                        s∈Si             / i
                                             ≡∑                              ∏
                                              Si ∈S∗i          s∈Si   π̂is       s∈S
                                                                                  / i   (1 − π̂is )

      This allows us to weight sets by their probability of occurrence. This also allows us to
      generate a predicted set aﬃliation,
                                                   ∑
                                  Â (Rt , i) =             A (Rt , Si ) Pr ( Si | S∗i ) .              (A-4.3)
                                                  Si ∈S∗i


In Figure A-5, we show the distribution of simulated set aﬃliations relative to the actual set
aﬃliation for each i, weighted by Pr ( Si | S∗i ). The weighted standard deviation of the distribution
is 0.242, reflecting that there exists meaningful variation in set aﬃliation based on the specialty-
proposal propensities. Further, the weighted mean of the distribution is −0.015, suggesting very
little forecast bias in predicted set aﬃliation. We use predicted set aﬃliation as a control, rather
than linear specialty shares of CPT utilization, wi , in a robustness check of the aﬃliation eﬀect
on prices, in Column 5 of Table 3; we find a similar estimate of the main eﬀect.


A-5      Counterfactual Revenue Simulation Algorithm
We simulate counterfactual revenue in scenarios that entail counterfactual aﬃliations for pro-
posals. In each scenario, we hold fixed the service and timing of each proposal, the Medicare
budget, and the utilization of each service. Counterfactual revenue results solely from the eﬀect
of aﬃliation on relative price. Prices are rationalized so that total spending meets the fixed
Medicare budget. The algorithm is as follows:

                                                      A-9
  1. Starting at the first year in which the RUC’s pricing decision goes into eﬀect, we replace the
     relative price RV (Uiy that followed a RUC                                                   ^
                                                   ) recommendation with a counterfactual RV U iy ,
     by subtracting α̂ A (Rt , Si ) − Ã (Rt , Si ) , where A (Rt , Si ) and Ã (Rt , Si ) are actual and
      counterfactual aﬃliations, respectively, and α̂ is the estimated aﬃliation eﬀect from Equa-
      tion (6). RUC decisions in meeting t map to prices in the Medicare schedule in year y (t).
      We repeat for subsequent years, allowing previously set prices to continue forward.

  2. We take quantities qisy of service i, by specialty s, in year y, observed in Medicare claims.
     We set conversion factors CFy and CF  g y so that the overall spending is $70 billion in 2014
      dollars, which implies that
                                ∑∑                                ∑∑
                         gy
                         CF              ^
                                         RV U iy · qisy = CFy               RV U iy · qisy .     (A-5.4)
                                 i   s                            i     s


  3. The revenue reallocation for service i, specialty s, and year y is
                                           (                             )
                                             g y · RV
                               ∆risy = qisy CF     ^  U iy − CFy · RV Uiy .


  4. We aggregate ∆risy to yearly averages for specialties s or types of service k:
                                                        ∑∑
                                     ∆Rs = ∥Y∥−1                  ∆risy ;
                                                        y∈Y   i
                                                        ∑∑∑
                                     ∆Rk = ∥Y∥−1                        ∆risy .
                                                        y∈Y   s   i∈k


A-6     Alternative Mechanisms Behind the Price Eﬀect
In this appendix, we consider evidence regarding alternative mechanisms of the aﬃliation eﬀect
on prices, summarized in Table A-4. All specifications in Table A-4 include the same controls as
in the baseline specification of the price regression, shown in Column 4 of Table 3.
   First, we consider the possibility that aﬃliation could reflect signaling “buy-in.” That is,
more specialties should be willing to propose for procedures that have a higher intrinsic price.
As more specialties propose, set aﬃliation, as defined in Equation (4), will mechanically increase
through max operator in the formula. Higher prices under this scenario are warranted and do not
reflect any RUC bias. We modify the baseline price-eﬀect regression in Equation (6) to include
proposer-count fixed eﬀects:

               ln RVUit = αA (Rt , Si ) + γn 1 (∥Si ∥ = n) + Xi β + Tt η + wi ζ + εit .          (A-6.5)

This specification relies only on within-proposer-count variation to identify the price eﬀect of
aﬃliation. As shown in Column 1 of Table A-4, the coeﬃcient on standardized set aﬃliation is


                                                 A-10
unchanged, at 0.112, and highly significant.
    Second, we consider a range of specifications relating to interests (and information) held by
RUC specialties that are specific to the proposed service. Specifically, we consider the service i’s
                                                                   q
utilization share of all services billed by a RUC specialty s, or σis , as defined in Equation (2) and
discussed in Appendix A-2.1.1. We also consider i’s revenue share of all Medicare revenue to s, or
 R , as defined and discussed in Appendix A-2.1.2. These measures capture both proposal-specific
σis
interests and information about i. We perform variants of the regression

                   ln RVUit = αA (Rt , Si ) + γms∈Rt (σi ) + Xi β + Tt η + wi ζ + εit ,                      (A-6.6)

where ms∈Rt (σi ) is a moment function of the vector of service-specific utilization or revenue
shares for specialties serving on the RUC, s ∈ Rt .
                                                                                        q
    Columns 2 and 3 of Table A-4 show results for regressions adding standardized mean σis
     R , respectively. Columns 4 and 5 show results for regressions adding standardized 33rd
and σis
            q       R , respectively, to reflect the two-thirds vote count required for passing
percentile σis and σis
a proposal before the RUC. In all specifications, the coeﬃcient on standardized set aﬃliation
remains unchanged in magnitude and significance. The coeﬃcients on the standardized measures
of RUC-specialty interest in proposal iare small, though statistically significant. Although we
ascribe a causal interpretation to the eﬀect of aﬃliation, given our discussion in Section 3.3, the
same reasoning does not hold for γ.53


A-7       Technical Details of the Conceptual Framework
This appendix provides additional detail behind the conceptual framework [we outline in Section
                                                                                        ]
5. We start with more detail about the formula for expected “variance”, E (θ + bR − p)2 , that
represents information loss in the standard Crawford and Sobel (1982) model. Next, we provide
details of the analysis with hard information and the optimal b∗R under hard information. Finally,
we describe a mechanism of assigning intervals of expected length L such that the posterior
distribution of θ remains uniform within each realized interval.

A-7.1      Canonical Crawford and Sobel (1982) Partitions
Consider θ uniformly distributed on the interval [0, L]. The sender (the specialty) has bias b,
relative to the receiver (the RUC). The formula for the number of partitions supported under
  53
     For γ to have a causal interpretation, we would require random variation in RUC specialty composition, Rt .
As we discuss in Section 3.3, the RUC has had a relatively fixed composition over time, compared to variation in
specialty proposals. In contrast, note that ms∈Rt (σi ) is invariant to the specialty identities in the proposal, Si .




                                                        A-11
b = bS − bR over the interval is
                                              ⌊ (   √      )⌋
                                               1        2L
                                     n∗ (b) =     1+ 1+       .                                    (A-7.7)
                                               2         b

Using Equation (A-7.7), we define the limiting bias such that n∗ (b − ε) = n for any positive but
arbitrarily small ε:
                                                              2L
                                              b∗ (n) =                 .
                                                         (2n − 1)2 − 1
b∗ (n) supports n partitions only in the limit. For example, as we show below, b =            1
                                                                                              4   supports
only one partition, since the first partition of technically two partitions will have a length of 0.
   The first partition is bounded by x0 = 0 and

                                                      L
                                               x1 =     − (n − 1) 2b,                              (A-7.8)
                                                      n

Subsequent partition lengths increase by 4b, which implies

                                          xk = 2xk−1 − xk−2 + 4b,                                  (A-7.9)

and Equations (A-7.8) and (A-7.9) imply that xn = L.
    We will consider a number of specific examples of n, which exist for b ∈ [b∗ (n +[ 1) , b∗ (n)). We
                                                                                                      ]
define the boundaries of the partitions in the space of [0, L], and the variance E (θ + bR − p)2 .
For the latter object, we use the fact that the variance of a uniformly distributed random variable
                                                                        [ L L)
along an interval of length L is L2 /12. Two partitions exist if b ∈ 12     , 4 and are defined by
( L          )
 0, 2 − 2b, L . The variance is given by
                                                              [(   )3 (       )3 ]
                        [             ]                  L2  1          1
                       E (θ + bR − p)2 =                       − 2b +     + 2b
                                                         12  2          2
                                                           (          )
                                                          1 L2      2   L2
                                                 =             + 12b =     + b2 .
                                                         12 4           48
                                [L        )                     (                      )
Three partitions exist if b ∈        L
                                24 , 12       and are defined by 0, L3 − 4b, 2L
                                                                              3 − 4b, L . The variance is
given by
                                                      [(           )3     ( )3 (       ) ]
                   [                 ]          L2         1 4b            1     1 4b 3
                                 2
                E (θ + bR − p)            =                  −          +     +    +
                                                12         3   L           3     3   L
                                                     (             )
                                                1        L2      2
                                          =                 + 32b .
                                                12       9




                                                          A-12
       By induction, one can verify that the variance in the equilibrium with n partitions is
                                      [                   ]          (              )
                                                      2          1       L2
                                   E (θ + bR − p)             =                   2
                                                                            + An b ,                        (A-7.10)
                                                                12       n2

where A1 = 0, and An = An−1 + 8n − 4. Note that the variance is continuous across the number
of partitions (as b changes). Also, the variance is decreasing in b, holding L fixed.

A-7.2        Hard Information
Given the formula for soft information loss in Equation (A-7.10), we can write the expected
utility for the specialty and the government, respectively, as
                                             [            ]
                               E [uS ] = −E (θ + θR − p)2 − b2 − c (L)
                                              (          )
                                            1 L2
                                       = −       + An b − b2 − c (L) ,
                                                       2
                                                                                                            (A-7.11)
                                           12 n2

and as
                                                  [            ]
                                    E [uG ] = −E (θ + θR − p)2 − b2R
                                                   (          )
                                                 1 L2
                                            = −       + An b − b2R .
                                                            2
                                                                                                            (A-7.12)
                                                12 n2

In both Equations (A-7.11) and (A-7.12), n is the number of partitions supported by b and L
and is given by Equation (A-7.7). Better information, either hard or soft, increases the utility of
both the specialty and the government.
       Taking the partial derivative of expected specialty utility with respect to L, while holding b
and n fixed, yields the following condition for the agent’s choice of L:

                                           ∂             L
                                             E [uS ] = − 2 − c′ (L) = 0.                                    (A-7.13)
                                          ∂L            6n

The convexity of c (L) implies that there exists a single optimal candidate that satisfies Equation
(A-7.13) for the cheap talk equilibrium with n partitions. Denote the solution to Equation (A-
7.13) for a given n, if it exists (i.e., n∗ (b, L∗n ) = n), as L∗n .54 Intuitively, L∗n is increasing in n:
better soft communication (higher n) reduces the incentive to produce hard information (larger
L∗n ). The globally optimal L∗ is then given by L∗ = arg maxn (E [uS ; L∗n ]). L∗ is decreasing in b:
As the specialty and the RUC have divergent preferences, soft communication worsens, and this
increases the optimal hard information. Because the set of L∗n is comprised of discrete values,
L∗ (b) is a step function.
   In Equation (A-7.13), L∗n is increasing in n, and in Equation (A-7.7), n∗ (b, L) is increasing in L. Since (i)
  54

L∗n∈ (0, 1] and (ii) n∗ (b, L) is bounded by n∗ (b, 1), there must be at least one n ∈ {1, . . . , n∗ (b, 1)} such that
n (b, L∗n ) = n.
 ∗




                                                          A-13
A-7.3     Optimal RUC Bias
Because smaller L∗ increases government utility in Equation (A-7.12), and because L∗ is a
decreasing function of b = bR − bS , the optimal b∗R from the government’s perspective is weakly
lower under the possibility of hard information than when we fix L = 1.
    However, the optimal b∗R ≥ 0. That is, an adversarial RUC is still never optimal from the
government’s perspective. In order for b∗R < 0, we need three requirements:

   1. The threshold bR where the specialty is indiﬀerent between n = 1 and n = 2 must be less
      than 0.

   2. The expected government utility when bR = bR is higher than the maximum expected
      government utility under n = 2:
                                                          [            ]
                                   max E [ uG | n = 2] < E uG | bR = bR .


   3. The expected government utility when bR = bR is higher than complete delegation when
      bR = bS .

Note also that convexity of c (L) implies that c′ (L∗1 ) < c′ (L∗2 ). From the first order conditions
that c′ (L∗1 ) = − 61 L∗1 and c′ (L∗2 ) = − 24 L2 , we must have L∗1 > 14 L∗2 . Convexity also implies that
                                             1 ∗

                                                          [          ]
                                    c (L∗1 ) − c (L∗2 )     1 ∗ 1 ∗
                                                        ∈     L , L .
                                        L∗2 − L∗1           24 2 6 1

    The threshold bR is defined by the following condition:
                           [                    ]   [                    ]
                          E uG | bR = bR , n = 1 = E uG | bR = bR , n = 2 .

In other words

                   1          (       )2            1             (       )2
                     (L∗1 )2 + bR − bS + c (L∗1 ) =    (L∗2 )2 + 2 bR − bS + c (L∗2 ) .
                  12                                48

The threshold is then
                                       √
                                            1            1
                          bS = bR +           (L∗1 )2 −    (L∗2 )2 + c (L∗1 ) − c (L∗2 ).        (A-7.14)
                                           12           48

Condition 1 and convexity imply that
                                   √
                                        1            1          1
                            bS <          (L∗1 )2 −    (L∗2 )2 + L∗1 (L∗2 − L∗1 ).               (A-7.15)
                                       12           48          6




                                                      A-14
   Condition 2 requires that

                                    1            2    1         1
                               −      (L∗1 )2 − bR > − (L∗2 )2 − b2S ,                    (A-7.16)
                                   12                 48        2

where the expression on the left is the expected government utility at bR and n = 1, and the
expression on the right is the expected government utility under the optimal bR = 12 bS conditional
on n = 2. Condition 3 requires that

                                            1            2
                                       −      (L∗1 )2 − bR > −b2S .                       (A-7.17)
                                           12
The expression on the right is the government utility under full delegation.
                                                (                  )
   We show numerically that there are no values L∗1 , L∗2 , bS , bR that satisfy Equations (A-7.14)
to (A-7.17) simultaneously.

A-7.4     Uniform Posterior Intervals
While it is convenient to work with continuous L, there is a technical complication in specifying
                                                    ( )
values of θ and θ, such that it remains that θ ∼ U θ, θ with fixed L = θ − θ. For example,
consider the case of L = 0.9. If θ = 0, then we must have θ = 0 with probability 1, but θ = 0
with probability less than 1 if θ > 0. Therefore, if any potential interval must have L = 0.9, and
                             [ ]
we have a realized interval θ, θ = [0, 0.9], then θ cannot be uniformly distributed within the
realized interval.
   To preserve uniform posterior distributions within the intervals revealed after hard informa-
tion, we need sets of potential intervals to be mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive.
Thus, we may have one potential interval of length La = 0.9 and another potential interval of
length Lb = 0.1. The ordering of these intervals may be random, but so long as the intervals
are not overlapping in a particular ordering, then the posterior distribution of θ within each
interval will remain uniform. We operationalize this with the concept that L instead represents
the expected length of the information interval after hard information, under a mechanism that
divides the unit interval into N intervals of length La and a remaining weakly shorter interval
of length Lb = 1 − N La ≤ La .
   The probability that θ falls in an interval of length La is N La , while the probability that θ
falls in the remaining interval of length Lb . Thus L = N L2a + L2b = N L2a + (1 − N La )2 . We can
                                                                                             ⌊    ⌋
solve for La (L), as a function of L, by using the quadratic formula and the fact that N = L−1 :
                                            √              (            )
                                      1+        1 − (1 − L) ⌊L−1 ⌋−1 + 1
                          La (L) =                                          ,
                                                    1 + ⌊L−1 ⌋

which is continuous and monotonically increasing in L.
   We modify our equilibrium analysis by stating expected utility E [uA ] (prior to hard infor-


                                                   A-15
mation) as a function of L:
                                [      ]
                  E [uA ] = −E (θ − p)2 − b2 − c (L)
                                 [                        ]
                               1 N La 3 (1 − N La )3
                          = −          +             + Ab2 − b2 − c (L) ,                 (A-7.18)
                              12   n2a       n2b

where na = n∗ (b, La ), nb =[ n∗ (b, 1 −] N La ) ≤ na , and A = N La Ana + (1 − N La ) Anb . The
                                      2
expression for the variance E (θ − p) is continuous, monotonically increasing in L (and La (L)),
and piecewise convex in La (L). The remainder of the analysis proceeds by identifying solutions
L∗n , where n = (na , nb ), and choosing L∗ = arg maxn (E [uS ; L∗n ]).


A-8      Private Price Transmission Robustness
In Section 5.3, we show that private insurance price changes are more responsive to Medicare
price changes when the Medicare price changes originate from RUC decisions and, within RUC
decisions, when they originate from a higher-aﬃliation proposal. We interpret this finding as
supporting the hypothesis that RUC decisions, particular those from higher-aﬃliation proposals,
contain valuable information that private insurance follows. In this appendix, we investigate
alternative mechanisms that may generate this result.
   First, aﬃliated proposals may result in more informative Medicare prices not because they
facilitate communication, as detailed in Section 5, but because RUC members may naturally have
more information about the procedures that their specialty societies perform. We investigate
this possibility by using proxy measures of the RUC members’ own information, based on their
utilization of the service in question. In particular, we consider a specialty s’s share of total
utilization for service i, wis , as defined in Equation (5), and the service i’s share of the total
utilization for specialty s, as defined in (2), averaging across the specialties of RUC members at
the relevant meeting:

                                                 1        ∑
                                   wiy =                            wis ;                 (A-8.19)
                                              Rt(i,y)   s∈Rt(i,y)
                                                 1        ∑
                                   σ iy =                           σis ,                 (A-8.20)
                                              Rt(i,y)   s∈Rt(i,y)


where Rt(i,y) is the set of RUC member specialties at the meeting t (i, y) corresponding to service
i and (private) price change year y.
   Second, aﬃliated proposals may be for high-volume services for which both private insurers
and Medicare have interests in setting accurate prices. Strong correlation between private in-
surance and Medicare price changes for high-aﬃliation proposals may then result from careful
price-setting in both private insurance and Medicare, and not because aﬃliation per se causes


                                                 A-16
better communication between proposing specialties and the RUC. We consider two measures
of volume for service i: private insurance volume and total (private insurance and Medicare)
volume.
       Third, we take an omnibus approach, agnostic to what in particular may drive greater price
following from Medicare to private insurance, by fitting a predictive model of price following.
We consider changes in private insurance prices as a function of changes in Medicare prices:

                             ∆ ln PricePi,y = α + βiy ∆ ln PriceM
                                                                i,y M (i,y) + εiy ,


where the goal is to predict βiy .55 To operationalize this, as an approximation of βiy , we take
the ratio of demeaned ∆ ln PricePi,y and demeaned ∆ ln PriceM
                                                            i,y M (i,y) ,


                                               ∆ ln PricePi,y − ∆ ln PriceP
                               Ratioiy =                                          ,
                                                     i,y M (i,y) − ∆ ln Price
                                           ∆ ln PriceM                        M



where ∆ ln PriceP and ∆ ln PriceM are respective sample means of log private and Medicare price
changes, weighted by Medicare volume. We then predict this ratio as a linear function of private
insurance volume for i; total (private insurance and Medicare) volume for i; time dummies Tiy
for y M (i, y), y, and RUC meeting; and the vector of specialty shares wi . We take the predicted
       \iy , as an agnostic index for predicted price-following based on characteristics of (i, y).
ratio, Ratio
       Given each of these measures that may influence price transmission to private insurance, we
assess the robustness of our results to controlling for these measures, both directly and interacted
with Medicare prices. Specifically, for each Indexit measure (i.e., wiy , σ iy , private volume of i,
                       \iy ), we assess price transmission controlling for these proxy measures
total volume of i, and Ratio
directly and interacted with Medicare prices, σis , in regressions similar to Equation (8):
                           ∑(                              )
           ln PricePiy =                          i,y (i,y) · 1 (C (i, y) = C) +
                                  αC + βC ln PriceM  M
                           C
                           3 (
                           ∑                                  ) (                  (
                                                                                     τ −1 τ
                                                                                             ))
                                  γτ + δτ ln PriceM
                                                  i,y M (i,y)  · 1 F (Index iy ) ∈       ,      +
                                                                                       3   3
                           τ =1
                           Tiy η + ξi + εiy,                                                            (A-8.21)

where τ ∈ {1, 2, 3} indicates the tercile, F (·) is the distribution function of the relevant mea-
sure Indexit , and the rest is the same as in Equation (8). Table A-6 shows results from these
regressions. The key coeﬃcients of interest, βC , are highly stable regardless of Indexiy . Price
transmission remains greater for Medicare price changes originating from RUC decisions and,
within these decisions, from high-aﬃliation proposals.

  55
    This changes-on-changes specification closely matches the fixed-eﬀects specification in Equation (8). As shown
in Figure A-8, separating Medicare price changes into high- and low-aﬃliation groups gives similar results.


                                                      A-17
                                                               Table A-1: Sample Selection


                                                                                                                   Observations
                 Sample step                               Description                                        Dropped       Remaining
                 1. Raw RUC data                           Universe of all administrative data used                           17,498
                                                           by RUC
                 2. Drop observations with no              These observations do not represent RUC              11,079             6,419
                 survey information and no RUC             decisions, as all decisions require these
                 recommendation                            elements
                 3. Drop observations that appear          Identify observations with the same CPT               132               6,353
                 to be duplicates                          code, RUC meeting, and survey specialty;
                                                           if there are diﬀerences in other variables
                                                           between these observations, choose the
                                                           observation with the most complete data
                                                           and larger survey sample sizes
                 4. Combine observations with same         These observations were incorrectly                   127               6,226




A-18
                 CPT code and RUC meeting but              entered as separate lines; use total survey
                 diﬀerent survey specialties               sample and respondent numbers
                 5. Drop observations with invalid         83% of these observations have a meeting              490               5,736
                 RUC meeting date                          date of “Editorial,” indicating that the
                                                           RUC decided that a full decision was not
                                                           necessary, and no specialty proposals
                                                           were elicited; 10% of these observations
                                                           are “HCPAC,” which are not for
                                                           physician procedures
                 6. Drop observations with missing         These observations are likely                        1,313              4,423
                 survey specialty or specialties           administrative discussions without a full
                                                           proposal from a specialty or specialties

       Note: This table describes key sample selection steps, the observations dropped, and the observations remaining after each step. The sample
       selection steps were taken after detailed discussions with the RUC to understand their data and aim to retain observations that represent full RUC
       decisions with a specialty proposal.
                                                     Table A-2: Example CPT Descriptions


         CPT code     Short description         Long description
         99214        Oﬃce / outpatient         Oﬃce or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of an established
                      visit, established        patient, which requires at least 2 of these 3 key components: A detailed history; A
                                                detailed examination; Medical decision making of moderate complexity. Counseling
                                                and/or coordination of care with other physicians, other qualified health care
                                                professionals, or agencies are provided consistent with the nature of the problem(s) and
                                                the patient’s and/or family’s needs. Usually, the presenting problem(s) are of moderate to
                                                high severity. Typically, 25 minutes are spent face-to-face with the patient and/or family.
         71010        Chest x-ray 1 view        Radiologic examination, chest; single view, frontal
                      frontal
         17003        Destruct premalignant     Destruction (e.g., laser surgery, electrosurgery, cryosurgery, chemosurgery, surgical
                      lesion 2-14               curettement), premalignant lesions (e.g., actinic keratoses); second through 14 lesions,
                                                each (List separately in addition to code for first lesion)




A-19
         95165        Antigen therapy           Professional services for the supervision of preparation and provision of antigens for
                      services                  allergen immunotherapy; single or multiple antigens (specify number of doses)
         44391        Colonoscopy for           Colonoscopy through stoma; with control of bleeding (e.g., injection, bipolar cautery,
                      bleeding                  unipolar cautery, laser, heater probe, stapler, plasma coagulator)
         96413        Chemo iv infusion 1 hr    Chemotherapy administration, intravenous infusion technique; up to 1 hour, single or
                                                initial substance/drug
         20610        Drain/inject              Arthrocentesis, aspiration and/or injection; major joint or bursa (e.g., shoulder, hip, knee
                      joint/bursa               joint, subacromial bursa)
         62311        Inject spine              Injection(s), of diagnostic or therapeutic substance(s) (including anesthetic,
                      lumbar/sacral             antispasmodic, opioid, steroid, other solution), not including neurolytic substances,
                                                including needle or catheter placement, includes contrast for localization when
                                                performed, epidural or subarachnoid; lumbar or sacral (caudal)

       Note: This table shows short and long descriptions of example CPT codes, determined by the AMA CPT Committee prior to a proposal to the
       RUC. Stem words in the long description are used for predicting RVUs after LASSO selection.
                  Table A-3: Price Eﬀect of Alternative Aﬃliation Measures


                                    (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                                            Aﬃliation metric
                                                  Gini-
  Aﬃliation vector space         Euclidean                    Manhattan       Correlation      Angular
                                                Euclidean
                                                       Panel A: Mean aﬃliation

                                 0.101***       0.104***        0.055**         0.061**         0.059**
  Medicare CPT quantity
                                  (0.029)        (0.030)        (0.021)         (0.025)         (0.022)
  Medicare + Marketscan          0.076***       0.079***        0.048**         0.057**         0.055**
  CPT quantity                    (0.025)        (0.026)        (0.020)         (0.025)         (0.023)
                                 0.094***       0.094***         0.038*          0.036*         0.036*
  Medicare CPT revenue
                                  (0.029)        (0.029)         (0.019)         (0.021)        (0.020)
  Medicare BETOS                 0.088***       0.089***        0.056**         0.049**         0.050**
  quantity                        (0.029)        (0.030)        (0.022)         (0.024)         (0.022)
  Medicare BETOS                 0.072***        0.068**        0.045**           0.030         0.032*
  revenue                         (0.027)        (0.028)        (0.021)          (0.020)        (0.019)

                                                 Panel B: 33rd percentile aﬃliation
                                 0.104***       0.111***        0.061**         0.060**         0.060**
  Medicare CPT quantity
                                  (0.032)        (0.031)        (0.024)         (0.026)         (0.025)
  Medicare + Marketscan          0.076***       0.081***        0.062**         0.052**         0.050**
  CPT quantity                    (0.024)        (0.026)        (0.023)         (0.024)         (0.023)
                                 0.089***       0.091***         0.039*           0.027          0.026
  Medicare CPT revenue
                                  (0.031)        (0.033)         (0.021)         (0.022)        (0.022)
  Medicare BETOS                  0.086**       0.093***        0.066***        0.051**         0.053**
  quantity                        (0.033)        (0.034)         (0.025)        (0.025)         (0.025)
  Medicare BETOS                 0.088***       0.083***        0.053**         0.034**         0.043**
  revenue                         (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.022)         (0.016)         (0.018)

Note: This table shows results of regressions of log RVU on various measures of set aﬃliation. Each cell
represents the coeﬃcient on the aﬃliation measure in a separate regression, stated in Equation (6) and
corresponding to the preferred specification of Column 4 in Table 3. Further details about the regression
controls are given in the note for Table 3. Rows of the table correspond to the vector space upon which
aﬃliation is calculated; all vector spaces are in shares (i.e., elements of the vector for each specialty sum
to 1). Columns correspond to aﬃliation metrics between two specialties, discussed in Appendix A-2.
Panel A calculates the set aﬃliation measure as the mean maximized specialty-pair aﬃliation, which
is the default and is given in Equation (4). Panel B calculates the set aﬃliation measure as the 33rd
percentile of the maximized specialty-pair aﬃliations. Standard errors, clustered by RUC meeting, are
in parentheses; *** denotes significance at the 1% level.




                                                   A-20
                   Table A-4: Alternative Mechanisms Behind Price Eﬀect


                                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                                 Log RVU
                                     0.112***      0.098***      0.103***      0.098***      0.104***
  Standardized set aﬃliation                                                                  (0.030)
                                      (0.043)       (0.029)       (0.030)       (0.030)
  Standardized measures
  of RUC-specialty interest
            q                                      0.021**
      Mean σis
                                                   (0.009)
            R                                                    0.031***
      Mean σis
                                                                  (0.007)
                       q                                                       0.028***
      33rd percentile σis
                                                                                (0.003)
                       R
                                                                                             0.030***
      33rd percentile σis                                                                     (0.004)
  Baseline controls                      Y             Y             Y             Y             Y
  Proposer count dummies                 Y             N             N             N             N
  N                                    4,401         4,401         4,401         4,401         4,401
  Adjusted R-squared                   0.891         0.891         0.895         0.891         0.895
  Sample mean log RVU                  1.567         1.567         1.567         1.567         1.567

Note: This table shows results of regressions of log RVU on standardized set aﬃliation, with the addition
of controls to test robustness to alternative mechanisms. Column 1 tests robustness to the alternative
mechanism of signaling “buy-in,” controlling for proposer dummies, as in Equation (A-6.5). Columns 2
to 5 relate to alternative mechanisms of proposal-specific information held by RUC specialties. These
specifications, given in Equation (A-6.6), control for proposal-specific measures of utilization or revenue
                                  q        R
shares by RUC specialties, or σis    and σis . Measures are moments (mean or 33rd percentile) in the
distribution across RUC specialties and are standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Details
are given in Appendix A-6. All specifications include controls in the baseline price-eﬀect regression,
in Column 4 of Table 3. Standard errors, clustered by RUC meeting, are in parentheses; ** denotes
significance at the 5% level, and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.




                                                  A-21
                     Table A-5: Specialty Seats on Counterfactual RUC

     Specialty                          Seats           Specialty                        Seats
     Anesthesiology                       2             Obstetrics and Gynecology          2
     Cardiology                           1             Oncology                           1
     Emergency Medicine                   2             Ophthalmology                      1
     Family Medicine                      4             Orthopedic Surgery                 1
     Gastroenterology                     1             Pediatrics                         2
     General Surgery                      1             Psychiatry                         1
     Internal Medicine                    4             Radiology                          1
     Neurology                            1

Note: This table shows members of a counterfactual RUC, in which seats are assigned in proportion to
the population of physicians in each specialty. The number of total seats is 25, as it is in the current
RUC. This RUC accommodates the 16 largest specialties; including specialties with fewer physicians
would require a larger RUC. Many smaller specialties lack a seat in this RUC; compare this to the
broader range of specialties that have some representation on the actual RUC over time in Table 1.
Physician population numbers are from Table 1.1 of Association of American Medical Colleges (2016),
accessible at https://www.aamc.org/data/workforce/reports/458480/1-1-chart.html.




                                                 A-22
                                                         Table A-6: Price Transmission Robustness


                                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
                                                                                            Log private price
                     Log Medicare price
                                                          0.331***        0.291***       0.328***       0.338***       0.329***       0.326***
                       × not RUC
                                                           (0.022)         (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.023)        (0.022)        (0.022)
                                                          0.520***        0.513***       0.530***       0.536***       0.524***       0.520***
                       × RUC, low aﬃliation
                                                           (0.023)         (0.027)        (0.023)        (0.024)        (0.023)        (0.023)
                                                          0.642***        0.733***       0.653***       0.657***       0.655***       0.629***
                       × RUC, high aﬃliation
                                                           (0.041)         (0.044)        (0.041)        (0.042)        (0.041)        (0.04)
                                                            -0.016        0.168**          -0.017         -0.003         0.001          -0.048
                     RUC, high vs. low aﬃliation
                                                           (0.067)        (0.069)         (0.067)        (0.067)        (0.068)        (0.066)




A-23
                                                                                                         Private         Total
                     Proxy or predictor (Indexiy )          None             wiy            σ iy                                          All
                                                                                                         volume         volume
                     Adjusted R-squared                     0.852          0.859           0.852          0.987          0.987          0.987


       Note: This table shows results of regressions of log private price on log Medicare price, as in Table 5. Definitions of private and Medicare prices
       and the merging of the two prices are given in Table 5. Column 1 has no proxy or predictor and is identical to Column 5 in Table 5, as written
       in Equation (9). The remaining columns control for indicators of terciles of a proxy and interactions of these indicators with log Medicare price,
       as written in Equation (A-8.21). Columns 2 and 3 consider proxies for information that the average RUC member specialty may have about i,
       specifically wit and σ it , defined as the average specialty share of a service’s utilization and the average service share of a specialty’s utilization,
       given in Equations (A-8.19) and (A-8.20), respectively. Columns 4 and 5 consider proxies of the importance of a service i to private insurance,
       specifically the private insurance volume or the total private insurance and Medicare volume, respectively. Column 6 considers an prediction
       of price transmission based on private volume, total volume, year dummies, Medicare price change year dummies, RUC meeting dummies, and
       specialty share wi . All regressions are run on the same sample of 7,182 observations, weighted by Medicare volume. Standard errors are in
       parentheses. ** denotes significance at the 5% level; *** denotes significance at the 1% level.
                                    Figure A-1: Relationship between Aﬃliation Measures



                                     A: Weighted Euclidean                            B: Manhattan
                        1




                                                                         2
                                0




                                                                         1
               Weighted Euclidean




                                                                     Manhattan
                         −1




                                                                           0
                    −2




                                                                     −1
               −3




                                                                         −2
                        −4




                                      −3    −2     −1     0   1                  −3    −2     −1     0   1
                                              Euclidean                                  Euclidean


                                           C: Correlation                              D: Angular
                                                                         2
                        1




                                                                         1
                           0
               Correlation




                                                                      Angular
                                                                           0
                 −1




                                                                     −1
                        −2




                                                                         −2




                                      −3    −2     −1     0   1                  −3    −2     −1     0   1
                                              Euclidean                                  Euclidean




Note: This figure shows the relationship between diﬀerent aﬃliation measures and the baseline measure
of Euclidean distance. All measures are in the aﬃliation vector space of Medicare quantity shares. In each
panel, the alternative aﬃliation measure is plotted against the Euclidean distance aﬃliation measure, for
the sample of 4,423 proposals. Each dot represents a 5% sample of the data, ordered by the Euclidean
distance aﬃliation measure, and averages of the respective aﬃliation measures are plotted. We provide
further details on the definition of aﬃliation measures in Appendix A-2.




                                                                  A-24
                                 Figure A-2: Mixed Strategy Proposal Probabilities



                        10

                                                                                               0.8


                                                                                               0.6
                        8
                                                                                               0.4


                                                                                               0.2
                        6
     Specialty 2 bias




                                                                                               0.0




                        4




                        2




                        0
                             0     2           4              6       8           10
                                               Specialty 1 bias


Note: This figure shows the probability of proposal participation under θ = 1 by specialty 1 in a mixed
strategy equilibrium, in which specialties do not propose if θ = 0 and mix if θ = 1, described in Appendix
A-3. Proposal probabilities are depicted in the space of bias by specialties 1 and 2. No mixed strategy
equilibria exist in the region shown in pure white.




                                                         A-25
      Figure A-3: Distribution of Specialty-Proposal Propensities among Proposers
            2.5
            2
         Density
            1.5
            1
            .5




                   0             .2           .4           .6             .8            1
                                            Proposal probability



Note: This figure shows the density of specialty-proposal propensities, estimated by a logit model of
248,735 specialty-proposal pairs as described in Appendix A-4. Proposal propensities are shown only for
6,929 actual specialty-proposal pairs over 4,199 proposals.




                                                A-26
        Figure A-4: Distribution of Highly Ranked Specialty-Proposal Propensities



                              A: First Rank                                     B: Second Rank




                                                                      2.5
                  4




                                                                      2
                  3




                                                                1.5
               Density




                                                            Density
                 2




                                                            1
                  1




                                                                      .5
                  0




                                                                      0
                         0   .2    .4    .6     .8   1                      0   .2   .4    .6    .8     1
                              Proposal probability                              Proposal probability


                             C: Third Rank                                      D: Fourth Rank
                                                                      1.5
                  2
                  1.5




                                                                      1
               Density




                                                            Density
                 1




                                                                      .5
                  .5
                  0




                                                                      0




                         0   .2   .4    .6    .8     1                      0   .2    .4    .6     .8       1
                             Proposal probability                               Proposal probability




Note: This figure shows the density of specialty-proposal propensities, estimated by a logit model of
248,735 specialty-proposal pairs as described in Appendix A-4. In each panel, proposal propensities are
shown only for correspondingly ranked specialty for proposals that have at least as many actual proposers.
Specifically, in Panel A, the highest specialty propensity is shown for 4,199 proposals. In Panel B, the
second-highest specialty propensity is shown for 1,524 proposals with at least two proposers. In Panel C,
the third-highest specialty propensity is shown for 558 proposals with at least three proposers. In Panel
D, the fourth-highest specialty propensity is shown for 300 proposals with at least four proposers.




                                                         A-27
 Figure A-5: Distribution of Simulated Set Aﬃliation Relative to Actual Set Aﬃliation
                   1.5
                   1
         Density
                   .5
                   0




                         −1        −.5                0                   .5                 1
                                         Pseudo−affiliation difference



Note: This figure shows the density of 51,763 simulated set aﬃliations, using actual Rt and simulated
proposing specialty sets Si for each proposal i, diﬀerenced by actual set aﬃliation. Simulated specialty-
proposals are derived from a logit model of specialty-proposal propensities, as illustrated in Figures A-3
and A-4. Simulated observations are weighted by their likelihood of being drawn. The weighted standard
deviation of the simulated set aﬃliations is 0.242, and the weighted mean of the diﬀerenced statistic is
−0.015. Details of the simulation algorithm are described in Appendix A-4.




                                                  A-28
                                                                           Figure A-6: Principal Utility and Intermediary Bias



                                                                 A: Costlier Hard Information                                                 B: Cheaper Hard Information
                                                    -.04                                                                         -.04



                                                    -.05                                                                         -.05



                                                    -.06                                                                         -.06



                                                    -.07                                                                         -.07




                             Principal utility uG
                                                                                                          Principal utility uG
                                                    -.08                                                                         -.08




A-29
                                                    -.09                                                                         -.09

                                                           -.1         0           .1           .2   .3                                 -.1         0           .1           .2   .3
                                                                           Intermediary bias bR                                                         Intermediary bias bR
                                                           Note: bS = .3; κ = 1                                                         Note: bS = .3; κ = .1




       Note: This figure shows the government utility (uG ) in our conceptual model of cheap talk, outlined in Section 5, in which the government delegates
       authority to the RUC as an intermediary to decide on proposals by a specialty society. The key parameter is bias of the RUC intermediary, bR ,
       where bR = 0 indicates that the RUC has the same preferences as the government, and bR > 0 indicates that the RUC is biased in favor of the
       specialty society, which prefers a higher price with bias bS > 0. The figure shows bS = 0.3 and bR ∈ [−0.1, 0.3], where bR = 0.3 would imply
       RUC preferences identical to the specialty society. While greater bR results in more distorted decisions (greater bias), greater bR also improves
       communication. bR = 0 only supports a babbling equilibrium with only one communication
                                                                                      ( )             partition. The specialty society is able to invest in
                                                                                                                                          2
       hard information, to reduce the size of the interval from θ ∼ U (0, 1) to θ ∼ U θ, θ , where L ≡ θ − θ, at cost c (L) = κ (1 − L) . In both panels,
       uG is shown in the case where κ = ∞ in dashed lines, and shows that the optimal b∗R is between 0 and 1 (Dessein, 2002). Compared against this
       benchmark, in solid lines, Panel A shows costlier hard information (κ = 1), and Panel B shows cheaper hard information (κ = 0.1).
                   Figure A-7: Distribution of Normalized Log Medicare Price Changes


                   10



                    8



                    6
         Density




                    4



                    2



                    0
                        −.5                            0                                    .5
                                          Change in log Medicare price

                                               RUC               No RUC



Note: This figure shows the density of Medicare price changes associated with a RUC decision (solid
line) or not (dashed line). Medicare prices are defined as the total charges divided by the total volume
of claims for each CPT code and year pair observed in the 100% sample of Medicare claims. The figure
excludes any pair with fewer than 10 claims. Log prices are then normalized by subtracting the average
log Medicare price across CPT codes in a given year, weighted by frequency of claims. The figure plots
the diﬀerence between the normalized log price for a CPT code in a year and the price for the same CPT
code in the previous year.




                                                 A-30
               Figure A-8: Private Price Changes on Medicare Price Changes



                                                               A: High Affiliation

                                   .2
                       Log private price change
                        −.1        0        .1




                                                                                        Coeff = .569 (.00949)
                                   −.2




                                                                                                   N = 1,224

                                                  −.4   −.2              0              .2                .4
                                                              Log Medicare price change


                                                               B: Low Affiliation
                                   .2
                       Log private price change
                        −.1        0        .1




                                                                                         Coeff = .351 (.0126)
                                   −.2




                                                                                                   N = 1,368

                                                  −.4   −.2              0              .2                .4
                                                              Log Medicare price change




Note: This figure is a binned scatterplot of log private price changes on log Medicare price changes arising
from high-aﬃliation RUC proposals (Panel A) and low-aﬃliation RUC proposals (Panel B), where each
dot represents 5% of the data, ordered by Medicare price change. Lines show the best fit through the
data, and the line slopes correspond to coeﬃcients on log Medicare price change in a univariate regression
of log private price change. Coeﬃcients are robust to regression controls similar to those in Table 5. For
consistency with Table 5, observations are weighted by frequency of Medicare claims for a given service
(CPT code). Unweighted observations yield higher coeﬃcients of approximately 1.5 for high-aﬃliation
RUC proposals and 1 for low-aﬃliation RUC proposals.




                                                                    A-31
