                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  IS FERTILITY A LEADING ECONOMIC INDICATOR?

                                       Kasey Buckles
                                      Daniel Hungerman
                                       Steven Lugauer

                                     Working Paper 24355
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24355


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2018




We are grateful for comments from participants in the H2D2 Conference at the University of
Michigan and the NBER Children’s Program meeting, and in the many seminars where we
presented this paper. We also thank Anna Aizer, Martha Bailey, Christiane Baumeister, Hernan
Boedo, Bill Evans, Ana Herrera, and Caroline Hoxby for useful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kasey Buckles, Daniel Hungerman, and Steven Lugauer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Fertility a Leading Economic Indicator?
Kasey Buckles, Daniel Hungerman, and Steven Lugauer
NBER Working Paper No. 24355
February 2018
JEL No. E32,E37,J11,J13

                                         ABSTRACT

Many papers show that aggregate fertility is pro-cyclical over the business cycle. In this paper
we do something else: using data on more than 100 million births and focusing on within-year
changes in fertility, we show that for recent recessions in the United States, the growth rate for
conceptions begins to fall several quarters prior to economic decline. Our findings suggest that
fertility behavior is more forward-looking and sensitive to changes in short-run expectations
about the economy than previously thought.


Kasey Buckles                                   Steven Lugauer
University of Notre Dame                        Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         University of Kentucky
3052 Jenkins-Nanovic Halls                      225F Gatton
Notre Dame, IN 46556                            Lexington, KY 40506
and NBER                                        stevenlugauer@gmail.com
kbuckles@nd.edu

Daniel Hungerman
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3056 Jenkins-Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu
I. Introduction
        On August 7, 2009, the New York Times published an article describing how the Great
Recession had impacted fertility in the United States. The article concluded that the economic
downturn had caused a decrease in fertility, as the annual birth rate fell markedly in 2008, the first
year of the Great Recession (Roberts, 2009). This would not have come as a surprise to most
researchers studying fertility; a large literature across the social sciences has explored the relationship
between fertility and the business cycle, with most studies concluding that fertility is pro-cyclical. 1
        Of course, births in 2008 were conceived in either 2007 or early in 2008. Thus, one
possibility is that the 2008 birth rate fell because of a precipitous drop in conceptions during the
beginning of that year. This drop would be intriguing, as early 2008 was before the severity, extent,
or even existence of the recession had been widely acknowledged. Alternately, the decline could be
explained by a large decrease in conceptions during 2007. But this was before there was any
recession at all.
        In this article, we document changes in aggregate fertility at the onset of recessions. Unlike
most studies, we focus on within-year changes in fertility behavior. Using high-frequency data on
live births in the United States, we identify a new business-cycle fact: the growth rate of conceptions
declines very rapidly at the beginning of economic downturns and the decline starts several quarters
before recessions begin. This pattern holds in the United States for the Great Recession as well as for
the recessions beginning in 1990 and 2001. Our main results are easily conveyed in simple graphs of
national data; but we verify that they are statistically significant and are observed using state-level
data as well. The evidence suggests that the declines in fertility are not driven by a spike in abortions
or fetal deaths, but rather reflect a fall in conceptions. Moreover, the fall in conceptions is large. For
example, the annual growth rate in conceptions fell by more than four percentage points as the
Great Recession began. We also consider changes in conceptions at the end of recessions; however,
there the pattern is more complicated. Along with being a “jobless recovery,” the Great Recession
appears to have been a “baby-less recovery.”
        Large literatures in economics consider fertility and, separately, the onset of recessions. The
business-cycle fact we establish generates a novel connection between these topics and as such it




1 Examples include Adsera (2004, 2011), Adsera and Menendez (2011), Currie and Schwandt (2014), Galbraith and
Thomas (1941), Yule (1906), and Chatterjee and Vogle (2016), among many others. See Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov
(2011) for a survey and see below for discussion of additional studies.

                                                                                                                  1
does not fit neatly into any one area of prior work. Instead, our finding has implications for multiple
lines of research.
         First, we note that despite hundreds of studies on the cyclicality of fertility, scholars have not
noticed the patterns we document here; indeed, several recent and careful papers suggest that the
patterns we find are unlikely to exist. For example, in their well-cited overview of fertility and the
business cycle, Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov (2011) write that during a recession “downward
shifts in fertility start with a short time lag of one to two and a half years,” and that “some time lag
should be expected even if couples responded rapidly to changing economic conditions.” Our
results show that fertility behavior in the U.S. over the last three decades has been much more
forward-looking and quick to respond than this statement implies.
         Our findings also suggest that the choice of economic measure is important, especially for
studies using high-frequency data, which are likely to become increasingly prevalent given the
growing availability of high-quality economic and fertility data. In particular, unemployment is the
most commonly used measure of economic performance in the fertility literature, and its use could
be problematic because unemployment lags the business cycle—an issue we discuss below.
Additionally, some work on the relationship between fertility and economic factors has
acknowledged that measures of fertility could partially be driven by abortions and miscarriages (e.g.,
Dettling and Kearney, 2014). Our discussion of that possibility for our results suggests that
conceptions are the driving factor.
         Next, our results highlight the importance of expectations about the near future in
determining fertility outcomes. Some prior work has considered the relationship between fertility
and economic conditions across generations (Becker and Barro, 1988); some has explored how long-
term economic growth affects long-term fertility trends (Chatterjee and Vogl, 2016); and some has
considered how a woman’s long-term economic prospects interact with contraception use and early
fertility (Bailey, 2006; Goldin and Katz, 2002; Kearney and Levine, 2014). None of this research
focuses on near-future economic conditions. In his seminal study, Becker (1960) argues that the
lengthy “production time” for creating babies means that their production should be relatively
unresponsive to short-term fluctuations. 2 Our work suggests in fact a high level of sensitivity to
near-future events.


2 Becker writes, “It takes about 10 months on the average to produce a pregnancy and this period combined with a nine-
month pregnancy period gives a total average construction period of nineteen months. This period is sufficiently long to
reduce the impact on the demand for children of temporary movements in income” (page 227). When calculating the

                                                                                                                       2
         From a more macro-economic perspective, our paper relates to the growing body of
research connecting changes in family composition to macroeconomic conditions. See Doepke and
Tertilt (2016) and Greenwood, Guner, and Vandenbroucke et al. (forthcoming) for two recent
reviews. Work in this area typically does not focus on business cycle dynamics, with the (very
notable) exception of considering how family composition may affect jobless recoveries. 3 Our
findings suggest that the onset of recessions also should be considered. Relatedly, prior work has
found that recessions can have long-term effects on many economic outcomes (like wages, for
example); we note that the fertility effects also appear to be quite persistent, a conclusion supported
by several other papers (Currie and Schwandt, 2014; Chatterjee and Vogl, 2016; Huttunen and
Kellokumpu, 2016). This fact represents an arguably under-appreciated channel by which the
impact of a recession can persist, possibly for generations.
         Finally, identifying and anticipating the onset of recessions is itself one of the most
important topics of study in macroeconomics. Our work raises the question of whether non-
traditional indicators—like conceptions—might be used for the purpose of forecasting. At the end
of the paper we briefly discuss the possibilities and challenges of tracking conceptions in real time
using scanner data on retail purchases related to fertility and pregnancy. While we leave a thorough
evaluation of fertility- and family-related indicators for future work, our results show they deserve
consideration, both for forecasting and for understanding how economic conditions affect fertility.


II. Evidence on Conceptions and Recessions
II.A. Graphical Evidence
         We begin with graphical evidence relating the aggregate number of conceptions to the onset
of economic recessions. Our data on conceptions come from the National Center for Health
Statistics’ Natality Detail Files. The data set is publicly available and contains all births generating a
birth certificate. Thus, our conceptions measure is constructed using live births; we return to this
when we discuss fetal deaths and abortions in Section III.B. The data include the infant’s month of



cyclicality of fertility (in tables 4 and 5), he brings births forward one year, so that cyclicality is estimated based on
conditions contemporaneous to the time of conception.
3 Greenwood, Seshadri, and Vandenbroucke (2005) consider the interaction between baby booms and busts and the

macro-economy. Also, see Jones and Schoonbroodt (2016). We focus on shorter-run movements. In the longer term,
demographic shifts could alter the very nature of the business cycle. Jaimovich and Siu (2009) and Lugauer (2012) show
that economies with a relatively younger labor force experience larger economic fluctuations; the changes in conceptions
we document, along with concomitant changes in housing and durable-goods purchases at a recession’s onset, represent
one way in which this empirical relationship might manifest itself.

                                                                                                                         3
birth, and a clinical estimate of gestation in weeks, which we use to estimate a month of conception.
         We focus our analysis on conceptions from 1988 through 2015, giving us 108 quarterly
observations. We choose this period for two reasons. First, clinical estimates of gestation are only
available on birth certificates beginning in 1989. Prior to that, gestation was estimated from the
mother’s reported date of her last menstrual period and was imputed in cases where this information
was missing. Second, prior work has shown that the relationship between fertility and economic
fundamentals changed in the 1970s/early 1980s—something we discuss in more detail below. 4
         To facilitate comparisons with other macroeconomic variables, we aggregate the conceptions
data to a quarterly frequency and calculate the annual growth rate in the number of conceptions
                                                            𝑐𝑐𝑡𝑡 −𝑐𝑐𝑡𝑡−4
relative to the same quarter in the previous year:            𝑐𝑐𝑡𝑡−4
                                                                           , where 𝑐𝑐 represents conceptions and 𝑡𝑡

represents the date of each quarterly observation. 5 We work with annual growth rates, rather than
quarterly, because of the seasonality present in conceptions. This measure fits with the preferred
method of investigating fertility and recessions advocated in Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov (2011);
see their discussion on page 269. Below we consider both other measures of birth rates and other
ways to account for the seasonality; our conclusions are robust to these changes.
         The United States averaged a little over one million conceptions per quarter during our
sample period, leading to 109 million births. The annual growth rate in conceptions averaged a scant
0.12 percent, though it varied—often at business cycle frequencies. The standard deviation in the
annual growth rate over our sample equals 1.97 percent, with the largest growth (4.6%) occurring
before the Great Recession began (between the first quarters of 2005 and 2006) and the largest
decline (-4.2%) occurring just as the recession ended (between the last quarters of 2008 and 2009).
          To explore how conceptions related to the recessions, we compare the movements in
aggregate conceptions to start and end dates of the last three recessions (beginning in 1990, 2001,
and 2007) as determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and to movements
in Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the standard measure of an economy’s overall performance.
Using GDP also allows us to relate conceptions to economic outcomes both within and across
business cycles. We use real, chain-weighted, quarterly data on annual GDP growth from the Bureau




4 Consistent with this, when we use the available gestation measures to construct the time series back to 1968, we do not
see a striking anticipatory drop in conceptions for the recessions between 1968 and 1988.
5 Another common approximation of this growth rate is ln(𝑐𝑐 ) − ln(𝑐𝑐
                                                               𝑡𝑡       𝑡𝑡−4 ); using this alternate measure of the rate does
not change the analysis below.

                                                                                                                            4
of Economic Analysis. 6 We use quarterly data, as this is the most frequent GDP data available. 7 We
then use the annual growth rate in this measure to side-step issues of residual seasonality in GDP
(see Moulton and Cowan, 2016) and because we calculated the conception growth rate the same
way. This comparison of GDP and conceptions thus allows us to control for the fact that both of
these variables fluctuate seasonally and that both may trend over time. We consider alternate
detrending techniques and results in levels below.
         In Figure 1, we plot the annual growth rate in births (solid line) against GDP growth (dashed
line). The vertical gray areas correspond to the start and end dates of recessions. Clearly, the
growth rate in conceptions begins to fall prior to the beginning of each recession. 8 The figure also
shows an absence of “false positives” where large drops in conceptions occur away from any
recessions. The magnitude of the drop in conceptions over the business cycle is extraordinarily
large. For example, there are roughly 100,000 fewer births per quarter at the end of the Great
Recession compared to at the beginning (for about a 10% decline). Further, the decline in
conceptions leads the corresponding decline in GDP for each of the three recessions. 9
         Next, we look at the three recessions individually. We start with the Great Recession because
it was such a significant economic event, and then briefly discuss the other two smaller recessions.
Since we are interested in conceptions near the beginning of the recession, a brief recapitulation of
the dates of notable economic events around the start of the Great Recession may be helpful (see
Appendix Table 1 for a detailed timeline). We think it is fair to say that in late 2007 many experts
were optimistic about the prospects of future economic growth, although at that point problems in
(e.g.) the sub-prime mortgage market were known to some. (We explore the role of the housing
market in explaining the patterns we document in more detail later in Section III.A.) The autumn of
2007 saw all-time highs in several stock markets and continued expressions of cautious optimism


6  Data are from BEA NIPA Table 1.11.1. We list the data sources in the references. The chain-weighted deflation
method is a standard way to convert GDP from nominal to real terms because it adjusts the basket of goods used to
calculate the change in the price of goods produced (as opposed to using a fixed basket). The correlation in the business
cycle movements between this measure of GDP and other measures is generally high.
7 We also aggregate the conceptions data to quarterly, even though it is possible to construct monthly conception rates

using the birth certificate data. Appendix Figure 1 shows the time series of monthly growth rates in conceptions.
8 In fact, the absolute number of conceptions begins to decline before any of the recessions begin. Our use of an annual

growth rate somewhat obscures this fact in the figure. If conceptions trend up in the years before a recession, then a
drop in conceptions in a quarter may still be consistent with a positive growth rate relative to four quarters prior. Figure
5 presents results that control for seasonality directly, and the anticipatory drop in the level of conceptions is clearer.
Also, see Appendix Figure 1.
9 We also have used the demographic information that is available in the birth certificate data to reproduce Figure 1 by

mother’s age, by marital status, and by whether the mother was born in the United States. The growth rate of
conceptions falls before each recession for all groups.

                                                                                                                          5
about the economy. In December of 2007, a poll of CEOs found that many business leaders were
optimistic about the future. The recession began in December, as later determined by the NBER,
and by this time, conceptions had already been in decline for months. Bear Stearns did not collapse
until the end of the spring of 2008. Several months later, in September of 2008, Lehman Brothers
collapsed, an event sometimes considered a catalyst in the Great Recession. 10 The total number of
conceptions through the first three quarters of 2008 were already more than 100,000 lower than in
the first three quarters of 2006, and they were falling rapidly.
         Figure 2 plots the annual conception and GDP growth rates, by quarter, from the first
quarter of 2005 to the last quarter of 2012. The information in Figure 2 is the same as in Figure 1,
but zooming in highlights the anticipatory nature of conceptions. The figure clearly shows a decline
in conceptions well ahead of the Great Recession. While GDP displays a decline in growth in the
last quarter of 2007, and negative growth in mid-2008, conception growth turns negative in mid-
2007 and breaks from trend over a year before. The fall in the growth rate of conceptions occurs
before the recession began, and several quarters before the collapse of Bear Stearns (and even
further before the collapse of Lehman Brothers). The magnitude of the decline is also notable—in
proportionate terms, fertility- and economic growth contracted by roughly equal amounts, although
fertility growth rates reach a nadir five quarters—more than a full year—before GDP. Note again
that even after GDP growth rates turn positive in late 2009, fertility rates continue to decline relative
to the prior year. In this sense, the recession has been followed by a “baby-less recovery.”
         Figure 3 shows the recession of 2001, and Figure 4 focuses on the recession of 1990. The
2001 recession began in the first quarter of 2001 and lasted through the 4th quarter of that year. 11
The 1990 recession began in the 3rd quarter of 1990 and lasted through the first quarter of 1991. In
both pictures, we again see conception growth falling below prior-year levels before the recessions
begin. In Figure 3, conception growth rates recover along with GDP growth, but in Figure 4
conceptions continue to fall, with negative growth rates, even after the recession ends (so that the
1990 recession was also followed by a “baby-less” recovery). The anticipatory drop in conceptions
shown in Figure 2, before the most recent recession, is observed in these prior recessions as well.
         Figures 1-4 clearly show the growth rate in conceptions falling prior to each of the last three
recessions. Figure 5 shows the same pattern is present when looking at conceptions in levels (rather


10 See Mian and Sufi (2014) for a discussion of the events surrounding the Great Recession. Their chapter 3 provides a

skeptical discussion of the view of Lehman Brother’s collapse as a driver of the Great Recession.
11 GDP growth does not turn negative because (as discussed earlier) we use annual rather than quarterly growth rates.


                                                                                                                         6
than the growth rate) against the NBER-dated recessions. Since the conceptions data has a strong
seasonal component, we first seasonally adjusted the data using a method similar to that typically
employed with GDP data. 12 Conceptions were falling, in absolute terms, prior to each of the last
three recessions.
         Finally, we also filtered the conceptions and GDP data to remove any potential long-term
trends in the growth rates, leaving only movements at business cycle frequencies (similar to the
seasonal filtering just discussed). 13 Figure 6 plots deviations from trend for both series, using the CF
band pass filter of Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) to remove the trends. Again, a similar pattern
emerges; the deviations from the trend growth rate in conceptions break downward prior to each
recession and turn negative before GDP does.
         Our analysis to this point has used GDP as our measure of the strength of the economy.
However, much of the previous fertility literature uses employment measures, arguing that changes
in employment are most salient for families (and potential families). In Figure 7 we plot the growth
rate in conceptions against changes in the unemployment rate (the basic, unadjusted unemployment
rate produces similar results, as reported in Appendix Figure 2). For the Great Recession,
unemployment is rising slightly at the time conceptions fall, but does not notably increase until late
in 2008, when the recession is well underway. By that point, conceptions had already fallen far
below prior-year values. The large decline in conceptions comes before the large increase in
unemployment. The other two recessions display the same pattern—conception growth starts to fall
before unemployment starts to rise (growth turns positive). Changes to aggregate employment tend
to lag the cycle, whereas conceptions lead downturns in output.


II.B. Statistical Evidence
         Figures 1-7 graphically show that conceptions decline prior to recessions. Here we quantify
the relationship through a few simple statistics. Table 1 reports the correlation between the growth
rate of GDP and the growth rate of conceptions at different lags. The first row reports the


12 We use the X11 procedure to estimate the seasonal components. The Census Bureau developed the X11 seasonal
adjustment method, and it is among oldest and most widely used techniques. The basic idea is to estimate the trend at
each point by the moving average of a symmetric window of the data, and then the trend and seasonal parts can be
separated. As with the BEA GDP adjustment, the X11 procedure may not eliminate all forms of seasonality.
13 Business cycle filtering removes long run trends, such as an on-going decline in birth rates. However, our variables

actually appear to be stationary; the null hypothesis of a unit root, or seasonal unit root, is rejected for both variables at
better than the 1% level in a standard Augmented-Dickey-Fuller test. We used a band-pass filter that also removes high-
frequency movements, e.g., seasonality.

                                                                                                                             7
correlations over the entire sample. GDP growth and conceptions growth are highly correlated, both
contemporaneously and for conceptions lagged 1 to 5 quarters. The correlations range from 0.49 to
0.25. With a sample size of about 100, each of the correlations in the first row are statistically
different from zero at the 1% level.
        The correlations within the entire sample, however, mask variation in the relationship over
the business cycle. The rest of Table 1 shows that the correlation between lagged conceptions and
GDP is high during recessions, but the two variables are less related during other parts of the
business cycle. Row 2 reports the correlations between conceptions and GDP in the first four
quarters of the NBER dated recessions (the 1990 recession only lasted three quarters, but we use
four). While the contemporaneous correlation is actually negative (-0.42), during the recessions, the
correlations between GDP and lagged conception growth are highly positive at lags 2, 3, and 4. The
next three rows break the correlations out for each recession. The degree of correlation varies
across the recessions and sample sizes are small; however, the decline in GDP growth during a
recession is highly correlated with declining conception growth beginning about one year (t-5 to t-4)
earlier, for each recession—just as we saw graphically.
        Rows 6 and 7 of Table 1 demonstrate that the correlations outside of the recession time
periods behave differently. Row 6 reports the correlations, dropping the observations beginning
one quarter before the recession through two quarters after. Compared to row 1, these non-
recession periods have lower correlations at every lag. Row 7 isolates the post-recession period
further by using only the 12 quarters of data after each recession (36 observations total). During
these periods, GDP growth has almost no correlation with conception growth lagged up to four
periods. In a sense, the relationship is asymmetric over the business cycle. During the beginning of
a recession, GDP movements closely follow lagged conception growth. After the recession, the
correlation disappears. As we saw graphically, conceptions growth does not tend to return to pre-
recession levels until after the economic recovery is well underway.
        Next, we report tests of Granger causality. Granger causality is a standard method for
identifying whether movement in time series variable x and past values of x help to predict
movements in another time series y. Granger causality should not be confused with the more usual
concept of causality. We are not arguing here that a decline in conceptions causes a recession.
Instead, we think that the factors behind the last three recessions also had a profound (and very
rapid) effect on fertility decisions. In fact, these factors seem to have impacted fertility decisions



                                                                                                         8
before large parts of the economy. In this way, declining conceptions might be a proxy or early
warning for whatever shocks did create the recessions.
         Table 2 shows the results from a series of Granger causality tests. Our test of Granger
causality boils down to a Wald test applied to one equation in a bi-variate vector autoregression
(estimated by ordinary least squares). Specifically, we regress GDP growth on GDP lagged one
quarter and various lags of conception growth and check to see whether the lagged conception
terms are collectively statistically significant. 14 Letting GDPt denote the growth rate of GDP at date
t, Ct denote conception growth, and et capture unexplained shocks to GDP growth, the relevant
estimation equation is:
                    GDPt = α1GDPt-1 + β1Ct-1 + β2Ct-2 + … + βkCt-k + et                             (1)
                                               H0: β1 = β2 = … βk = 0
The null is then that past conception growth rates (lags 1 to k) do not “Granger cause” GDP
growth, and the stars in Table 2 indicate whether the null can be rejected with the indicated levels of
certainty.
         Row 1 of Table 2 presents the results using the entire sample and different numbers of lags.
For example, the column marked ‘5’ reports the test using lags 1-5 (k = 5) in the regression equation.
When using the entire sample, the null of no Granger causality cannot be rejected at the 10% level in
any of these five model specifications.
         However, the ‘asymmetric’ nature of the correlations over the cycle (as documented in Table
1) makes these results difficult to interpret. The Granger causality results are not necessarily robust
to the number of lags included in the test, nor, as will become evident, changes in the dates. This
sensitivity of the Granger causality test has been found in many other applications (Hamilton 1994,
page 305). Thus, we again consider subsets of the sample and show that over portions of the
business cycle conceptions do appear to Granger cause GDP.
         Row 2 of Table 2 uses only the first 4 quarters of data following the beginning of each of the
3 recessions. Using these 12 data points, and including at least the first five lags of conceptions,
provides evidence in favor of Granger causality (i.e. the null of non-causality can be rejected). Row 3
omits all the recessionary periods plus 1 quarter before and 2 quarters after, and the evidence of
Granger causality disappears. In the first 3 rows, we bolded the entry which corresponds to lowest

14Several different model specifications for the Granger causality tests lead to similar (but not identical) findings. We
have tried to report the more conservative set of results. For example, if we included contemporaneous conception
growth and more lags of GDP as explanatory variables and estimated the model via maximum likelihood, then the
evidence in favor of Granger causality would look stronger.

                                                                                                                            9
value for the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC), but, following convention, in each of these all lags
were included up to the specified number. 15 In rows 4 and 5, we include only the lags of conception
growth that correspond to the model with the lowest AIC of those models examined. Row 5, based
on including conception growth lagged 5 quarters (and not including any other lags) and GDP
growth lagged 1 quarter, indicates a strong rejection of the null. Even using the entire sample in row
4 shows some evidence that conception growth Granger-causes GDP growth, when only the lags
which minimize the AIC are used.
         A large literature (e.g., considering how oil prices effect the economy as in Kilian and
Vigfusson, 2011; Hatemi-J, 2012; Herrera, Lagalo, and Wada, 2015; and Hamilton, 2011) has
encountered a potential ‘asymmetry’ similar to what we see with conceptions. Following this
literature, we test for the presence of an asymmetric relationship in a straightforward way. We define
a new explanatory variable equal to conception growth as long as conception growth is greater than
zero, and equal to zero otherwise. The new variable is meant to capture whether times of positive
or negative conception growth affect GDP differently (or asymmetrically). The new variable is
added into Equation (1). Rows 6 and 7 of Table 2 report the Granger causality test on conceptions
and the new variable (the lags up to 5 periods). Now, with this specification meant to capture the
asymmetry, the null of non-Granger causality can be rejected in the entire sample (row 6) and easily
rejected for the recession years (row 7). Note, a joint hypothesis test on just the lags of the new
variable (i.e. a test on if there is asymmetry present) shows strong evidence that these new variables
have a statistically significant effect. We conclude that the movements of fertility are asymmetric
over the business cycle, mainly because fertility falls prior to the beginning of recessions.
         Collectively, we interpret the statistical results in Tables 1 and 2 as showing a relationship
between conceptions and the onset of recent recessions, but not for recoveries. This pattern
matches the idea of a ‘baby-less’ recovery suggested earlier, and is not entirely surprising. The decline
in births after the Great Recession has been noted by others (cf. Johnson, 2016). And, researchers
have spent considerable effort attempting to explain why other important household outcomes, such
as employment, have recovered so slowly following the Great Recession’s end and why some
outcomes more generally appear to respond to business cycles asymmetrically (e.g., Ferraro 2016).



15 Time series models are often selected to minimize the AIC. The AIC is similar in spirit to the inverse of an adjusted
R2, but with a larger penalty for each additional parameter to be estimated. One reason we report the specifications that
do not minimize the AIC is that the choice of lags to include is sensitive to the criteria employed. For example, the
alternative Schwarz Bayesian Criteria would suggest different specifications, as would an adjusted R2.

                                                                                                                       10
        On the one hand, the two phenomena may be connected—persistently low fertility could
reflect a correctly-anticipated jobless recovery. Returning to Figure 7, this anticipation does not,
however, appear to be an entirely satisfactory answer. While unemployment was persistently high
after the Great Recession ended, it has gradually and steadily fallen. Meanwhile, while fertility
growth rates were much higher in 2011 and 2012 than in the first quarter of 2008, they were still
typically negative. That is, unemployment fell slowly, but fertility did not rise slowly; instead, it
continued to fall. Another possibility is that, as age at birth has risen, births delayed due to a
recession may prove more difficult for older women to retime. Using cohort-level data (which are
more naturally suited to this question than the data we use here) Currie and Schwandt (2014)
provide evidence that short-term effects of unemployment on fertility can be quite persistent even
for younger women. Alternately, the most recent recession occurred in an era where long-term
contraception was more widely available, and its use could slow a rebound in the birth rate. We
know of no rigorous work on this, but note evidence (Daniels et al., 2015) that use of long-acting
reversible contraception grew dramatically in the years around the Great Recession.
        Another possible explanation for this asymmetry over the business cycle is an asymmetry
inherent in the timing of conception. Couples who start attempting conception may not achieve
immediate (or even eventual) success. Thus, if many couples at the end of a recession begin efforts
to conceive, this may appear gradually in the data. If, however, many couples stop efforts to conceive
in a certain period, this will be immediately visible even if some efforts to stop (e.g., efforts to
contracept) are unsuccessful. Figure 2 suggests that the decline in fertility continued more than a
year after the most recent economic recovery began, a sufficiently long period that it is doubtful that
typical time-to-conception delays could be the sole driving force, but such delays could still be part
of the story.
        Finally, we have replicated the analysis from Tables 1 and 2 using state-level data. Although
aggregate business cycle fluctuations drive much of the state variation, there exist differences in the
timing and severity of business cycles. These results exploit the cross-sectional variation across states
along with the temporal variation used so far. To conduct the analysis, we use the restricted-access
versions of the Natality Detail Files, which include the mother’s state of residence, to construct a
panel of quarterly state-by-state conception growth rates. State-level output (GSP, or gross state
product) time series are available quarterly only for recent years. Therefore, the state GSP analysis
only covers the Great Recession.



                                                                                                        11
         Appendix Tables 2 and 3 report the results. Similar to our results based on national output,
state-level output is correlated with conceptions at a one- to two-quarter lag during the Great
Recession, conceptions “Granger cause” fluctuations in output at the state level, and the recession
periods drive these findings. These results also help us rule out that the decline in fertility prior to
the national recession came from contemporaneous (rather than anticipatory) changes in fertility in a
subset of states that entered into a recession before the rest of the country.
         Finally, we have redone the entire analysis using state-level unemployment data in place of
GSP. As an economic indicator, unemployment can lag the business cycle, but state-by-state
unemployment rates are available quarterly throughout our time frame. Consistent with the
previous results, state-level conception growth and unemployment are more correlated in
recessionary periods than in recoveries, and lags of conception growth are more highly correlated
with unemployment than contemporaneous measures during recessions. Collectively, we interpret
the statistical results in the appendix tables as showing a relationship between conceptions and the
onset of recent recessions, but not necessarily for recoveries.


III. Understanding the Forward-Looking Nature of Conceptions
III.A. Comparisons to Other Leading Economic Indicators
         We do not interpret our finding that changes in conceptions precede economic downturns
as evidence that people have a supernatural ability to see the future. Instead, we think that the
factors behind the last three recessions also had a profound and rapid effect on fertility decisions. In
fact, these factors seem to have impacted fertility decisions before large parts of the economy. We
next consider how changes in conceptions compare to three widely-watched economic indicators:
the consumer confidence index, purchases of personal durable goods, and growth in housing prices.
We focus on these indicators for brevity, but we have considered others; doing so generally confirms
the results shown here. 16 The comparison of conceptions to other indicators is instructive as it
highlights how our patterns compare to those of other activities that are known to be forward-
looking. Indeed, since conception is at least sometimes unintended and even when done by
forward-looking agents is subject to uncertain timing, it would not be surprising if conceptions

16A few are worth highlighting. Oil prices increased 5-fold during our period of study, but with large swings that
sometimes coincided with the business cycle. We also have compared conceptions to the Consumer Sentiment Index
and the uncertainty measures of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016) and Jurado, Luvvigson, and Ng (2015). Conception
growth declines at the same time or prior to the movements in these other indicators for each recession. As Jurado,
Luvvigson, and Ng (2015) note, their uncertainty measure stays relatively high even as recessions end. This continued
uncertainty may be another factor contributing to the slow rebound in conceptions at the end of recessions.

                                                                                                                        12
performed worse than other indicators. In fact, we find that conceptions perform as well or better.
In this way, declining conceptions might be a proxy or early warning for whatever shocks did create
the recessions.
         Figure 8 plots the growth rate in conceptions against the consumer confidence index. The
index is based on a monthly survey of households’ optimism over the economy as measured by five
questions on the current and future business climate, the household’s current and future
employment outlook, and the family’s outlook for future income. The Federal Reserve Board has
used the index as a way to gauge consumer sentiment when considering interest rate changes. The
stock market, too, may react to movements in the index. Figure 9 plots the seasonally adjusted
growth rate in the purchase of personal durable goods (taken from NIPA table 2.3.1 on the BEA
website and transformed into a growth rate over the preceding year); these are goods typically
purchased to be consumed over a long period of time, e.g., washing machines, dishwashers, and
motor vehicles. Durable purchases are part of the consumption component of GDP and have
strong cyclical properties. Mankiw (1985) states, “Understanding fluctuations in consumer purchases
of durables is vital for understanding economic fluctuations generally;” also see Baxter (1996).
         Figure 10 plots our conception measure against the growth rate of the Case-Shiller Housing
Price Index, a repeat-sales index calculated by Standard & Poor’s. The Great Recession has been
closely associated with the housing market, and Dettling and Kearney (2014) hypothesize that a fall
in housing prices leads to a decline in fertility among current homeowners and an increase among
renters and first-time homebuyers; their results show that the first effect dominates.
         These figures show that for each of the last three recessions the downturn in conceptions
coincides with or even anticipates these indicators. Each figure plots the two trends on separate axes
(with conception growth on the left), as the magnitude of the variations differ. 17 In Figure 8, the fall
in conception growth appears to precede the decline in confidence prior to the Great Recession.
Conceptions also turn negative slightly before consumer confidence prior to the 1990 recession, as
well as before the 2001 recession. The drop in conceptions preceding the Great Recession happens
at about the same time or slightly before the drop in durables purchases in Figure 9. Conception
growth moves closely with durables for the 1990 recession, but conception growth goes negative
before the fall in durables growth for the next two recessions. Figure 10 shows that housing prices
started to fall before the Great Recession—at about the same time as the largest declines in

17The observation that durables show much greater variation in the face of the business cycle than does fertility goes
back at least to Becker (1960).

                                                                                                                         13
conceptions. But there is not an anticipatory decline in housing-price growth before the 1990
recession, or any decline at all for the 2001 recession where growth stays positive throughout.
Overall, prior to the onset of a recession conceptions decline close to or before each indicator.
            The noteworthy relative performance of conceptions indicates that conceptions may share
the forward-looking qualities observed for indicators like consumer confidence and durables
purchases. As Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbot said in 2002, “children are the ultimate vote
of confidence in the future.” 18 And children are in some ways similar to a very costly durable good;
indeed Becker (1960) described children in this way. But if the forward-looking aspect of fertility
decisions compares so well to other indicators, and is further acknowledged by policy-makers and
academics, one might wonder why prior research failed to document the anticipatory drops in
fertility we have shown here. Further, perhaps these drops were driven not by anticipatory changes
in conceptions but by other fertility outcomes, such as abortion. We consider these issues next.


III.B. Abortions and Fetal Deaths
            Our estimates of conceptions come from live births. However, a “missing birth” could be
due to an abortion or fetal death, rather than a missing conception. Of course, these channels are
not mutually exclusive—conceptions could fall prior to the recession and, upon conceiving, a greater
fraction of women could choose to abort or experience a fetal death. It is important to consider the
relative importance of these channels if we wish to understand the extent to which the patterns
observed above represent forward-looking behavior. For example, if our results are driven by
abortions rather than conceptions, fertility might be less forward-looking by about one quarter, since
the abortion decision usually takes place one to four months after conception. Fetal deaths also
tend to occur early in pregnancy. However, if fetal deaths explain most of the fertility pattern, then
that would suggest another channel altogether—one that is driven by physiological factors (perhaps
induced by stress) rather than by a conscious decision about fertility.
            We consider fetal deaths and abortions in turn. Fetal deaths at less than 20 weeks gestation
are referred to as miscarriages; those after 20 weeks are considered stillbirths. Over ninety-five
percent of fetal deaths are miscarriages, so we focus on them. Miscarriages may provide a
quantitatively important channel because fifteen to twenty percent of pregnancies end in a
miscarriage (Sagili and Divers, 2007). About half of miscarriages are due to chromosomal


18   This quote is referenced in both Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov (2011) and Martin (2004).

                                                                                                       14
abnormalities of the fetus, and can be considered effectively random. However, stress and nutrition,
which could be related to economic downturns, have been identified as risk factors for miscarriage
in early pregnancy (Atik, Hepworth-Jones, and Doyle, 2010). 19
         We begin with a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation. A miscarriage rate of 20 percent
would imply that there are as many as one million miscarriages each year in the United States. For
miscarriages to explain the decrease of 70,000 births between 2007 and 2008, we would need to see
miscarriages increase by about seven percent. If half of miscarriages are effectively random, then the
non-random portion would need to increase fourteen percent. We view this as unlikely, but to
explore this further we turn to data on miscarriages.
         Unfortunately, we have been unable to find time series data on miscarriages at the national
level. 20 However, a few states do collect information on fetal deaths; we were able to acquire data
from the state of New York (excluding New York City). 21 Fetal deaths appear in the data if there is
a fetal death certificate, which can be issued by a medical facility or by a funeral home. The data
include the number of fetal deaths, by month of occurrence and gestation at the time of death. We
construct approximate measures of the number of fetal deaths by quarter of conception, for the
years 1993-2012. We limit the sample to fetal deaths occurring in the first trimester because these
are most likely to be affected by changes in stress or nutrition; these deaths account for over three-
fourths of all fetal deaths in our data and our results are similar if we drop this restriction. Our
restricted sample includes approximately 100,000 first-trimester fetal deaths in New York State over
this period. Fetal deaths are under-reported; this is about 22% of the number we would expect to
see if twenty percent of pregnancies end in a miscarriage.
         We construct annual growth rates in first-trimester fetal deaths by quarter of conception,
analogous to the growth rates in conceptions used above. The trend is shown in Figure 11. There is


19 Another possibility is that stress could affect conceptions by affecting sexual behaviors (by causing people to have
more or less sex) or by affecting the probability of conception conditional on sex. While we are not able to test this,
either explanation would still mean that future economic conditions are having real effects with timing that is consistent
with our results.
20 We did explore using the National Survey of Family Growth, which has retrospective information on fetal deaths for

women age 15-44. Even when combining data from surveys between 1995 and 2010, the sample size was still too small
to be able to distinguish meaningful changes in the miscarriage rate from noise at a quarterly frequency. The CDC
publishes annual national-level data for fetal deaths, although unlike the data we present from New York, this source of
fetal-death data omits deaths at less than 20 weeks gestation. Reassuringly, the national fetal-death data also shows no
annual increase whatsoever around the time of the Great Recessions (Gregory, MacDorman, Martin, 2014).
21 We thank Larry Schoen of the New York Department of Health for helping us compile this information. These data

exclude New York City, which has a separate vital statistics system; we were unsuccessful in obtaining records from
them. We also collected data from Virginia (and thank Lewis Hughes for help with this effort), but we were unable to
use these data due to issues with inconsistent data collection over time.

                                                                                                                        15
no meaningful increase in this growth rate before either the 2001 or the 2007 recession. We
interpret these data with caution because they come from a subset of one state, and because fetal
deaths are under-reported. 22 Nevertheless, the data provide no evidence of an increase in
miscarriages leading up to recessions that is anywhere near the magnitude required to explain a
significant portion of the observed decrease in births. As an additional check, we used the birth
certificate data to construct the time series in the sex ratio. Because male fetuses are known to be
more vulnerable to adverse conditions in utero (Catalano et al., 2005), if our results are driven by
stress-induced miscarriages, we might also see a lower male/female sex ratio heading into recessions.
We found no evidence of this. Overall, data on miscarriages, patterns in the gender composition of
birth, and an appeal to the basic magnitude of our fertility drop all suggest that the fall in pre-
recession births is not driven by miscarriages.
         Next, do abortions increase before or during recessions? We are unaware of a good source
of intra-year abortion data, and even annual national-level abortion data must be estimated. Table 3
reports annual estimates from Jones and Jerman (2014). The total number of abortions is in the first
column (in 1000s), the abortion rate is in the second column (abortions per 1000 women ages 15-
44), and the ratio of abortions per 100 live births is in the third column. The data go from 1991 to
2011 and show an overall long-term decline in abortions.
         Looking closely at the data around the Great Recession, we see that abortions are somewhat
flat between 2005 and 2008, and are essentially unchanged in 2008 relative to the year before—and
that the 2007 and 2008 levels are both lower than the number of abortions in 2006. The abortion
rate is similarly stable across these years. There is a slight increase in the abortion ratio in 2008, but
this is unsurprising since births declined (the denominator decreased). There is also no break from
trend in any of the abortion measures around the 2001 recession. Moreover, a quick look at the
magnitudes in the table indicates that abortion is unlikely to play a quantitatively important role.
Abortions increased by 3,000 from 2007 to 2008—while births fell by nearly 70,000 (NVSS, 2015).
Even a tenfold increase in the number of abortions beyond what is reported in Table 3 would fail to
account for most of the decline we identify. The cyclical patterns we observe are not driven by
abortions.


22One might wonder if conceptions in the state of New York display the anticipatory behavior shown with national data
earlier. We used restricted-access Natality Detail Files with state identifiers to construct conceptions per quarter for
New York, analogous to the national measure constructed above. Our data agreement does not allow us to report the
time series for a single state, but we were able to confirm that the trend in conceptions in New York qualitatively
matches the national trend.

                                                                                                                     16
IV. Discussion
        This paper shows that conceptions fall before recessions begin, and that conceptions
compare well with other economic indicators in anticipating recessions. In their 2011 survey of the
literature, Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov (2011) characterize the relationship between fertility and
the business cycle as one in which fertility responds to changes in GDP or unemployment with a lag
(or in a few exceptional cases, concurrently). How can we reconcile our finding that changes in
conceptions lead the business cycle with this large body of research? We think there are three issues.
First, we note that the majority of the work cited by Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov uses data
aggregated to the annual level. While in many cases this is due to a lack of data at a higher
frequency, the result is that one would struggle to identify the relationship we document here (unless
one did so by implication, as was the case with the New York Times article mentioned in the
introduction). We show this in Figure 12, where we replicate our own results using annual rather
than quarterly data. For all three recessions, the annual time series conceals the anticipatory nature
of conceptions—in fact, for the first and third recessions, conception growth appears to be at
relative highs right before the recessions begin. The problem is even worse if one were to use data
on births rather than conceptions.
        A second issue concerns the measure of economic activity. Many studies in this literature
consider employment as a measure of the health of the economy (e.g., Ahn and Mira, 2002;
Noguera, Golsch, and Steinhage, 2002; Adsera, 2004; Adsera, 2011; D’Addio and d’Ercole, 2005;
Adsera and Menendez, 2011; Schaller, forthcoming; Andersen and Ozcan, 2013; Ananat, Gassman-
Pines, and Gibson-Davis, 2013; Huttenen and Kellokumpu, 2017; Currie and Schwandt, 2014). In
situations where employment significantly lags the overall economy, and where conceptions lead the
economy, use of employment could produce misleading or even reversed results. Looking again at
Figure 7 illustrates this possibility. The figure shows conceptions falling prior to an increase in
unemployment and a sharp break in trend for conceptions several quarters before unemployment
starts to rise. If conceptions lead recessions, and unemployment lags it, then over certain ranges, the
two trends may appear positively related. Moreover, prior work has generally not noticed that the
economy-to-fertility relationship varies over the business cycle. Our analysis thus confirms that
fertility is pro-cyclical but shows that the standard fertility-is-pro-cyclical story is potentially
misleading because: (a) declines ascribed to a recession may have been partly anticipatory, occurring
as the downturn began and not during, and (b) the fertility-business-cycle relationship can change



                                                                                                       17
over the cycle. This implies that future work should consider inter-year-data, at different points in
the cycle, using outcomes beyond employment at the time of conception.
        Third, this literature spans several decades, or even centuries. Taking this evidence as a
whole, we agree with Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov’s assessment that fertility has historically
fallen after economic downturns are already underway. As stated earlier, when we extend our own
analysis back to the late 1960s, we do not observe the sharp declines in conceptions before
recessions between 1968 and 1988 (though the data quality is lower during this period). The
anticipatory nature of fertility has become more pronounced in recent recessions, so that we are
documenting a newly emerging business cycle fact.
        Indeed, a number of studies find that fertility’s relation to other socioeconomic phenomena
changed during the 1970s/early 1980s (Ahn and Mira, 2002; Billari and Kohler, 2004; D’Addio and
d’Ercole, 2005; Macunovich, 1996; Adsera, 2004; Myers, forthcoming). Scholars have identified
several possible factors to explain the change, including contraception or other timing technologies,
women’s participation in the workforce, and labor market institutions. Further, the recessions we
focus on may have affected some economic outcomes (e.g., labor productivity) in ways different
from older recessions (Ng & Wright, 2013); the explanation may thus depend upon the nature of
modern recessions themselves. The fact that our results hold for the most recent recessions but not
for more historical ones fits well with extant work.
        Finally, in discussing several variables as forecasters Sims (2012) notes that “measures of
financial distress are important, and (economists) have been sifting through candidates for
measuring them better.” However, the performance of such indicators has come under question,
and Frankel and Saravelos (2012) conclude that “a consistent theme of the most recent literature is
that the leading indicators that most frequently appeared in earlier reviews are not statistically
significant indicators of crisis incidence.” Essentially all of the many indicators considered concern
financial and other macroeconomic variables (for further discussion of recent papers, see Ng and
Wright, 2013; Frankel and Saravelos, 2012; and Gades Rivas and Perez-Quiros, 2015). Our results
raise the question: could conceptions be used in practice as an indicator to forecast economic
downturns?
        An obvious challenge is that conceptions are difficult to measure in real time, even
compared to other indicators like consumer confidence or durables purchases. Using the measure
we have constructed here, changes in conceptions would not be observable for at least nine months
after they occurred, and even more in reality, given lags in the availability of the birth certificate data.

                                                                                                         18
One possible option is to use consumer purchases of goods that are especially likely to be bought
(or not bought) by those who are attempting to conceive or who are newly pregnant. These
purchases are tracked with high frequency by retail firms using scanner technology and might be
used to track conceptions in near-real time.
        We explored this possibility using Nielsen Retail Scanner Data from 2006 to 2012, which
provides weekly purchasing volumes for products by universal product code (UPC), for over 35,000
retail stores. 23 This period includes the Great Recession but few pre-recession observations. There
are over 2.6 million UPCs, grouped into over 1,100 product categories. We selected data from the
following product categories: ovulation and fertility test kits, pregnancy test kits, contraception,
multivitamins (which includes prenatal vitamins), other vitamins, pads, and tampons. The latter two
are included as women’s menstrual cycles are affected by both pregnancy and by the use of some
methods of contraception.
        We pursued two strategies. First, we calculated the average number of daily purchases in
each category, by quarter, from 2006 to 2012. We then created annual growth rates (for each
quarter, using the same method as for conceptions) and compared the trends over time. Using this
method, the product category that appeared to track conceptions most closely was ovulation and
fertility test kits (which averaged approximately 200-250 thousand purchases per quarter).
Appendix Figure 3 shows the results. Note that while the growth rate in ovulation kit purchases was
still positive as the Great Recession began (it was a growing market at the time), both series trend
downward from 2007 to 2009. The series are also closely linked at the end of the sample, with the
growth rate of ovulation kit purchases reaching a peak in the fourth quarter of 2011, one quarter
before conceptions peak.
        Our second strategy was to consider purchases in these same categories, but with a more
statistical approach for identifying which items best predict conception growth. Specifically,
following the method developed in Belloni et al. (2012), we employed a Lasso technique, letting the
Lasso estimation identify whether the growth rates of several fertility-related items could predict
contemporaneous changes in conception. The Lasso technique calculates regression coefficients by
minimizing the standard sum-of-squared-errors plus a penalty term equal to the (weighted) sum of
the absolute values of the included coefficients. The weights and penalties are determined by the
data (as proposed in Belloni et al., 2012). The variables included were the growth rates of the


 The data were accessed via an agreement between the University of Notre Dame and the Marketing Data Center at
23

The University of Chicago Booth School of Business.

                                                                                                                 19
following: contraception purchases, pregnancy tests, ovulation kits, menstrual pads, multivitamins,
and non-multi-vitamins. Including a more aggressive set of candidate controls (e.g., including levels,
or lagged rates) typically produced similar results, although sometimes no variables were selected.
           We then took variables selected by the Lasso (i.e., given non-zero coefficients in the Lasso
estimation) and produced fitted values of conception growth from an OLS regression of conception
growth on the selected variables: a post-Lasso estimate. The Lasso estimator selected only two
variables for inclusion and both are interesting: growth in tampons and growth in non-multi-
vitamins. Further, the post-Lasso OLS regression gave a positive coefficient to tampon growth. If
conceptions drop, one might expect more menstruating (non-pregnant) women rather than fewer,
and thus growth, rather than decline, in tampon purchases. The data instead show both dropping
together before the Great Recession. One possibility is that some women avoided pregnancies by
using methods such as long-acting-reversible contraception that prevented both births and
menstruation, but we are unaware of evidence of a spike in the use of such methods in mid-2007
(although their popularity increased greatly during the recession overall, as mentioned earlier).
Another possibility is that tampon and vitamin purchases respond to or even predict business cycle
fluctuations directly, absent any relationship to conceptions. The Lasso technique described here
could be used to identify other products or product categories that have this feature.
           The post-Lasso estimate is plotted along with actual conception growth in Appendix Figure
4 and its fit is remarkably good. Notably, both trends begin with small positive values and both
become negative in the third quarter of 2007. Both then stay negative every quarter until the fourth
quarter of 2010, when both become positive again. The post-Lasso OLS regression produces an R-
squared (on 2 covariates) of 0.48; these two covariates explain half the variation in conception
growth. 24
           We view this as an exploratory exercise. Our aim is not to identify the most effective
strategy for tracking conceptions in real time, but rather to provide proof-of-concept evidence that
data on consumer purchases might be used to do so. 25 In addition to addressing the lag for
observing conceptions, this approach also could help track conceptions in settings where other


24 There are 24 quarterly observations, and the adjusted-R-squared is 0.43.
25We also explored the possibility of using historical data on internet searches for terms related to pregnancy or
conception. We found that some terms did seem to be correlated with conceptions (“pregnancy” or “trying to
conceive”), but other similar searches (“have a baby”) did not. We also found that values in google-trends data on
internet searches appeared to change over time, even when the period of study was held constant, raising issues of
replicability. We concluded that this strategy also has potential for the future, but that the scanner data has more
predictive content at this time.

                                                                                                                       20
leading indicators are less well-measured, such as in developing countries (Henderson, Storyegard,
and Weil, 2012). This exercise also illustrates an important implication of our paper: quantifiable
phenomena beyond standard financial and economic measures have enormous potential for refining
our ability to measure, anticipate, and understand recessions and related economic behavior.


V. Conclusion
        In this paper, we use high-frequency data from birth certificates in the U.S. to document a
new business cycle fact: the growth rate of conceptions declines prior to economic downturns and
the decline occurs several quarters before recessions begin. Our measure of conceptions is
constructed using live births; we present evidence suggesting that our results are indeed driven by
changes in conceptions and not by changes in abortion or miscarriage. Conceptions compare well
with other economic indicators in anticipating recessions. Overall, the relationship between fertility
and the economy appears to differ before the start of a recession and at (or after) the end of a
recession. In the large literature on fertility, we know of no prior work that reaches these
conclusions.
        Our paper focuses on the U.S. experience. We leave to future work a consideration of
outcomes in other countries. While there can be important differences between, for example, labor
market institutions across countries, the pro-cyclical behavior of fertility has been found in many
settings. Whether the particular anticipatory behavior we identify here holds in other countries, we
cannot say. If not, then fertility patterns may point to reasons why business cycles unfold
differently, depending on time and place.
        Our results also suggest that greater care be taken to capture expectations—or even
realizations—of the future. Our work is not the first to call attention to the fact that fertility is a
forward-looking, or more generally a dynamic, decision. The well-known survey by Hotz, Klerman,
and Willis (1997) describes dynamic work on fertility as “nascent.” And more recently, for example,
Kearney and Levine (2014) argue that variation in early non-marital childbearing can be partly
explained by the sense of hopelessness created from income inequality; their discussion implicitly
recognizes the importance of future economic outcomes, as captured via present economic
circumstances. Other studies closer to our work use present economic conditions as a way to
represent future outcomes. For example, Fokkema et al. (2008) look at fertility and annual
consumer confidence lagged two years in the Netherlands (see also Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov,
2011), and several studies emphasize the importance of contemporary unemployment as

                                                                                                          21
representing uncertainty about the future (e.g.,. Noguera, Golsch, and Steinhage, 2002). A number
of studies consider long-term effects of economic conditions on fertility over a period of years, such
as Lovenheim and Mumford (2013), Huttenen and Kellokumpu (2017), and Chatterjee and Vogl
(2016). Understanding how an economic shock impacts fertility many years later is of course
worthwhile, but does not gainsay the point that fertility can be—and indeed is—anticipatory of
economic conditions. Researchers should consider carefully the importance of near-future
conditions when modeling fertility. 26
         Our work raises several other relevant topics for future work, including the cause of baby-
less recoveries and the viability of fertility or other demographic trends as forecasters. Just as
importantly, future work on fertility and the economy should take care when choosing the frequency
of data and the measure of economic performance. Our results show that the use of novel data in
this area has the potential to shed new light on well-studied topics.




26This point goes beyond discussions of cyclicality of fertility. In a recent paper, Buckles and Hungerman (2013)
consider maternal characteristics of newborns and find that anticipated circumstances at birth (e.g., weather) do a far
better job than circumstances at conception in explaining these characteristics. Future research on fertility should
consider the noteworthy explanatory power of conditions subsequent to conception for characterizing the conceptions
themselves.

                                                                                                                      22
References
Adsera, Alicia. 2004. “Changing Fertility Rates in Developed Countries. The Impact of Labor
       Market Institutions,” Journal of Population Economics 19, 17-43.
Adsera, Alicia. 2011. “Where are the Babies? Labor Market Conditions and Fertility in Europe,”
       European Journal of Population 27, 1-32.
Adsera, Alicia, and Alicia Menendez. 2011. “Fertility Changes in Latin America in Periods of
       Economic Uncertainty,” Population Studies 65(1): 37-56.
Ahn, Namkee, and Pedro Mira. 2002. “A Note on the Changing Relationship between Fertility and
       Female Employment Rates in Developed Countries,” Journal of Population Economics 15, 667-
       682.
Ananat, Elizabeth Oltmans, Anna Gassman-Pines, and Christina Gibson-Davis. 2013.
       “Community-Wide Job Loss and Teenage fertility: Evidence from North Carolina,”
       Demography 50, 2151-2171.
Andersen, Signe Hald, Berkay Ozcan. 2013. “The Effects of Unemployment on Fertility,” Working
       Paper.
Andrews, Edmund L. 2007. “Analysts Cut Expectations for Growth,” The New York Times, August
       24.
Atik, R. B., Hepworth-Jones, B. E., & Doyle, P. 2010. “Risk factors for miscarriage,” in Early
       Pregnancy, Cambridge University Press.
Bailey, Martha. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women's
       Life Cycle Labor Supply” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1): 289-320.
Baker, Scott, Nicolas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Baxter, Marianne. 1996. “Are Consumer Durables Important for Business Cycles?,” The Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 78(1): 147-155.
Becker, Gary, and Robert Barro. 1988. “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of Fertility,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, 1-25.
Becker, Gary. 1960. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility,” in Demographic and Economic Change in
       Developed Countries, Columbia University Press.
Belloni. A., D. Chen, V. Chernozhukov, and C. Hansen. 2012. “Sparse Models and Methods for
       Optimal Instruments with an Application to Eminent Domain,” Econometrica 80(6), 2369-
       2429.

                                                                                                 23
Bernanke, Ben S. 2007. “The Economic Situation and Outlook,” Statement before the Joint
        Economic Committee on November 8.
Billari, Francesco C., and Hans-Peter Kohler. 2004. “Patterns of Low and Lowest-low Fertility in
        Europe,” Populations Studies, 58(2): 161-176.
Bloomberg News. 2007. “Takeover Talk Helps Lift TSX; Dow, S&P Indexes Finish at Records;
        Alcoa Reports,” The Montreal Gazette, October 10.
Buckles, Kasey, and Daniel Hungerman. 2013. “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old
        Questions, New Answers,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(3), 711-724.
Business World. 2008. “Economists Say US Now in a Recession,” published in Business World
        Digest, March 14.
Catalano, R., Bruckner, T., Anderson, E., & Gould, J. B. 2005. “Fetal Death Sex Ratios: a Test of the
        Economic Stress Hypothesis,” International Journal of Epidemiology, 34(4), 944-948.
Chatterjee, Shoumitro, and Tom Vogl. 2016. “Growth and Childbearing in the Short-and Long-
        Run.” Working paper.
The Christian Science Monitor. 2013. “Timeline of the Great Recession,” September 8.
Christiano, L. J., and T. J. Fitzgerald. 2003. “The Band Pass Filter,” International Economic Review, 44,
        435-465.
The Conference Board. “Consumer Confidence Index,” (accessed November 20, 2016).
Currie, Janet, and Hannes Schwandt. 2014. “Short- and Long-term Effects of Unemployment on
        Fertility,” PNAS 111(41): 14734-14739.
D’Addio, Anna C., and Marco M. d’Ercole. 2005. “Trends and Determinants of Fertility Rates: The
        Role of Policies,” OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 27.
Daniels, Kimberly, Jill Daugherty, Jo Jones, and William Mosher. 2015. “Current Contraceptive Use
        and Variation by Selected Characteristics Among Women Aged 15-44: United States, 2011-
        2013.” CDC National Health Statistics Reports Number 86.
Dettling, Lisa J., and Melissa S. Kearney. 2014. “House Prices and Birth Rates: The Impact of the
        Real Estate Market on the Decision to have a Baby,” Journal of Public Economics 110, 82-100.
Doepke, M. and M. Tertilt. 2016. “Families in Macroeconomics,” in The Handbook of Macroeconomics
        v.2B. Elsevier.
Federal Reserve, 2007a. Federal Reserve Press Release on October 31.
Federal Reserve, 2007b. Federal Reserve Press Release on December 11.
Ferraro, Domenico. 2016. “The Asymmetric Cyclical behavior of the U.S. Labor Market,” Working

                                                                                                        24
       Paper.
Fokkema, Tineke, Helga de Valk, Joop de Beer, and Coen van Duin. 2008. “The Netherlands:
       Childbearing within the context of a “Poldermodel” society,” Demographic Research 19(21),
       743-793.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and George Saravelos. 2012. “Are Leading Indicators of Financial Crises Useful for
       Assessing Country Vulnerability? Evidence from the 2008 - 09 Global Crisis,” Journal of
       International Economics 87(2): 216 - 231.
Gades Rivas, Marea, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros. 2015. “The Failure to Predict the Great Recession—
       A View through the Role of Credit,” Journal of the European Economic Association 13(3): 534-
       559.
Galbraith, Virginia, and Dorothy Thomas. 1941. “Birth Rates and the Interward Business Cycles”
       Journal of the American Statistical Association 36, 465-476.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
       Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 110(4): 730-770.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. Forthcoming. “Family
       Economics Writ Large” Journal of Economic Literature.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2005. “The Baby Boom and
       Baby Bust” American Economic Review 95, 183-207.
Gregory, Elizabeth, Marian MacDorman, and Joyce Martin. 2014. “Trends in Fetal and Perinatal
       Mortality in the United States, 2006-2012,” NCHS Data Brief No. 169, November.
Hagenbaugh, Barbara. 2007. “CEOs Feeling More Upbeat; Figures Suggest Economic Growth,”
       USA Today, December 5.
Hamilton, James D. 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press.
Hamilton, James D. 2011. “Nonlinearities and the Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Prices,”
       Macroeconomic Dynamics (15) 364-378.
Hatemi-J. 2012. “Asymmetric Causality Tests with an Application,” Empirical Economics (43) 447-
       456.
Henderson, J Vernon, Adam Storyegard, and David N. Weil. 2012. “Measuring Economic Growth
       from Outer Space,” American Economic Review 102(2) 994-1028.
Herrera, Ana María, Latika Gupta Lagalo, and Tatsuma Wada. 2015. “Asymmetries in the Response
       of Economic Activity to Oil Price Increases and Decreases?,” Journal of International Money and
       Finance (50) 108-133.

                                                                                                      25
Hotz, Joseph V., Jacob Alex Klerman, Robert J. Willis. 1997. “The Economics of Fertility in
       Developed Countries,” in Rosenzweig and Stark (eds.) Handbook of Population and Family
       Economics. Elsevier Science.
Huttenen, Kristiina, and Jenni Kellokumpu. 2017. “The Effect of Job Displacement on Couples’
       Fertility Decisions,” Journal of Labor Economics 34(2, pt 1), 403-330.
Irwin, Neil. 2007. “Hiring, Wages Increase Modestly; Housing-Credit Fallout Appears to be
       Confined,” Washington Post, December 8.
Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry E. Siu. 2009. “The Young, the Old, and the Restless: Demographics and
       Business Cycle Volatility,” American Economic Review 99(3), 804-826.
Johnson, Kenneth. 2016. "U.S. Births Remain Low as the Great Recession Wanes," Carsey
       National Fact Sheet #34, Summer.
Jones, Larry E., and Alice Schoonbroodt. 2016. “Baby Busts and Baby Booms: The Fertility
       Response to Shocks in Dynastic Models,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 22, 157-178..
Jones, Rachel K., and Jenna Jerman. 2014. “Abortion Incidence and Service Availability in the
       United States,” Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 46(1), 3-14.
Jurado, Kyle, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Serena Ng. 2015. “Measuring Uncertainty,” American
       Economic Review, 105(3), 1177-1216.
Kearney, Melissa S., and Phillip B. Levine. 2014. “Income Inequality and Early Nonmarital
       Childbreaing,” Journal of Human Resources 49(1), 1-31.
Kilian, Lutz and Robert J. Vigfusson. 2011. “Nonlinearities in the Oil Price-Output Relationship,”
       Macroeconomic Dynamics (15) 337-363.
Lovenheim, Michael and Kevin Mumford. 2013. “Do Family Wealth Shocks Affect Fertility
       Choices? Evidence from the Housing Market,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2),
       464-475.
Lugauer, Steven. 2012. “Estimating the Effect of the Age Distribution on Cyclical Output Volatility
       Across the United States,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 94(4), 896-902.
Macunovich, Diane J. 1996. “Relative Income and Price of Time: Exploring their Effects on US
       Fertility and Female Labor Force Participation,” Population and Development Review
       22(Supplement), 223-257.
Mankiw, Gregory N. 1985. “Consumer Durables and the Real Interest Rate,” The Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 67(3): 353-362.
Martin. 2004. “`The Ultimate Vote of Confidence’: Fertility Rates and Economic Conditions in

                                                                                                     26
       Australia, 1976-2000,” Australian Social Policy 2002-03: 31-54.
Moulton, Brent R., and Benjamin D. Cowan. 2016. “Residual Seasonality in GDP and GDI,”
       Available at the Bureau of Economic Analysis website (bea.gov).
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession, and How We
       Can Prevent It from Happening Again. The University of Chicago Press.
Myers, Caitlin Knowles. Forthcoming. “The Power of Abortion Policy: Re-examining the Effects of
       Young Women’s Access to Reproductive Control,” Journal of Political Economy 104(), 334-445.
Noguera, Carles Simó, Katrin Golsch, and Nikolei Steinhage. 2002. “Increasing Uncertainty in the
       Spanish Labor Market and Entry into Parenthood,” Genus 58(1), 77-119.
Ng, Serena, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2013. “Facts and Challenges from the Great Recession for
       Forecasting and Macroeconomic Modeling,” Journal of Economic Literature 51(14) 1120-1154.
NVSS (National Vital Statistics Reports). 2015. “Births: Final Data for 2014”. US Department of
       Health and Human Services.
Roberts, Sam. 2009. “Birth Rate is Said to Fall as a Result of Recession,” The New York Times,
       August 7.
Rouse, Karen. 2008. “K.C. Fed Chief: No Recession Yet,” The Denver Post, January 17.
Sagili, H., & Divers, M. 2007. “Modern Management of Miscarriage,” The Obstetrician &
       Gynaecologist, 9(2), 102-108.
Schaller, Jessamyn. “Booms, Busts, and Fertility: Testing the Becker Model using Gender-Specific
       Labor Demand,” forthcoming in the Journal of Human Resources.
Shell, Adam. 2008. “5-Year Winning Streak Has a Good Shot at a 6th; 2008 Could Start Out Bumpy
       but Signs Point to a Sweet Finish,” USA Today, January 2.
Sims, Christopher. 2012. “Comment on ‘Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-09 Recession’”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring, 141-148.
Sobotka, Tomáš, Vegard Skirbekk, Dimiter Philipov. 2011. “Economic Recession and Fertility in
       the Developed World,” Population and Development Review 37(2), 267-306.
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, “NIPA Table 1.11.1: Real Gross Domestic Product: Percent
       Change From Quarter One Year Ago,” (accessed November 15, 2016).
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, “NIPA Table 2.3.1: Percent Change From Preceding Period in
       Real Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Type of Product,” (accessed November
       15, 2016).
Yule, G. Udny. 1906. “On the Changes in the Marriage- and Birth-Rates in England and Wales

                                                                                                      27
during the Past Half Century: with an Inquiry as to their Probable Causes.” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society 69(1), 88-147.




                                                                                             28
                Table 1: Correlations between Conception Growth and GDP Growth

                              Sample
       Period                               (t)        (t-1)      (t-2)          (t-3)       (t-4)      (t-5)
                               Size
 (1)   1988-2014                108       0.47        0.47        0.44           0.39        0.34       0.24
 (2)   Recession 1st 4 Qtr       12       -0.41       0.29        0.65           0.42        0.49       0.18
 (3)   2007Q4 – 2009Q2           7        -0.09       0.05        0.56           0.84        0.96       0.90
 (4)   2001Q1 – 2001Q4           4        -0.99       0.37        0.49           -0.09       0.78       0.31
 (5)   1990Q3 – 1991Q1           3        -0.94       0.40        0.83           0.89        0.79       0.91
 (6)   Non-recession years       85       0.24        0.29        0.22           0.14        0.08       0.04
 (7)   Post-Recession            36       -0.08       -0.01       0.06           0.03        0.13       0.32

Notes: Variables are annual growth rates, reported quarterly. Each row presents the simple
correlations over the given period using different lags of the conceptions variable, where the lags are
in terms of quarters. Row 6 drops the dates from one quarter before the recession to two quarters
after; row 7 uses the 12 quarters of data after each of the three recessions. The first quarter of 1988
is not included. The sample size is the number of observations used for the contemporaneous
correlation.




                                    Table 2: Granger Causality

                                                    Lags Included in the Regression Equations
                                Sample
      Period                     Size         (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)
   (1) 1988-2014                  108        0.88          0.93           0.86            0.23         0.11
   (2) Recession 1st 4 Qtr         12        0.17          0.34           0.13           0.02**       0.07*
   (3) Non-recession years         85        0.45          0.46           0.53            0.56         0.63
  Optimal lags
   (4) 1988-2014                 108                                                     0.05**
   (5) Recession years            24                                                                 0.005***
  Asymmetry
   (6) 1988-2014                 108                                                                 0.05**
   (7) Recession years            24                                                                 0.00***

Notes: This table reports the probability of exceeding the chi-squared statistic of a Wald test of the
hypothesis test that none of the conception lags are statistically significant in a regression of GDP
growth on lags of GDP and lags of conception growth. Stars denote significance at the * 10% ** 5%
and *** 1% level. Bold indicates the lowest AIC.
                                   Table 3: Annual Abortion Data

                                Abortions Abortion        Abortion
                    Year         (1000s)   Rate            Ratio   Interpolated?
                    1991          1,557     26.3            27.4
                    1992          1,529     25.7            27.5
                    1993          1,495      25             27.4        Yes
                    1994          1,423     23.7            26.6        Yes
                    1995          1,359     22.5            25.9
                    1996          1,360     22.4            25.9
                    1997          1,335     21.9            25.5        Yes
                    1998          1,319     21.5            25.1        Yes
                    1999          1,315     21.4            24.6
                    2000          1,313     21.3            24.5
                    2001          1,291     20.9            24.4        Yes
                    2002          1,269     20.5            23.8        Yes
                    2003          1,250     20.2            23.3        Yes
                    2004          1,222     19.7            22.9
                    2005          1,206     19.4            22.4
                    2006          1,242     19.9            22.9        Yes
                    2007          1,210     19.4            21.9
                    2008          1,212     19.4            22.5
                    2009          1,152     18.5            22.2        Yes
                    2010          1,103     17.7            21.7
                    2011          1,059     16.9            21.2

Source: Jones and Jerman (2014). The abortion rate is abortions per 1000 women ages 15-44 as of
July 1st each year. The abortion ratio is abortions per 100 pregnancies ending in abortion or live
birth, for each year; the ratio is based on birth during the 12-month period starting July of that year.
Interpolations are adjusted using state health department reports.
                                       Figure 1: Conception and GDP Growth Rates

             5
             4
             3
             2
             1
             0
             -1
             -2
             -3
                                               Conceptions
             -4
                                               GDP
             -5
             1988 Q1        1992 Q1         1996 Q1        2000 Q1        2004 Q1         2008 Q1        2012 Q1


Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions and GDP over the preceding year, reported quarterly. The data comes from the
Natality Detail Files and the BEA. The shaded areas indicate NBER dated recessions.
                                 Figure 2: Conception and GDP Growth Rates
     5                                     Near the Great Recession
     4
     3
     2
     1
     0
    -1
    -2
                         Conceptions
    -3
                         GDP
    -4
    -5
          2005 Q1



                    2006 Q1



                                    2007 Q1



                                                        2008 Q1



                                                                            2009 Q1



                                                                                                2010 Q1



                                                                                                               2011 Q1



                                                                                                                          2012 Q1
Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions and GDP over the preceding year, reported
quarterly. The data comes from the Natality Detail Files and the BEA. The vertical lines indicate the
beginning (2007 Q4) and end (2009 Q2) of the recession.



                                 Figure 3: Conception and GDP Growth Rates
      6
                                            Near the 2001 Recession
      5
      4
      3
      2
      1
      0
     -1               Conceptions
     -2               GDP
     -3
          1998 Q1




                       1999 Q1




                                              2000 Q1




                                                                  2001 Q1




                                                                                      2002 Q1




                                                                                                          2003 Q1




                                                                                                                         2004 Q1




Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions and GDP over the preceding year, reported
quarterly. The data comes from the Natality Detail Files and the BEA. The vertical lines indicate the
beginning (2001 Q1) and end (2001 Q4) of the recession.

                                                                                                                                    32
                                  Figure 4: Conception and GDP Growth Rates
                                             Near the 1990 Recession
      5
      4
      3
      2
      1
      0
     -1                      Conceptions
     -2                      GDP
     -3
     -4
          1988 Q1




                              1989 Q1




                                               1990 Q1




                                                                1991 Q1




                                                                                 1992 Q1




                                                                                           1993 Q1
Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions and GDP over the preceding year, reported
quarterly. The data comes from the Natality Detail Files and the BEA. The vertical lines indicate the
beginning (1990 Q3) and end (1991 Q1) of the recession.



                    Figure 5: Conceptions (seasonally adjusted) and NBER Recessions
1100000



1050000



1000000



 950000
          1988             1992         1996             2000             2004      2008   2012

Notes: The figure shows the number of conceptions each quarter, after seasonal adjustment. The
data comes from the Natality Detail Files. The shaded areas indicate NBER dated recessions.




                                                                                                     33
                             Figure 6: Deviatons from Trend Growth
                               Conceptions and GDP - CF Filtered
  0.03

  0.02

  0.01

     0

  -0.01

  -0.02

  -0.03
          1988      1992          1996         2000         2004          2008         2012

Notes: The figure shows the quarterly deviations from trend growth rates for conceptions (solid
line) and GDP (dashed line). The data comes from the Natality Detail Files and the BEA. The
deviations from trend were calculated using the CF filter. Different filtering techniques may change
the timing slightly. The shaded areas indicate NBER dated recessions.




                                                                                                   34
                                                      Figure 7:
                                Conception Growth Rates and Changes in Unemployment
            5

            4

            3

            2

            1

            0

           -1

           -2

           -3
                                            Conceptions
           -4                               Unemployment

           -5
           1988 Q1         1992 Q1         1996 Q1         2000 Q1         2004 Q1        2008 Q1         2012 Q1

Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions and the change in unemployment, both reported quarterly. The data comes from
the Natality Detail Files and Bureau of Labor Statistics. The shaded areas indicate NBER dated recessions.




                                                                                                                                  35
                              Figure 8: Conceptions Growth Rate
                                  and Consumer Confidence
  5                                                                                             160
                                                                                                140
  3
                                                                                                120
  1                                                                                             100
                                                                                                80
 -1                                                                                             60
                                                                                                40
 -3
                              Conceptions                                                       20
                              Confidence
 -5                                                                                             0
      1988      1992         1996         2000         2004         2008         2012


Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions over the preceding year, alongside the
consumer confidence index, both reported quarterly. The shaded areas indicate NBER dated
recessions.




                              Figure 9: Conceptions and Durables
                                         Growth Rates
   5                                                                                            20
   4
   3
                                                                                                10
   2
   1
   0                                                                                            0
  -1
  -2
                                                                                                -10
  -3                            Conceptions
  -4                            Durables
  -5                                                                                            -20
       1988      1992         1996          2000        2004        2008         2012


Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions and consumer durable goods purchases
over the preceding year, reported quarterly. The shaded areas indicate NBER dated recessions.


                                                                                                    36
                      Figure 10: Conception and Housing Price Growth Rates

   5                                                                                             15
   4
                                                                                                 10
   3
   2
                                                                                                 5
   1
   0                                                                                             0
  -1
                                                                                                 -5
  -2
  -3
                                                                                                 -10
  -4
  -5                                                                                             -15
    1988          1992        1996          2000         2004         2008         2012
Notes: The figure shows the percent growth rate of conceptions and the Case-Shiller home price
index (2000=100) over the preceding year, reported quarterly. The data comes from the Natality
Detail Files and FRED. The shaded areas indicate NBER dated recessions.



                          Figure 11: Miscarriages and Recessions:
  0.2                            Evidence from New York
 0.15

  0.1

 0.05

   0

-0.05

 -0.1

-0.15

 -0.2
        1993   1995     1997    1999    2001     2003    2005     2007     2009     2011
Notes: The picture shows the annual growth rate in quarterly miscarriages in New York State. The
grey bars indicate recessions.

                                                                                                 37
                                              Figure 12:
                       Growth Rates in Conceptions and Births Using Annual Data

      5
      4
      3
      2
      1
      0
     -1
     -2
     -3                              Year of Conception

     -4                              Year of Birth
     -5
          1988          1992           1996           2000            2004           2008           2012

Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions and births over the preceding year, reported
annually. The data comes from the Natality Detail Files. The vertical lines indicate the beginnings of NBER
dated recessions.




                                                                                                           38
                                          APPENDIX

  Appendix Table 1: Selected Events Before and During the Start of the Great Recession

Date             Event
August 2007      The Congressional Budget Office predicts economic growth for the year of
                 2.1 percent. The New York Times reports that most economists “predict
                 continued economic growth for the rest of the year and into 2008” but that
                 some are revising their projections downwards (Andrews, 2007).
October 9, 2007  Dow reaches an intraday record high of 14,167; the S&P hits an all-time high
                 of 1565. The Nasdaq climbs to 2806, its highest level since January 2001
                 (Bloomberg News, 2007).
October 31, 2007 The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) of the Federal Reserve lowers
                 its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points. The FOMC reports that
                 “Economic growth was solid in the third quarter, and strains in financial
                 markets have eased somewhat on balance. However the pace of economic
                 expansion will likely slow in the near term” (Federal Reserve, 2007a).
November 8, 2007 In testimony before the Joint Economic Committee, Ben Bernanke states
                 “the U.S. Economy has performed reasonably well” but that “the economic
                 outlook has been importantly affected by recent developments in financial
                 markets.” Describing the October FOMC meeting, he said, “Growth was
                 seen as remaining sluggish during the first part of next year, then
                 strengthening as the effects of tighter credit and the housing correction began
                 to wane” (Bernanke, 2007).
December 5, 2007 A survey of CEOs predicts economic growth in the coming year. 70% of
                 CEOs expect their company’s sales will rise in the next six months
                 (Hagenbaugh, 2007).
December 8, 2007 Responding to a labor department report of jobs gains, the Washington Post
                 concludes “Hiring, wages increase modestly, housing credit fallout appears to
                 be confined” (Irwin, 2007).
December 11,     The FOMC again lowers its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points.
2007             The FOMC reports that “Economic growth is slowing...Strains in financial
                 markets have increased in recent weeks. Today’s action, combined with the
                 policy actions taken earlier, should help promote moderate growth over time”
                 (Federal Reserve, 2007b).
December 2007    The recession begins, as subsequently determined by the National Bureau of
                 Economic Research (in November, 2008).
January 2, 2008  Overviewing the stock market’s outlook, USA Today summarizes, “5-year
                 winning streak has a good shot at a 6th; 2008 could start out bumpy, but signs
                 point to a sweet finish” (Shell, 2008).
January 17, 2008 Tom Hoenig, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
                 addresses a group of legislators and bankers and states “the economy is
                 slowing, but I don’t see any immediate evidence that we’re going into a
                 recession” (Rouse, 2008).
March 13, 2008   Bear Stearns contacts the federal reserve to report its severe financial distress,
                 J.P. Morgan Chase subsequently agrees to purchase Bear Stearns.


                                                                                                 39
March 14, 2008    In a poll, 71 percent of economists say the United States is in recession
                  (Business World, 2008).
September 15,     Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy.
2008
October 3, 2008   President Bush signs into law the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of
                  2008.
December 19,      The U.S. government bails out General Motors and Chrysler (Christian
2008              Science Monitor, 2013).




                                                                                              40
                 Appendix Table 2: Correlations Between Conception Growth
                          and State-Level Economic Fluctuations

Panel A: Conceptions and State GSP
                           Sample
      Period                                  (t)      (t-1)     (t-2)     (t-3)     (t-4)    (t-5)
                             Size
 (1) 2006-2014              1836             0.33      0.32      0.30      0.26      0.23      0.22
 (2) Recession 1st 4 Qtr     204             0.29      0.41      0.40      0.29      0.17      0.09
 (3) 2007Q4 – 2009Q2         357             0.23      0.30      0.40      0.49      0.51      0.40
 (4) Non-recession years    1275             0.22      0.20      0.16      0.08      0.05      0.11
 (5) Post-Recession          612             0.42      0.33      0.28      0.27      0.23      0.19

Panel B: Conceptions and State Unemployment
                            Sample
        Period                          (t)             (t-1)    (t-2)    (t-3)     (t-4)    (t-5)
                              Size
   (1) 1988-2014              5253    -0.26            -0.26     -0.23    -0.20    -0.16     -0.10
   (2) Recession 1 4 Qtr
                  st
                               612    -0.14            -0.20     -0.22    -0.12    -0.06     -0.10
   (3) 2007Q4 – 2009Q2         357    -0.23            -0.26     -0.36    -0.46    -0.51     -0.41
   (4) 2001Q1 – 2001Q4         204    0.06             -0.04     -0.06    0.01     -0.04     -0.02
   (5) 1990Q3 – 1991Q1         153    -0.35            -0.18     -0.17    -0.11    -0.14     -0.16
   (6) Non-recession years    4029    -0.06            -0.09     -0.06    -0.05    -0.07     -0.04
   (7) Post-Recession         1836    -0.25            -0.23     -0.19    -0.20    -0.20     -0.15

Notes: Variables are annual growth rates, reported quarterly. Panel A uses state-of-residence
conception rates and state-level GSP data (including the District of Columbia). The change in
growth rate is calculated from 2006 onwards, as state-level GSP data is not available at the quarterly
level for earlier years. Panel B uses state-level unemployment data. The first quarter of 1988 is not
included. The sample size is the number of observations used for the contemporaneous correlation.
Each row presents the simple correlations over the given period using different lags of the
conceptions variable, where the lags are in terms of quarters. Row 6 drops the dates from one
quarter before the recession to two quarters after; row 7 uses the 12 quarters of data after each
recession (36 quarter/year periods total).




                                                                                                      41
                 Appendix Table 3: Granger Causality Using State-Level Data

Panel A: With State Level GSP Data and State Fixed Effects
                                            Lags Included in the Regression Equations
       Period              Sample Size      1           2          3         4         5
  (1) All Years               1785       0.02**      0.05**      0.16      0.22    0.00***
  (2) Recession 1 4 Qtr
                 st
                               204      0.00***     0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00***
  (3) Recession                357       0.02**      0.04**     0.08*      0.11      0.16
  (4) Non-recession years     1224        0.75        0.57     0.01*** 0.00*** 0.00***

Panel B: With State Level GSP Data and No State Fixed Effects
                                             Lags Included in the Regression Equations
       Period              Sample Size     1           2          3          4         5
  (1) All Years               1785     0.00*** 0.01***         0.02**     0.02**    0.00***
  (2) Recession 1st 4 Qtr      204     0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00***
  (3) Recession                357     0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00***
  (4) Non-recession years     1224       0.89        0.92       0.14       0.26     0.00***


Panel C: With State Level Unemployment Data and State Fixed Effects
                                           Lags Included in the Regression Equations
       Period              Sample Size     1           2         3          4        5
  (1) All Years               5202     0.00***     0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00***
  (2) Recession 1 4 Qtr
                 st
                               612       0.72        0.40      0.30       0.42     0.18
  (3) Recession                714       0.47        0.75      0.12      0.07*     0.10
  (4) Non-recession years     3978       0.61      0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00***

Panel D: With State Level Unemployment Data and No State Fixed Effects
                                             Lags Included in the Regression Equations
      Period               Sample Size     1           2          3          4         5
  (1) All Years               5202     0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00***
  (2) Recession 1 4 Qtr
                 st
                               612       0.92        0.22       0.29       0.37      0.38
  (3) Recession                714       0.67        0.73       0.09*      0.08*     0.11
  (4) Non-recession years     3978       0.80      0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00***

Notes: This table reports the probability of exceeding the chi-squared statistic of a Wald test of the
hypothesis test that none of the conception lags are statistically significant in a regression of (in
panels A and B) GSP growth on lags of GSP and lags of conception growth and (panels C and D)
unemployment growth on lags of unemployment growth and lags of conception growth. Non-
recession years exclude all quarters in a recession, the two quarters after, and the quarter before.
Standard errors clustered at the state level. Stars denote significance at the * 10% ** 5% and *** 1%
level.




                                                                                                   42
                                     Appendix Figure 1: Conception Growth Rate, by Month

          8




          4




          0




         -4




         -8
           1988              1992             1996             2000              2004             2008              2012
Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions reported monthly. The data comes from the Natality Detail Files. The shaded
areas indicate NBER dated recessions.




                                                                                                                                     43
               Appendix Figure 2: Conceptions Growth Rate and Unemployment
   5                                                                                                  11

   3                                                                                                  9

   1                                                                                                  7

  -1                                                                                                  5

  -3                                                                                                  3

  -5                                                                                                  1
       1988      1992         1996         2000          2004        2008          2012


Notes: The figure shows the growth rate of conceptions (solid line, left axis), alongside the
unemployment rate (dashed line, right axis), both reported quarterly. The shaded areas indicate
NBER dated recessions.




                     Appendix Figure 3: Growth Rates for Conceptions
  5                           and Ovulation Kit Purchases                                         20
  4                                                                                               15
  3
                                                                                                  10
  2
  1                                                                                               5
  0                                                                                               0
 -1                                                                                               -5
 -2
                                                                                                  -10
 -3
                                                                          Conceptions             -15
 -4
                                                                          Ovulation Kits
 -5                                                                                               -20
   2007-Q1       2008-Q1        2009-Q1        2010-Q1       2011-Q1        2012-Q1
Notes: This picture shows trends in the annual growth rates of conceptions (left axis) and purchases
of ovulation kits (right axis), by quarter from 2006-2012. Purchasing data are from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC as provided by the Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth
School of Business.




                                                                                                       44
                 Appendix Figure 4: Using Scanner Data to Track Conceptions,
                             Estimates from a Post-Lasso Model
    2

    1

    0

    -1

    -2

    -3                                                                Conceptions
    -4                                                                Post-Lasso Model
    -5
      2007-Q1      2008-Q1       2009-Q1       2010-Q1       2011-Q1       2012-Q1


Notes: The above picture plots two quarterly trends. The solid line is the growth rate of
conceptions. The dashed line is from the expected level of conception growth based on an OLS
regression of conception growth on the contemporaneous growth rates of (a) tampons and (b) non-
multi-vitamins. These two goods were selected using a Lasso procedure outlined in Belloni, Chen,
Chernozhukov, and Hansen (2012).




                                                                                              45
