                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PROTECTIONISM AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                      Alessandro Barattieri
                                       Matteo Cacciatore
                                         Fabio Ghironi

                                      Working Paper 24353
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24353


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 2018, Revised July 2018




We thank our discussants—Giancarlo Corsetti, Aurélien Eyquem, Fabrizio Perri, Katheryn Russ,
and Joseph Steinberg—for very helpful comments. We are also grateful to Chad Bown,
Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Charles Engel, Luca Gambetti, Greg Ip, Yida Li, John Shea, Dalibor
Stevanovic, and audiences at the AMSE-Banque de France Workshop on Heterogeneity in
International Economics, Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Bank of Italy, Banque de France,
CEPREMAP, the 2017 Joint Central Bankers’ Conference, the 2017 Midwest Macro Meetings,
the 2017 NBER IFM Summer Institute, Ohio State University, Peking University PHBC, the
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Université Paris-Dauphine, University of Kent,
University of Maryland, University of Tübingen, University of Wisconsin-Madison, the 2017
West Coast Workshop in International Finance, the XVI Workshop on Macroeconomic
Dynamics: Theory and Applications, and the 2018 Tsinghua Workshop in International Finance.
The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the views or policies of the
CEPR and NBER. Alessandro Barattieri acknowledges financial support from the Unicredit and
Universities Foundation Modigliani Research Grant.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Alessandro Barattieri, Matteo Cacciatore, and Fabio Ghironi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Protectionism and the Business Cycle
Alessandro Barattieri, Matteo Cacciatore, and Fabio Ghironi
NBER Working Paper No. 24353
February 2018, Revised July 2018
JEL No. E31,E52,F13,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the consequences of protectionism for macroeconomic fluctuations. First, using high-
frequency trade policy data, we present fresh evidence on the dynamic effects of temporary trade
barriers. Estimates from country-level and panel VARs show that protectionism acts as a supply
shock, causing output to fall and inflation to rise in the short run. Moreover, protectionism has at
best a small positive effect on the trade balance. Second, we build a small open economy model
with firm heterogeneity, endogenous selection into trade, and nominal rigidity to study the
channels through which protectionism affects aggregate fluctuations. The model successfully
reproduces the VAR evidence and highlights the importance of aggregate investment dynamics
and micro-level reallocations for the contractionary effects of tariffs. We then use the model to
study scenarios where temporary trade barriers have been advocated as potentially beneficial,
including recessions with binding constraints on monetary policy easing or in the presence of a
fixed exchange rate. Our main conclusion is that, in all the scenarios we consider, protectionism
is not an effective tool for macroeconomic stimulus.

Alessandro Barattieri                            Fabio Ghironi
ESG UQAM                                         Department of Economics
Case Postale 8888                                University of Washington
sucursale Centre-ville                           Savery Hall, Box 353330
Montreal (Quebec) H3C 3P8                        Seattle, WA 98195
Canada                                           and NBER
barattieri.alessandro@uqam.ca                    ghiro@uw.edu

Matteo Cacciatore
HEC Montreal
Institute of Applied Economics
3000 Côte-Sainte-Catherine
Montreal, QC H3T 2A7
CANADA
and NBER
matteo.cacciatore@hec.ca
1   Introduction

To paraphrase Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (1848), a specter is haunting the world economy—
the specter of protectionism. The outcomes of G-20 and G-7 meetings have been raising the
concern that key powers are taking steps away from existing alliances that had been forged also to
exorcise this specter. The U.S. administration of President Donald Trump has withdrawn from the
Trans-Paci…c Partnership (TPP), started renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), and imposed punitive tari¤s against a number of trading partners. Like-minded political
leaders in other countries have made no secret of their penchant for protectionism.
    Since the threat of protectionism started looming in the run-up to the 2016 U.S. presidential
election, analysts and pundits everywhere have been debating possible costs and bene…ts of trade
policy as a tool to boost aggregate economic performance, rebalance external accounts, or address
distributional e¤ects of trade. In‡uential scholars have argued that tari¤s may be bene…cial when
countries are mired in a liquidity trap, as the in‡ationary e¤ect of increased import costs may help
lift the economy out of the trap (for instance, Eichengreen, 2016).
    This paper contributes to this debate by studying the e¤ects of protectionism on macroeconomic
‡uctuations. In the …rst part, we take a fresh look at time series evidence by using vector autore-
gressions (VARs) to investigate the short-run e¤ects of trade policy on macroeconomic outcomes.
We perform two variants of this exercise: one that focuses on individual countries using quarterly
or monthly data, and the other that uses annual data in a panel VAR for a larger set of countries.
In the …rst exercise, we use Bown’s (2016) Global Antidumping Database (GAD) to construct se-
ries of initiations of antidumping investigations, which are usually followed by the imposition of
antidumping tari¤s. We identify exogenous trade policy shocks by exploiting the contemporaneous
exogeneity of antidumping investigations with respect to macroeconomic variables. We consider
three countries: two emerging economies that are most active in using these trade policy measures
(Turkey and India) and the largest user among small-open developed economies (Canada). We
combine these time series with series on in‡ation, GDP, and the trade balance (as a ratio to GDP)
to study the consequences of protectionist shocks in structural VAR regressions.
    In the second exercise, we use a panel VAR on twenty-one small open economies that addresses
the fact that the GAD covers only a limited portion of total imports. In this exercise, we consider
the import weighted average of applied tari¤ rates. This restricts our attention to annual data,
but we expand sample size by working with a panel of countries. Important for our analysis that



                                                 1
follows, none of the countries in our panel found itself at the zero lower bound (ZLB) on monetary
policy interest rates in our sample, and all the countries operated under ‡oating exchange rates.
   Three robust conclusions emerge from our empirical exercises (and a variety of checks): pro-
tectionism is recessionary, in‡ationary, and has, at best, a small positive e¤ect on the trade bal-
ance/GDP ratio. Essentially, the dynamic e¤ects of protectionism in small open economies are
akin to those of negative supply-side shocks that contract output, increase prices, and have a
combination of contrasting e¤ects on the trade balance.
   In the second part of the paper, we lay down a benchmark small open economy model of
international trade and macroeconomic dynamics that allows us to delve deeper into the dynamic
e¤ects of protectionism. The model builds on Ghironi and Melitz’s (2005) dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium version of Melitz’s (2003) trade model by incorporating the endogenous entry
of heterogeneous producers into domestic and export markets. Di¤erently from Ghironi and Melitz,
endogenous tradedness in the tradable sector (the fact that only a subset of tradable goods is
actually traded in equilibrium) is supplemented by the inclusion of a traditional exogenously non-
tradable sector. We also assume that one of the two countries in the model is a small open economy
that has no impact on the rest of the world. Nominal rigidity is introduced in the form of sticky
nominal wages. We calibrate the model and study the consequences of an increase in protectionism
by the small open economy under ‡exible exchange rates.
   The predictions of the model match the robust results of the empirical evidence: Protectionism
is in‡ationary, recessionary, and can generate a small improvement in the trade balance, but at
the cost of a recession. The model highlights the importance of both macro and micro forces
for the contractionary e¤ects of tari¤s. Higher import prices dominate a decline in the price of
domestic non-tradables (due to lower aggregate demand) in driving CPI in‡ation upward. Tari¤s
induce expenditure switching toward domestic tradable goods, but they also reallocate domestic
market share toward less e¢ cient domestic producers, lowering aggregate productivity. In turn,
higher domestic prices reduce aggregate real income (expenditure reduction), lowering investment
in physical capital and product creation. Intuitively, since physical capital includes both domestic
and imported goods, the import tari¤ increases the price of investment. Moreover, since households
spend more of their real income to consume any given amount of imports, the demand for domestic
goods declines, reducing the number of producers on the market. In addition to this, the central
bank’s response to higher in‡ation further imparts a contractionary impulse.
   Lower aggregate demand and monetary policy contraction dominate expenditure switching,


                                                 2
causing a recession in the aftermath of an increase in protectionism. The decline in investment
propagates the negative e¤ects of higher tari¤s over time. Improvement in the trade balance
follows from the combination of expenditure switching and the fact that contraction of domestic
income reduces the demand for imports. Overall, the model and empirical investigation line up
closely in terms of qualitative and quantitative results and implications: In normal times and under
a ‡exible exchange rate, protectionism is not advisable if policymakers want to avoid economic
contraction, and, given its recessionary e¤ect, it is at best of dubious value if policymakers want to
improve their countries’external accounts.
   We then use the model to study counterfactual scenarios where temporary trade barriers have
been advocated as potentially bene…cial. We …rst consider the argument that protectionism could
be helpful when countries are in a liquidity trap (i.e., when countries are stuck at the ZLB on policy
interest rates). Both our empirical evidence and theoretical analysis suggest that protectionism is
in‡ationary. Through this channel, protectionism may indeed be temporarily useful to lift economies
out of ZLB situations. We therefore perform the following counterfactual exercise: Suppose the
model-home economy is hit by an exogenous, recessionary shock that pushes the central bank
against the ZLB constraint. Would the imposition of tari¤s on imports in the aftermath of this
shock help lift the economy out of the liquidity trap? Since the predictions of the model line up
nicely with the evidence when tari¤s are imposed under “normal economic conditions”— none of
the countries in our empirical analysis found itself at the ZLB in our sample— the counterfactual
exercise sheds empirically-relevant light on the issue of interest.
   The answer is that any bene…cial in‡ationary e¤ects of protectionism are not su¢ cient to
overcome the unfavorable macroeconomic e¤ects of reduced real income. Moreover, larger or more
persistent trade shocks have larger recessionary e¤ects along the transition dynamics when the
economy is at the ZLB. The reason is that larger or more persistent tari¤ increases have a more
unfavorable e¤ect on aggregate demand, which reduces the extent to which the trade policy is
in‡ationary. Through this channel, a large or persistent trade policy shock ends up becoming
de‡ationary very shortly after its initial in‡ationary e¤ect, which worsens the liquidity trap instead
of ameliorating it.
   We then explore the consequences of protectionism for countries that peg the nominal exchange
rate. Our interest re‡ects the widespread di¤usion of pegs, crawling pegs, or very narrow bands
(Reinhart and Rogo¤, 2004). A recent illustration of the issue is the experience of Ecuador— a
dollarized economy that applied a broad range of temporary tari¤s between 2015 and 2016 to …ght a


                                                   3
balance-of-payments crisis. Over this period, the trade balance of Ecuador e¤ectively improved, but
the growth of real GDP further declined, together with consumption and investment. In contrast
to the typical conclusion of textbook models, we …nd that protectionism remains contractionary
even when the exchange rate is …xed: Higher import prices continue to result in lower aggregate
income and investment, pushing the economy into a recession.
      In sum, the policy conclusion of our paper is that protectionism remains costly— at least for
small open economies— even when it is used temporarily, even when economies are stuck in liquidity
traps, and regardless of the ‡exibility of the exchange rate. Detrimental economic e¤ects arise even
abstracting from retaliation from trade partners.


Related Literature The paper is related to several literatures. There is a massive amount of
work that studies virtually every aspect of the consequences of protectionism in the international
trade …eld, both theoretically and empirically. It is impossible to do this work any justice in the
limited space of a non-survey paper.1 Our research is obviously related to work in the trade …eld by
virtue of using data and concepts that are familiar to trade economists— most notably, Bown (2011)
and Bown and Crowley (2013, 2014). To the best of our knowledge, this is the …rst study to use
high frequency trade policy data to identify the short-term macroeconomic e¤ects of protectionism.
      We also connect to trade research by incorporating rigorous, state-of-the-art trade microfounda-
tions in our macroeconomic model. This allows us to move the frontier set by early analyses of the
dynamic e¤ects of protectionism in international macro models closer to the current frontier of the
trade …eld, and to use present-day modeling tools to address the connection between protectionism
and macroeconomic dynamics that so many analysts and pundits are spilling ink on.
      The macroeconomic e¤ects of trade policy were among the topics of Mundell’s (1961) seminal
analysis of “Flexible Exchange Rates and Employment Policy.”Mundell warned against the poten-
tial recessionary e¤ects of restrictive trade policies under ‡exible exchange rates, but highlighted
de‡ationary e¤ects of terms of trade movements. Krugman (1982) showed that Mundell’s conclu-
sion is in fact quite robust to various extensions of the basic IS-LM model. Dornbusch, Fischer, and
Samuelson (1977) included changes in tari¤s among the scenarios they explored in their Ricardian
model of international trade and macro dynamics. Eichengreen (1981, 1983) studied the conse-
quences of tari¤s in a portfolio balance model of exchange rate and macro dynamics. In contrast to
previous work, he found that a tari¤ can have temporary expansionary e¤ects before reducing out-
  1
    See Goldberg and Pavcnik (2016) and references therein for a comprehensive discussion of the e¤ects of trade
policy on trade volumes, prices, productivity, and labor market outcomes.


                                                       4
put and employment in subsequent periods. In more recent literature on trade and macro dynamics,
interest shifted toward understanding the dynamic consequences of trade integration (permanently
lower trade costs) rather than temporary increases in protectionism. For instance, see Barattieri’s
(2014) analysis of global imbalances and asymmetric trade integration in goods versus services,
or Cacciatore’s (2014) study of trade integration and labor market dynamics with heterogeneous
…rms and labor market frictions. Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2014) pioneered a literature that
investigates the ability of policymakers to deliver devaluation-consistent dynamics under a ‡exible
exchange rate by using …scal policy tools, and a budding literature is exploring the macroeconomic
consequences of combinations of trade policy instruments (tari¤s-cum-subsidies) or of the border
adjustment proposal (Barbiero, Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki, 2017; Erceg, Prestipino, and Ra¤o,
2017; Lindé and Pescatori, 2017). We restrict attention to tari¤s (which would be legal to im-
pose under WTO rules in the context of antidumping procedures) as the benchmark trade policy
tool, and— when the exchange rate is …xed— we do not design tari¤ setting to generate dynamics
that mimic any feature of a devaluation. We focus on exogenous increases in tari¤s to keep the
model-based exercise close to the empirical investigation. Our paper contributes to the literature
that reintroduces analysis of protectionism in present-day international macro modeling by using
a quantitative trade and macro model with implications in line with the evidence on the issues we
focus on.2
       There is much that this paper does not do: We restrict attention to small open economies,
since this is where we …nd more data to perform empirical investigation of the dynamic e¤ects of
protectionism. Given the recent actions by the Trump administration, and the responses by China
and the European Union (EU), it will be important to investigate the interaction of protectionism
and macro dynamics when economies are large and their policies have non-negligible external e¤ects.
The recent papers we mentioned in the previous paragraph make a start at that in models that do
not feature the trade microfoundation of our framework. We do not study optimal tari¤ setting.3
Finally, we do not address the distributional consequences of protectionism or the dynamic impact
it could have on the sectoral structure of the economy. These are all interesting, important topics
   2
     By exploring whether protectionism is expansionary at the ZLB, this paper is also related to the study of the
possible expansionary e¤ects of negative supply shocks in Wieland (2016) and to the analysis of non-conventional
…scal policy at the ZLB by Correia, Farhi, Nicolini, and Teles (2011).
   3
     Eaton and Grossman (1981) provide an interesting analysis of the interaction of optimal tari¤ setting and market
incompleteness for a small open economy. They …nd that incomplete markets motivate the optimality of positive
tari¤s. Optimal tari¤ arguments are part of the analysis of monetary policy in Bergin and Corsetti (2015). They use
a model with endogenous producer entry in the traded sector, but they do not focus on the consequences of trade
policy shocks.



                                                         5
that we leave for future research.


Outline The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our empirical exercise.
Section 3 lays down the model. Section 4 presents the calibration, Section 5 uses the calibrated
model to investigate the e¤ects of imposing tari¤s in normal times or at the ZLB. Section 6 studies
the e¤ects of protectionism under a …xed exchange rate. Section 7 concludes.


2   Empirical Evidence

In this Section, we study the macroeconomic e¤ects of trade policy shocks by applying structural
vector autoregression methods. First, we use quarterly and monthly measures of temporary trade
barriers and macroeconomic data for individual countries. Second, we consider annual tari¤s and
macroeconomic data for a panel of twenty-one small-open economies. We identify trade policy
shocks by exploiting decision lags inherent in trade policy decisions. The main conclusion is that
protectionism acts as a supply shock, as it is both in‡ationary and recessionary. At the same time,
protectionism has at best a small positive e¤ect on the trade balance.


Monthly and Quarterly Trade Policy Data

Antidumping duties, global safeguards, and countervailing duties— what Bown (2011) calls tempo-
rary trade barriers (TTBs)— are the primary policy exceptions to the trade rules embodied in the
GATT/WTO. These are the policies used by both industrial and developing countries to implement
new trade restrictions during the last twenty years. As a result, exporters are simultaneously sub-
ject to low (on average) applied import tari¤s, while facing frequently changing temporary trade
barriers. Among the latter, antidumping initiatives account for the vast majority of trade pol-
icy actions— across countries, they account for between 80 and 90 percent of all temporary trade
barriers.
    The Global Antidumping Database (GAD), maintained by Bown (2016), collects and organizes
information on product-level antidumping investigations since the 1980s across country users.4 The
database provides information about the dates in which antidumping investigations are initiated,
their outcomes (i.e., the amount of ad-valorem or speci…c antidumping duties), and the products
involved. Given the structure of the dataset, it is possible to build time series data for antidumping
   4
     As of June 2018, the data are available at https://sites.google.com/site/chadpbown/GAD.zip. The time coverage
varies across countries.



                                                        6
policy actions at any time frequency longer than daily.
       Following Bown and Crowley (2013), our baseline measure of trade policy corresponds to the
number of HS-6 products for which an antidumping investigation begins in a given quarter or
month. We construct time series data by matching the initiation dates of each anti-dumping case
recorded in the GAD to the number of HS-6 products interested by each investigation. Notice that
while the products subject to investigations are typically recorded with HS-6 codes, in some cases
the information is available at a more disaggregated level (8- or 10-digits). As in Bown (2011),
we record such observations at the HS-6 level whenever at least one sub-product is subject to the
investigation.5
       We focus on two countries in the main text: Turkey and Canada. For robustness, we also
report the results for India in the Appendix. Turkey and India are the largest and most active
users of temporary trade barriers (Bown, 2011); Canada is the largest and most active user among
developed small-open economies. In Turkey, up to 5:3 percent of imported products are subject
to temporary trade barriers over the period 1994-2009 (Bown, 2011), amounting to 1 percent of
GDP.6 For Canada, the percent of imported products is 2:2 percent, amounting to 0:4 percent of
GDP.
       Figures 1 and 2 report the dynamics of new antidumping initiatives at quarterly frequency
together with the growth rate of real GDP. Both …gures show substantial variation over time in the
trade policy measure. Furthermore, the …gures highlight the lack of systematic correlation between
antidumping investigations and aggregate conditions. In Canada, the unconditional contempora-
neous correlation between GDP growth and new antidumping investigations is 0:04 (the …gure is
very similar when considering linearly detrended GDP). The three largest spikes in antidumping
investigations occur at times of positive economic growth, with a rather modest increase during
the Great Recession. The picture is similar for Turkey. In this case, there is a more pronounced
increase in 2000:Q4, which predates by a year the trough of GDP following the Turkish …nancial
crisis of 2001. As discussed below, our results are qualitatively una¤ected when we restrict the
Turkish sample to the period after 2002.
   5
     A very small fraction of observations are recorded at the 4-digit level. Our baseline measure does not include
these observations. In the Appendix, we show that our results are robust to an alternative treatment of 4-digit
observations.
   6
     Notice that since 1995, Turkey has a customs union agreement with the EU. Therefore, the temporary trade
barriers we focus on represent the country’s main discretionary trade policy tool.




                                                        7
Empirical Strategy
                                                                       p
                                                                       X
For each country, we estimate a structural VAR: Yt =               +         i Yt i   + Aut , where Yt is a vector
                                                                       i=1
that collects the trade policy measure and the macroeconomic variables; ut is a vector of structural
innovations such that E (ut u0t ) = IN ; and A is the matrix that links structural- and reduced-
form innovations. We consider both quarterly and monthly time series. Quarterly data allow us
to use a comprehensive measure of aggregate economic activity (real GDP rather than industrial
production). Monthly data feature a larger number of observations, allowing us to include more
series in the VAR.
       We identify structural trade policy shocks by exploiting the contemporaneous exogeneity of
antidumping investigations with respect to macroeconomic variables. The assumption that an-
tidumping initiatives do not respond to macroeconomic shocks within a month or a quarter re‡ects
the existence of decision lags in the opening of investigations. As summarized in Figure 3, decision
lags stem from technical aspects of regulation and coordination issues among producers: The open-
ing of an investigation requires …ling a petition (supported by a minimum number of producers)
that gathers evidence about dumped imports and a preliminary assessment of compliance.7
       For these reasons, we order the trade policy measure …rst in the VAR and impose a recursive
ordering of the structural shocks. Since we are not interested in identifying shocks to macroeconomic
variables, their ordering (i.e., the corresponding exclusion restrictions) is irrelevant for the purpose
of our analysis.
       The identifying assumption is valid as long as trade policy actions are not anticipated by eco-
nomic agents— from an econometric standpoint, anticipation can lead to a non-fundamental moving
average VAR representation. Our focus on the initiations of antidumping investigations rather than
on their …nal outcome (i.e., the imposed antidumping duties) addresses this issue. First, the open-
ing of an investigation is immediately announced to the public and agents can access the supporting
evidence about the margins of dumping. Since antidumping duties are commensurate to the mar-
gins of dumping, antidumping tari¤s are predictable at the time of the investigation. Second, the
application of antidumping duties is in general retroactive (up to the beginning of the investiga-
tion). Third, the share of antidumping investigations that end up with the imposition of tari¤s
is substantial (more than 85 percent of cases in Turkey and India and approximately 65 percent
   7
    For instance, in Turkey the industry application must represent at least 25 percent of the product’s total pro-
duction. Once producers have gathered evidence about the margins of dumping, they bring the petition before the
board. The preliminary assessment of compliance takes up to 60 days (see the Turkish O¢ cial Gazette, article 20295
on September 27, 1989).


                                                        8
of cases in Canada). For these reasons, our benchmark speci…cation focuses on the initiation of
antidumping investigations.8
       Another issue related to anticipation e¤ects concerns the possibility that antidumping investi-
gations also re‡ect expectations about future economic conditions that are not captured by past
information from the variables included in the VAR. Decision lags in the opening of investiga-
tions imply that new information at time t does not a¤ect the time-t number of new antidumping
initiatives. However, lagged news about future economic conditions may a¤ect current antidump-
ing initiatives. We address this issue in two ways. First, we verify that the identi…ed structural
trade-policy shocks are not Granger-caused by time series that contain information about future
economic activity. As discussed in the robustness analysis below, we consider four series: a stock
market index, the real price of oil, an index of global real economic activity in industrial commodity
markets (Kilian, 2009), and an index of future economic activity. In addition, we re-estimate the
VAR including these time series.
       Finally, a few words on the relationship between our identi…cation approach and the counter-
cyclical, lagged response of TTBs to macroeconomic variables (Bown and Crowley, 2013) are in
order. First, what matters for the identi…cation of trade policy shocks is the exogeneity of TTBs
with respect to contemporaneous macroeconomic shocks— the VAR structure already accounts for
the lagged response of antidumping investigations to macroeconomic shocks that occurred in previ-
ous periods. Second, our analysis uses monthly and quarterly data. At such frequencies, the decision
lags that characterize the opening of an investigation imply that the number of antidumping initia-
tives is not a¤ected by current macroeconomic shocks. Third, as discussed below, our results are
not sensitive to the identifying exclusion restriction. Finally, our results show that protectionism
triggers negative comovement between output and in‡ation. This result is not compatible with
the propagation of demand-side shocks (e.g., …nancial shocks), arguably the key drivers of business
cycles in the countries in our sample.9
   8
      Whether or not the assumption has …rst-order e¤ects depends on the time elapsing between the beginning and the
end of an investigation. For Canada, the median duration of an investigation is 90 days, suggesting that at quarterly
frequencies the distinction is less important. For Turkey, the information about the dates of preliminary decisions
is in general not available. Staiger and Wolak (1994) …nd that the mere opening of an antidumping investigation
has e¤ects on imports due both to an exporter pricing mechanism and to an importer reaction to the …ling of an
investigation.
    9
      A …nal observation further corroborates the contemporaneous exogeneity of antidumping investigations: The
episodes in which antidumping investigations increase more signi…cantly in Canada (e.g., 1997:Q4, 1999:Q3, 2001:Q1)
involve steel-sector products that also feature antidumping investigation in the United States.




                                                         9
Results

We now turn to the discussion of macroeconomic variables and results.


Quarterly Data For each country, we estimate a structural VAR with four observables: the
number of antidumping initiatives, real GDP growth, the core CPI in‡ation rate, and real net
exports over GDP.10 The data cover the period 1994:Q1 to 2015:Q4. Appendix A presents the
details about the data. We estimate the VAR including two lags of each variable.11
       Figures 4 and 5 report the impulse responses to a one-standard deviation shock to antidumping
initiations in Canada and Turkey, respectively.12 In Canada, the shock implies a 50 percent increase
in the average number of HS-6 products subject to new antidumping investigations. Figure 4 shows
that Canadian in‡ation increases and the growth rate of GDP declines. There is a modest, albeit
signi…cant, increase in the trade balance to GDP ratio. Annualized in‡ation rises by approximately
0:2 percent at the peak, while GDP growth declines by 0:1 percent at the trough. To understand
the magnitude of the responses, we examine the economic signi…cance of antidumping investigations
in the largest episodes in our sample. For instance, consider the highest Canadian peak in quarter
2001:Q1. In this episode, the products under investigation were all in the steel sector, accounting for
approximately 30 percent of sectoral imports. In turn, the steel sector’s contribution to Canadian
GDP was 1:1 percent, inclusive of input-output linkages.13 All these initiatives ended up with
the imposition of tari¤s, with a median rate equal to 56 percent. The …gures are similar when
considering the second highest peak in quarter 1998:Q4.
       The results for Turkey are qualitatively identical, although the response of macroeconomic
variables is stronger. Annualized in‡ation rises by approximately 1:5 percent at the peak, while
GDP growth declines by 0:4 percent at the trough. These heightened e¤ects are explained by three
factors. First, the size of the shock is larger, since now a one-standard deviation shock doubles the
number of antidumping initiatives. Second, the imposed tari¤s remain in place longer (at least six
  10
      Core in‡ation is more appropriate than headline in‡ation to assess the e¤ects of antidumping investigations,
since in practice antidumping policy is never applied to energy products. Results remain robust when considering
headline CPI in‡ation. Notice also that Turkish in‡ation dynamics display a signi…cant decline in the early 2000s,
re‡ecting the adoption of in‡ation targeting (the new regime was announced in 2002 and implemented in 2006). For
this reason, we allow the mean of the in‡ation rate to di¤er pre- and post-2004— by 2004, in‡ation was stabilized,
leading to a new regime with lower mean and variance.
   11
      The Akaike information criterion suggests this is a plausible choice for both countries.
   12
      The error bands are at 68 percent con…dence level and obtained via bootstrapping as in Kilian (1998).
   13
      We sum the share of NAICS-6 digit steel sector’s value added over GDP and the share of steel output used
as an input in other industries. The steel sector directly accounted for 0:3 percent of Canadian GDP, while the
intermediate-input usage was worth 0:8 percent of GDP.




                                                       10
and a half years). Third, in our sample, the cycle of the Turkish economy is …ve times more volatile
than Canada, implying larger responses to macroeconomic shocks— the standard deviation of GDP
growth is about 2:7 percent in Turkey and 0:6 percent in Canada. Moreover, in Turkey, the average
in‡ation rate between 1994 and 2002 was 14:5 percent. This suggests that real frictions imply a
stronger propagation of aggregate shocks in Turkey. When we restrict the Turkish sample to the
period after 2002:Q1, the magnitude of the responses becomes similar to those for Canada. This
…nding re‡ects the substantial decline in aggregate volatility in the Turkish economy brought about
by the adoption of in‡ation targeting and far-reaching reforms in the …nancial sector following the
…nancial crisis of 2001.14


Monthly Data At monthly frequency, we replace real GDP growth with the log-deviations of
industrial production from a deterministic trend, and we consider the level of real net exports (mea-
sured in 2010 USD billions). We also add the nominal interest rate and the appreciation rate of the
e¤ective nominal exchange rate to the list of macroeconomic variables.15 The increased number of
observations also allows us to control for the role of macroeconomic developments that characterize
the Turkish economy in the early 2000s— Turkey experienced both …nancial and monetary policy
reforms in the aftermath of the 2001 crisis. In particular, we restrict the sample to the post-2004
period, although the results are not substantially a¤ected by using the full sample. The period of
analysis is hence 2004:M1-2015M:12 for Turkey and 1994:M1-2015:M12 for Canada.
       Figure 6 reports the results for Canada. The industrial production index declines slowly, and
the response remains negative and statistically signi…cant for several months. The annualized
in‡ation rate displays a statistically signi…cant increase after four months (by about 0:3 percent).
The response of the interest rate is also positive and signi…cant on impact, with a slow decay
afterwards. Initially, the response of net exports is positive and statistically signi…cant, followed
by a decline, which is however not statistically signi…cant. The nominal exchange rate displays an
appreciation, which becomes signi…cant at the …fth month.
       Figure 7 reports the results for Turkey. Following the increase in antidumping initiations,
in‡ation increases on impact, and the response remains positive for four months. A second positive
and signi…cant peak occurs at the seventh month. Industrial production declines for seven months
  14
      In May 2001, the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency initiated a comprehensive restructuring program
for the banking system. In January 2002, Turkey adopted in‡ation targeting.
   15
      For the Canadian interest rate, we use the overnight interbank rate provided by the OECD. For Turkey, we
follow Kilinc and Tunc (2014) and use the overnight repo interest rate provided by the Bolsa of Istanbul. (In the
robustness analysis with quarterly data, we used a di¤erent series for the Turkish interest rate, since the repo rate is
only available since 2000.)


                                                          11
with a decline of about 0:5 percent at the trough. Real net exports display a modest increase.
The nominal exchange rate, after an initial depreciation, displays a persistent appreciation, with
a signi…cant peak at the seventh month. By contrast, the response of the interest rate is not
signi…cant.


Robustness In Appendix B, we conduct several exercises to assess further the robustness of our
…ndings. First, as mentioned above, we consider four additional series: an index of share prices
provided by the OECD, the real price of oil, Kilian’s (2009) index of global real economic activ-
ity in industrial commodity markets, and an index of future economic activity again constructed
by the OECD.16 These four variables contain information on agents’ expectations about future
economic activity— for instance, Kilian’s index produces accurate forecasts of world GDP. Thus,
their inclusion helps us address possible concerns about the in‡uence of future expected economic
conditions on antidumping investigations. Moreover, the real price of oil is an additional control
for supply-side determinants of GDP and in‡ation, while the index of global real economic activity
provides information about world demand and supply. Impulse responses show that our results are
robust to the inclusion of these additional variables. Moreover, in Appendix B, we show also that
none of the four variables Granger cause the identi…ed structural trade policy shocks.
       Second, we consider an alternative identi…cation scheme in which antidumping initiatives re-
spond contemporaneously to all macroeconomic shocks. We obtain similar impulse responses to
the benchmark speci…cation.
       Third, we consider alternative temporary trade policy measures:(i) we construct a measure that
exploits information about the outcomes of antidumping investigations, restricting the sample to
the initiatives that e¤ectively end up with the imposition of a tari¤; (ii) we consider an alternative
treatment of observations recorded at the 4-digit level; (iii) we construct an overall temporary
trade barrier measure that includes global safeguards and countervailing duties (in addition to
antidumping investigations).
       Fourth, we verify that our results are not driven by the largest spikes in the dynamics of
antidumping investigations. Visual inspection of the time series of our trade policy measure reveals
there are two such episodes in Turkey (2000:Q4 and 2009:Q3) and three in Canada (1997:Q4,
1998:Q4, and 2001:Q1). We construct dummy variables for each episode and re-estimate the VAR.
The magnitude of the impulse responses is reduced, but the results are qualitatively the same.
  16
    We use the global price of WTI Crude provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. See Appendix A for
the details about the other three additional series.


                                                     12
    Finally, we replace the growth rate of real GDP with log-deviations of real GDP from a deter-
ministic trend. Across all the scenarios we consider, the results remain similar to the benchmark
speci…cation. In addition, in Appendix C, we estimate the VAR on Indian data. The results are in
line with the evidence for Canada and Turkey.


Annual Tari¤ Data: A Panel Structural VAR of Small Open Economies

The Global Antidumping Database makes it possible to construct monthly and quarterly measures
of trade policy. However, antidumping investigations only apply to a subset of imports. For this
reason, we now consider a more comprehensive trade policy measure, the import-weighted average
of the applied tari¤ rates.17
    Since tari¤ data are only available at annual frequency, we estimate a panel structural VAR
using harmonized data for a sample of twenty-one countries over the period 1999-2016.18 All the
countries in the sample had a ‡oating exchange rate regime and none of them hit the zero lower
bound on the policy interest rate over the sample period.19
    Figure 8 plots the tari¤ data for the twenty-one countries in our sample. Over time, the applied
tari¤ rates show a general decline in all the countries considered. However, there is signi…cant
variation around the downward trend in several countries. Given this observation, we measure
temporary trade policy interventions by removing a deterministic trend from the tari¤ series.
    Our benchmark VAR speci…cation includes three macroeconomic variables: the growth rate of
real GDP, CPI in‡ation, and net exports over GDP.20 The data come from the World Development
Indicators database (see Appendix A for details). We also include country-…xed e¤ects, accounting
for unobserved, time-invariant cross-country heterogeneity, and year …xed e¤ects, accounting for
the presence of common shocks across countries. Due to the limited dimension of the dataset, we
restrict each equation coe¢ cient to be the same across countries.
   17
      We use HS-2 digits tari¤ rates from WITS. We use the concept of e¤ectively applied tari¤, which is de…ned as
the lowest available tari¤. If a preferential tari¤ exists, it is used as the e¤ectively applied tari¤. Otherwise, the
MFN applied tari¤ is used. The import-weighted average of applied tari¤ rates is computed by using …xed weights,
with imports …xed at the 1999 level. This addresses the concern that variation in the average may re‡ect changes in
weights rather than in tari¤s.
   18
      We choose the sample period to include as many countries as possible in the analysis. The sample includes
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, Indonesia, India, Israel, South Korea, South Africa, Malaysia,
Mexico, Norway, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, Paraguay, Thailand, Turkey, and Uruguay.
   19
      Malaysia pegged its currency to the US dollar for part of the sample. However, the exclusion of Malaysia from
the sample does not a¤ect our results.
   20
      The panel-unit-root tests proposed by Levin, Lin, and Chu (2002) reject at the one percent con…dence level the
presence of unit roots in the three macroeconomic variables we use (against the alternative that each panel variable
is stationary).




                                                         13
         We continue to identify trade policy shocks by assuming that trade policy responds with a one-
period delay to macroeconomic shocks. As before, the assumption re‡ects decision lags in trade
policy changes. For instance, in the context of the WTO, when tari¤s increase above their bound
rate, countries have to negotiate with the most concerned trading partners (possibly settling a
compensation for the loss of trade). Moreover, various countries in our sample are part of custom
unions (Brazil, Colombia, Paraguay, Turkey and Uruguay), and common external tari¤s are set at
the level of the union. We estimate the VAR including one lag of each variable.
         Figure 9 (Panel A) reports the impulse responses to a one-standard deviation tari¤ increase
(around 1:75 percentage points).21 In‡ation rises by 0:3 percentage points, while GDP growth
decreases by about 0:2 percent on impact. Net exports over GDP increase by 0:25 percent at the
peak, and the e¤ect is statistically signi…cant.22 We obtain similar results (available upon request),
when we include a measure of the short-term interest rate in the VAR. Following a tari¤ shock, the
response of the interest rate is positive and statistically signi…cant.
         Overall, the empirical analysis provides evidence of non-negligible macroeconomic e¤ects of
temporary trade barriers at frequencies that are relevant for business cycle analysis. In particular,
trade policy tends to be in‡ationary and recessionary in small open economies that operate under
‡exible exchange rates. At the same time, protectionism has at best a small positive e¤ect on the
trade balance.


3        The Model

In this Section, we develop the small open economy model of trade and macroeconomic dynamics
that we will use for the exercises in the remainder of the paper.
         As is now standard practice in the literature, we model the small open economy as a limiting
case of a two-country dynamic general equilibrium model in which one country (the small open
economy, also referred to as Home) is of measure zero relative to the rest of the world (Foreign
henceforth). As a consequence, the policy decisions and macroeconomic dynamics of the small open
economy have no impact on Foreign. The small economy’s terms of trade ‡uctuate endogenously in
response to aggregate shocks due to the presence of …rm monopoly power in both countries. Next
we describe in detail the problems facing households and …rms in the small open economy.
    21
     As before, the error bands are at 68 percent con…dence level and obtained via bootstrapping as in Kilian (1998).
Panel B in Figure 9 presents the responses generated by the model described in the next section.
  22
     In Appendix C, we show that the improvement of the trade balance is the result of a decline in imports that
more than o¤sets a decline in exports.



                                                         14
Household Preferences

The small open economy is populated by a unit mass of atomistic households. Each household
is a monopolistic supplier of one speci…c labor input. The representative household, indexed by
h 2 [0; 1], maximizes the expected intertemporal utility function

                                           1
                                                                                                            !
                                           X          Ct (h)1              C
                                                                                       Lt (h)1+         L
                                                  t
                                      E0                                                                            ;                            (1)
                                                       1      C                          1+ L
                                           t=0


where     2 (0; 1) is the discount factor, Ct (h) is a consumption basket that aggregates traded and
non-traded goods as described below, and Lt (h) is the number of hours worked. In order to simplify
the notation, we anticipate symmetry of the equilibrium across households and omit the index h
below, unless it is necessary for clarity.
   Consumption is a C.E.S. composite of tradable and non-tradable baskets, CtT and CtN :

                                                                                                                             N
                                                                      N 1               1                   N 1
                                                  1                                                                         N 1
                             Ct = (1        N)    N       CtT          N       +       N
                                                                                        N
                                                                                            CtN              N                    ;


where     N   2 (0; 1] is the share of non-tradables and
                                                      > 0 denotes the constant elasticity of sub-
                                                                                   N
                                                                                   h      i 1
stitution. The consumption-based price index is Pt = (1          T 1 N +         N 1 N 1 N,
                                                           N ) Pt           N Pt

where PtT is the price of the tradable basket and PtN is the price of the non-tradable basket (all
prices are in units of Home currency unless noted).
    The non-tradable consumption basket CtN aggregates consumption varieties CtN (n) over a con-
                     hR                    i N =( N 1)
                        1
tinuum [0; 1]: CtN = 0 CtN (n)( N 1)= N dn             , where N > 1 is the symmetric elasticity
of substitution across non-tradable goods. The corresponding consumption-based price index is
      hR                i1=(1 N )
         1
PtN = 0 PtN (n)1 N dn             , where PtN (n) is the price of product n.
   We use the subscript D to denote quantities and prices of a country’s own tradable goods
consumed domestically, and the subscript X to denote quantities and prices of exports. The trad-
able consumption basket CtT aggregates consumption sub-baskets of Home tradables and Foreign
exports in Armington form with elasticity of substitution                                   T   > 0:

                         "                                                                          1
                                                                                                        #       T
                                                              1        1                    T               T       1
                                      1               T
                  CtT   = (1     X)   T
                                            T
                                           CD;t           T       +   X
                                                                       T        T
                                                                               CX;t             T
                                                                                                                        ;    0<       X   < 1;


where 1       X   is the weight attached to the country’s own good. Preferences for tradables are biased
in favor of domestic goods whenever               X   < 1=2. The price index that corresponds to the basket CtT

                                                                      15
                                                                               1
                                              1   T                        1       T
                                                             T 1
is given by   PtT   = (1         X)
                                        T
                                       PD;t           +   X PX;t
                                                                       T
                                                                                       .
                                    T , aggregates consumption varieties C T (!) over a contin-
   Domestic tradable consumption, CD;t                                      D;t
               hR                        i T =( T 1)
         T =
uum : CD;t             T    ( T 1)= T d!
                 !2 CD;t (!)                         , where T > 1 is the symmetric elasticity of
substitution across goods. A similar basket describes the imported consumption bundle: CX;t T =
hR                         iT (T )
                             =   1

       C T (!)( T 1)= T d!         . As in Ghironi and Melitz (2005), at any given point in time,
   !2    X;t

only a subset of goods      t    2      is available to consumers. Hence, the price index for the domestic trad-
                           hR                           i1=(1 T )
                T =
able bundle is PD;t                    P T (!)1 T d!                       T (!) is the nominal price of good ! 2
                                                                  , where PD;t
                                !2   t   D;t
                                                                                                                            1=(1   T)
                                                                           R               h                  i1   T
                                                            T                                       IM    T (!)
 t . The price index for the imported bundle is            PX;t    =       !2          t
                                                                                               1+   t    PX;t          d!               ,
where   IM
        t     > 0 is an ad-valorem import tari¤ and PX;t
                                                     T (!) is the dock price of the imported variety


(denominated in Home currency). We assume that the government rebates the tari¤ revenue to
households in lump-sum fashion.23


Production

In each country, there are two vertically integrated production stages. At the upstream level,
perfectly competitive …rms use capital and labor to produce a non-tradable intermediate input. At
the downstream level, two sectors use the intermediate input to produce tradable and non-tradable
…nal consumption goods. In the benchmark version of the model, we consider ‡exible prices in
both tradable and non-tradable sectors.


Homogeneous Intermediate Input Production

There is a unit mass of perfectly competitive intermediate producers. The representative interme-
diate …rm produces output YtI = Zt Kt L1t                 , where Zt is exogenous aggregate productivity, Kt is
physical capital, and Lt is a bundle of the labor inputs supplied by individual households. The
composite labor input aggregates in Dixit-Stiglitz form the di¤erentiated labor inputs provided by
                           hR                     i =( 1)
                              1         ( 1)=
domestic households: Lt      0  (Lt (h))       dh         ; where > 0 is the elasticity of substi-
tution between the di¤erent labor inputs, and Lt (h) denotes the labor hired from household h.
                           hR                i1=(1 )
                              1    n (h))1
The total wage bill is wtn   0  (w t       dh        , where wtn (h) is the nominal wage rate paid
  23
    Our assumptions about preferences over consumption sub-bundles imply standard demand functions that depend
on the relevant relative prices and quantities. We omit them for brevity and just note that the ad-valorem tari¤ acts
as an import demand shifter: all else given, higher tari¤s increase the relative price of Foreign exports and shift
demand away from Foreign products.




                                                             16
to household h. Each household sets wtn (h) acting as a monopolistic supplier of its di¤erentiated
labor input. We discuss wage determination when presenting the household’s optimal decisions.
       The Home intermediate sector …rm chooses Lt and Kt to maximize per-period pro…t: dIt
't YtI       (wtn =Pt ) Lt        rK;t Kt , where 't is the real price (in units of …nal consumption) of the
intermediate input, and rK;t is the real rental rate of capital.


Non-Tradable Sector

Our model will feature Melitz-type selection of tradable producers into exporting. However, the
Melitz model is best thought of as a model of the tradable sector, part of which turns out to
be non-traded in equilibrium (thus, the model is naturally suited to capture the evidence that
many manufacturing producers do not export— see Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum, 2003).
We address the fact that economies include sectors that produce truly non-tradable output by
augmenting the framework with an exogenously non-tradable sector.
       This sector is populated by a continuum of monopolistically competitive …rms, each producing
a di¤erent non-traded variety n.24 Production uses intermediate inputs in linear fashion. Optimal
price setting implies that the real price of product n is equal to a markup over marginal cost:
 N     (n)    PtN (n) =Pt = [
 t                                   N= ( N   1)] 't .


Tradable Sector

There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive …rms, each producing a di¤erent tradable
consumption good variety that can be sold domestically and abroad. Firms are heterogeneous
since they produce with di¤erent technologies indexed by relative productivity z. The number of
…rms serving the domestic and export market is endogenous. Prior to entry, …rms face a sunk
entry cost fE:t (in units of intermediate input), representing the real costs of regulation and the
technological investment associated with market entry. Upon entry, Home and Foreign …rms draw
their productivity level z from a common distribution G(z) with support on [zmin ; 1). This relative
productivity level remains …xed thereafter. There are no …xed costs of production. Hence, all …rms
that enter the tradable sector produce in every period until they are hit by a “death”shock, which
occurs with probability              2 (0; 1) in every period. Exporting is costly and involves both a per-unit
iceberg trade cost           t   > 0 and a per-period …xed cost fX;t in units of the intermediate input.
  24
    We abstract from producer heterogeneity and endogenous producer entry in the non-tradable sector, since these
mechanisms are not central to understanding the short-run e¤ects of protectionism. See Cacciatore, Duval, Fiori,
and Ghironi (2016) for a model with endogenous producer entry in the non-tradable sector.


                                                            17
        T (z) and P T (z) denote, respectively, the nominal domestic price (in Home currency)
   Let PD;t        X;t
                                                                                T (z) is the
and the export price (in Foreign currency) set by Home producer z. Notice that PX;t
                          T (z) does not include Foreign import tari¤s (if any). All …rms set
dock export price, i.e., PX;t
‡exible prices that re‡ect the same proportional markup                     T=( T        1) over marginal cost. Let
 T (z)      T (z) =P and
           PD;t                   T (z)        T (z) =P denote real prices relative to the consumer price
                                              PX;t
 D;t                t             X;t                  t

index in the destination market. The optimal prices are then given by:                    T (z)   =[
                                                                                          D;t          T=( T   1)] 't =z
and   T (z)   = (1 + t )     T (z)=Q ,     where Qt     "t Pt =Pt is the consumption-based real exchange rate
      X;t                    D;t    t

(units of Home consumption per unit of Foreign) and "t is the nominal exchange rate (units of Home
currency per unit of Foreign).
   Due to the …xed export cost, a …rm exports in a given period if and only if the export pro…t,
dTX;t (z), is non-negative. This will be the case as long as productivity z is above a cuto¤ level zX;t
such that: zX;t = inffz : dTX;t (z) > 0g— see Appendix D for the analytical details. Firms with
productivity below the export cuto¤ level zX;t produce only for their domestic market in period t.
The set of exporting …rms ‡uctuates over time with changes in the pro…tability of export.
   As in Melitz (2003) and Ghironi and Melitz (2005), all the information on the distribution of
productivity levels G(z) that is relevant for aggregate outcomes can be summarized by an aver-
age productivity level z~D for all producing …rms that serve the domestic market and an average
z~X;t for all Home exporters. We relegate the details to Appendix D and only note here that, in
every period, there is a mass ND;t of tradable-sector …rms that produce in the Home country.
Among these …rms, there are NX;t = [1                 G (zX;t )] ND;t exporters. For future reference, we fol-
low Melitz (2003) in de…ning the average productivity of Home …rms in the tradable sector as:
     n                                             o1=( T 1)
z~t = z~DT 1 + [~
                zX;t = (1 + t )] T 1 (NX;t =ND;t )           .


Firm Entry and Exit In every period there is an unbounded mass of prospective entrants in
both countries. Entrants at time t start producing only at t + 1, a plausible assumption given
the quarterly calibration we will pursue. The exogenous exit shock hits incumbents and new
entrants with equal probability at the end of each period. Hence, the law of motion for the
number of producing …rms is ND;t = (1                 )(ND;t   1   + NE;t   1 ).   The expected post-entry value, e~t ,
that a prospective entrant computes in taking the entry decision is given by the expected present
                                                                        hP                         i
                                                                           1               s t d~T ,
discounted value of the stream of per-period average pro…ts: e~t     Et    s=t+1  t;s (1 )       s

where    t;t+s
                   s (C
                          t+s =Ct )
                                      C
                                          is the stochastic discount factor and d~Ts the average total pro…ts,




                                                          18
returned to households as dividends.25 Entry occurs until average …rm value equals the entry cost,
leading to the free-entry condition e~t = 't fE;t .


Household Budget Constraint and Intertemporal Decisions

International asset markets are incomplete, as non-contingent nominal bonds denominated in For-
eign currency are the only internationally traded asset. The representative household can also
invest in non-contingent nominal bonds denominated in Home currency, which are traded only do-
mestically. Let At+1 (h) and A         ;t+1 (h)   denote, respectively, nominal holdings of Home and Foreign
bonds for the representative Home household h. To ensure a determinate steady-state equilibrium
and stationary responses to temporary shocks in the model, we follow Turnovsky (1985), and,
more recently, Benigno (2009), and assume a quadratic cost of adjusting Foreign bond holdings
                      2    26
   [A   ;t+1 (h) =Pt ] =2.      These costs are paid to …nancial intermediaries which rebate the revenue
to households in lump-sum fashion in equilibrium.
       In addition to bonds, the representative household can invest also in shares in a mutual fund of
the domestic …rms producing in the tradable sector. This is the mechanism through which household
savings are made available to prospective entrants to cover their entry costs. The mutual fund pays
a total real dividend in each period that is equal to the average total pro…t of all home …rms in the
tradable sector that produce in that period, ND;t d~Tt . During period t, the representative household
buys xt+1 (h) shares in a mutual fund of ND;t + NE;t …rms. Even though only 1                        of these …rms
will produce and pay dividends in t + 1, the household does not know which …rms will be hit by
the death shock. Hence, it …nances operations by all incumbents and new entrants, with exit risk
a¤ecting the equilibrium price of equity. The date-t price of a claim to the future pro…t stream of
the mutual fund is equal to the average price of claims to future pro…ts of Home …rms, e~t .
       The household also accumulates physical capital and rents it to intermediate input producers
in a competitive capital market. Investment in the physical capital stock, IK;t , requires use of the
same composite of all available varieties as the basket Ct . Physical capital obeys a standard law of
motion: Kt+1 (h) = (1             K ) Kt (h)   + IK;t (h), where   K   2 (0; 1) denotes the depreciation rate of
capital.
       Households set the nominal wage wtn (h) subject to a quadratic adjustment cost (            w =2)
                                                                                                           2    n
                                                                                                           w;t wt (h) Lt (h),

  25
    The average pro…t from domestic sales in period t is d~TD;t        zD ), while the average export pro…t is d~TX;t
                                                                dTD;t (~
dTX;t (~    Thus, the average total pro…t of each Home …rm is given by d~Tt = d~TD;t + (NX;t =ND;t ) d~TX;t .
       zX;t ).
   26
    Since only Foreign bonds are traded across borders, de…ning an adjustment cost for Foreign bond holdings is
su¢ cient to pin down a unique steady state and ensure stationarity of the model.



                                                          19
where         w;t (h)   = wtn (h) =wtn 1 (h)               1 denotes nominal wage in‡ation. Wages are ‡exible if                                  w   = 0.
In real terms, the adjustment cost can be interpreted as units of …nal consumption that the house-
hold needs to purchase when implementing a wage change. The size of this cost is assumed to be
larger when the household’s labor income increases.
   The representative Home household’s period budget constraint is:

                                                                             2
                                                          A   ;t+1 (h)
At+1 (h) + "t A          ;t+1 (h)   +        "t P t                              + Pt Ct (h) + Pt IK;t (h) + e~t (ND;t + NE;t )xt+1 (h) =
                                         2                      Pt
                                                                                   h                            i
                                                                                                 w    2
                         (1 + it )At (h) + (1 + it )A                 ;t (h) "t   + 1                 w;t (h)       wtn (h) Lt (h) +
                                                                                                2
                                         +Pt rK;t Kt (h) + (d~Tt + e~t )ND;t xt (h) + Tt (h) ;                                                         (2)


where it+1 and it+1 are, respectively, the nominal interest rates on Home and Foreign bond holdings
between t and t + 1, known with certainty as of t. Moreover, Tt (h) aggregates lump-sum rebates
of the cost of adjusting bond holdings, the pro…ts from non-tradables producers, and the revenue
that the government receives from tari¤s.
   The …rst-order condition for wtn (h) implies that the real wage, wt (h)                                                        wtn (h) =Pt , is a time-
varying markup,               w;t (h),   over the marginal rate of substitution between hours and consumption.
Eliminating the household-identi…er h, since symmetric households make identical choices: wt =
          L         C
 w;t Lt       =Ct       . The endogenous wage markup is given by:


                        w;t                                                  8                                                               9:
                                                                             <                   w;t (h) (1     +     w;t )
                                                                                                                                             =
                               (        1) 1          2
                                                       w      2
                                                              w;t    +   w                 h                                 2           i
                                                                             :        Et
                                                                                                          (1+         w;t+1 )     Lt+1       ;
                                                                                               t;t+1 w;t+1 1+         C;t+1        Lt


Intuitively, households change their markups over time in order to smooth wage changes across
periods.
   The Euler equation for capital accumulation requires 1 = Et [ t;t+1 (rK;t+1 + 1  K )], while the
                                                        h                      i
Euler equation for share holdings implies e~t = (1  ) Et t;t+1 d~Tt+1 + e~t+1 . Finally, the Euler
equations for bond holdings are:

                                                                                                    t;t+1
                                                 1+        at   = (1 + it+1 ) Et                                ;
                                                                                               1+     C;t+1

                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                    t;t+1 Qt+1
                                   1+ a         ;t+1   +        at   = 1 + it+1 Et                                            ;
                                                                                                 1 + C;t+1 Qt


                                                                                 20
where a          ;t+1       A   ;t+1 =Pt .    The term           at   captures a risk-premium shock that we append to the
Euler equations for bond holdings and that a¤ects the household’s demand for risk-free assets.
We assume that                  at   follows a zero-mean autoregressive process:                         at   =   "a   at 1   +   at ,   where
       i:i:d:
 at             N 0;    2
                        a
                            .27
       We present the details of the symmetric equilibrium in Appendix D, and we limit ourselves
to presenting the law of motion for net foreign assets below. Home bonds are in zero net supply
and shares in the mutual fund of tradable producers are fully held domestically, which implies the
equilibrium conditions at+1 = at = 0 and xt+1 = xt = 1 in all periods. Home net foreign assets are
determined by: Qt a               ;t+1   = Qt (1 + rt ) a        ;t   + T Bt , where rt is the foreign real interest rate, de…ned
by 1 + rt = (1 + it )=(1 +                   C;t )   and   C;t        Pt =Pt   1        1, and T Bt   NX;t Qt ~TX;t CX;t
                                                                                                                     T                   T
                                                                                                                              NX;t ~X;t CX;t
is the trade balance. The change in net foreign assets between t and t + 1 is determined by the
current account: Qt (a               ;t+1        a ;t ) = CAt           Qt rt a    ;t   + T Bt .


Monetary Policy

To close the model, we specify a rule for monetary policy. Our benchmark policy speci…cation
considers a ‡exible exchange rate. We explicitly take into account the possibility that the nominal
interest rate it+1 cannot fall below some lower bound izlb , so that, in each period, the interest
rate is constrained to be such that it+1 > izlb . We set izlb equal to zero in our simulations.
Thus, the monetary authority sets the nominal interest rate following a feedback rule of the form
                                     h                         %Y i1 %i
1 + it+1 = max 1 + izlb ; (1 + it )%i (1 + i) (1 + ~Ct )% Y~gt          , where i is the steady-state
nominal interest rate. Since gains from variety are mostly unmeasured in CPI data (Broda and
Weinstein, 2010), we assume that the central bank responds to data-consistent measures for CPI
in‡ation and the output gap, ~Ct and Y~gt respectively.28 Following Ghironi and Melitz (2005),
we obtain a data-consistent price index, P~t that removes the pure product variety e¤ect from
the welfare-consistent index Pt as explained in Appendix E. In turn, ~Ct = P~t =P~t                                               1      1 and
Y~gt = Pt Ygt =P~t , where the GDP gap, Ygt , measures deviations of GDP, Yt                                      Ct + IKt + T Bt , from
the ‡exible-wage outcome.
       Table A.1 in the Appendix summarizes the equilibrium conditions of the model. Since we do not
  27
     We follow Smets and Wouters (2007) and subsequent literature in specifying this shock as an exogenous term
appended to the Euler equations for bonds. Nevertheless, as shown by Fisher (2015), the shock at can be inter-
preted as a structural shock to the demand for safe and liquid assets, i.e., at captures, in reduced form, stochastic
‡uctuations in household preferences for holding one-period nominally risk-free assets. Notice that the risk-premium
shock is isomorphic to a discount factor shock (a “beta shock”) only up to a …rst-order approximation.
  28
     In the presence of endogenous producer entry and preferences that exhibit “love for variety,”the welfare-consistent
aggregate price index Pt can ‡uctuate even if product prices remain constant.


                                                                            21
focus on the consequences of changes in entry costs and iceberg trade costs, we assume fE;t = fE ,
fX:t = fX , and     t   =   in all periods. Moreover, we keep aggregate productivity constant at its
steady-state value, Zt = Zt = Z. Eight Foreign variables directly a¤ect macroeconomic dynamics
                                                                                  T
in the small open economy: Yt , it+1 ,           C
                                                 t   ,   T
                                                         t   ,    T ,
                                                                  X;t   ~TX;t , Y~X;t , and NX;t . Aggregate demand,
Yt , the nominal interest rate, it+1 , and in‡ation,              C   , are determined by treating the rest of the
                                                                  t

world (Foreign) as a closed economy that features the same production structure, technology, and
frictions that characterize the small open economy. To determine price and quantities related to
Foreign exports, we assume that Foreign producers solve a pro…t maximization problem that is
equivalent to that faced by Home producers (see Appendix D).


4        Calibration

We interpret periods as quarters. We set the discount factor                     equal to 0:99, the share of capital
in the Cobb-Douglas production function of the upstream intermediate sector,                           , equal to 0:33,
the capital depreciation rate        K   equal to 0:025, and risk aversion,         C,    equal to 2. We calibrate the
elasticity of substitution between tradable and non-tradable goods,                  N,   equal to 0:5, consistent with
the estimates for industrialized countries in Mendoza (1991). We set the elasticity of substitution
between tradable goods produced in Home and Foreign,                       T,   equal to 1:5, the standard value in
the international business cycle literature. We set the elasticity of substitution of non-tradable
varieties such that     N   = 6 to generate a 20 percent markup in steady state. Following Ghironi
and Melitz (2005), we set the elasticity of substitution of tradable varieties                    T   equal to 3:8. We
assume that …rm-level productivity z is drawn from a Pareto distribution with lower bound zmin
and shape parameter          >   T       1. We set       equal to 3:4, and we normalize zmin and fE to 1.29
We choose the …xed export cost fX such that, in steady state, 21 percent of tradable-sector …rms
export output abroad (Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum, 2003). Using the results in Born
and Pfeifer (2016), we map the Rotemberg wage adjustment cost,                       w,   into an average duration of
nominal wage contracts. Consistent with Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), we assume
that nominal wages are …xed for approximately 3 quarters on average, which implies                        w   = 116. We
set the elasticity of substitution of di¤erentiated labor inputs                = 11, which implies a wage markup
equal to 10 percent under ‡exible wages. We set the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, 1=                       L,   equal
to 1, a conventional value in the literature. Finally, to ensure steady-state determinacy and model
    29
    This calibration ensures that the lower-bound productivity zmin is low enough relative to the export costs that
zX;t is above zmin .



                                                             22
stationarity, we set the adjustment cost parameter for foreign bond holdings,                , to 0:0025.
         We calibrate the parameters that directly a¤ect trade volumes and monetary policy to match
Canadian data. We calibrate the degree of home bias,              N,   and the size of the tradable sector,      T,

to match a steady-state trade-to-GDP ratio of 50 percent and a steady-state output share of 30
percent in manufacturing (the tradable sector). We set iceberg trade costs,                and     , equal to 0:3,
and we set average import tari¤s,          IM   and   IM   , equal to 2 percent, in line with Canadian and
U.S. tari¤s. Finally, we parametrize the interest rate rule consistent with the estimates in Kichian
(2015): %i = 0:5, % = 2:80, %Y = 0.


5        Protectionism and Business Cycle Dynamics under a Flexible Exchange
         Rate

The theoretical literature on the macroeconomic e¤ects of tari¤s has long been dominated by
Mundell’s (1961) conclusion that, under ‡exible exchange rates, a tari¤ is contractionary. In
Mundell’s static model, the imposition of a tari¤ improves the terms of trade, which increases
saving via the Harberger-Laursen-Metzler e¤ect. This rise in saving reduces aggregate demand,
and aggregate supply falls to clear the goods market.30 Chan (1978) and Krugman (1982) showed
that Mundell’s result is indeed robust with respect to various extensions of the basic IS-LM model.
In addition, Krugman (1982) argued that the imposition of tari¤s can lead to a deterioration of the
current account balance. In contrast with these results, the …rst analysis of tari¤s in a dynamic
setting by Eichengreen (1981) showed that the short-run output contraction depends upon the
extent to which the domestic currency appreciates in the short run, emphasizing the intertemporal
tradeo¤s involved in a tari¤.
         In this Section, we re-assess the classic question about the consequences of import tari¤s under a
‡exible exchange rate. We …rst investigate the consequences of protectionism by assuming that the
economy is at the deterministic steady state. This exercise allows us to evaluate the prediction of
the model against the data. Next, we study the short-run e¤ects of protectionism when the economy
faces major slack (induced by a risk-premium shock) and binding constraints on monetary policy
easing (the ZLB). Notice that in our analysis, we abstract from export subsidies, since those are
forbidden under WTO rules.
    30
    According to the Harberger-Laursen-Metzler e¤ect, a terms of trade deterioration reduces real income, which in
turn increases the real expenditure needed to maintain the same standard of living. As a result, saving declines and
the current account deteriorates.




                                                        23
    We study macroeconomic dynamics following a temporary increase in Home import tari¤s,
 IM 31
 t .     We consider a perfect foresight environment: The policy shock comes as an initial surprise
to agents, who then have perfect foresight from that moment on. We solve the model as a nonlinear,
forward-looking, deterministic system using a Newton-Raphson method, as described in La¤argue
(1990). This method solves simultaneously all equations for each period, without relying on low-
order, local approximations.


Protectionism in Normal Times

We assume that a tari¤ shock in the model corresponds to the tari¤ shock identi…ed in the panel
VAR. Therefore, we parametrize               IM    consistent with the stochastic process estimated in Section 2.
                                             t

This requires setting the quarterly persistence of the shock equal to 0:56, with a standard deviation
of innovations equal to 0:034.32
    Figure 10 (continuous lines) shows the e¤ects of a temporary increase in                        IM      at time 0, assuming
                                                                                                    t

that the economy was at the deterministic steady state until time                          1. Consistent with the VAR
evidence, output falls and in‡ation increases in the aftermath of the tari¤ shock. Moreover, the
ratio of net exports over GDP increases.33 In order to assess the quantitative …t of the model, we
construct model-based, annualized measures of the macroeconomic variables included in the panel
VAR (GDP growth, in‡ation, and net exports over GDP). Panel B in Figure 9 shows that the
impulse responses from the model are quantitatively in line with the panel VAR estimates.34
    The in‡ationary e¤ect of the trade policy shock is easily understood. The (welfare-consistent)
CPI index, Pt , can be written as:

    8               2                                                                  31                                         91   1

    >                                                                         !1               N
                                                                                                                                  >        N
    <                                 1                     P~ T
                                                                                   T       1   T                                  =
                                             T                                                                       1
                N ) 4$D;t     P~D;t                                                    5
                      T         T                   T                    IM
                                                          "t D 1 +                                               PtN
                                                                                                                              N
Pt = (1                                          + $X;t                  t                         +        N                                  ;
    >
    :                                                       z~X;t                                                                 >
                                                                                                                                  ;
                                                                                                                                       (3)
                               (1         T )=(1   T)                                                  (1       T )=(1   T)
       T
where $D;t = (1            X )ND;t
                                                             T
                                                        and $X;t =   X   [(1 + ) z~D ]1        T
                                                                                                   NX;t                       are time-
varying weights on prices of Home and Foreign tradable goods that depend on producer dynamics.35
  31
     In the model, a tari¤ increase has allocative e¤ects for various reasons: trade is not balanced, there are non-traded
goods, we focus on a temporary shock, and we abstract from export subsidies. For this reason Lerner’s symmetry
does not hold.
  32
     This implies that tIM increases by 1:75 percent in the …rst year, returning to its initial level after 1 year as in
Figure 9 Panel A.
  33
     Consistent with the data, net exports increase because imports fall by more than exports.
  34
     Appendix E shows that results are similar when constructing measures for real GDP and in‡ation using the
data-consistent price index P~t .
  35                                                                                                                T
     Equation (3) combines the de…nition of the Home price index, with the equilibrium conditions PD;t                   =


                                                             24
Higher tari¤s increase import prices faced by Home consumers, raising, other things equal, this
price index. In addition, Home market share is reallocated from relatively more productive Foreign
                                                                                          T relative
exporters to relatively less productive domestic producers, which implies an increase in $D;t
    T . The reallocation of market share lowers the average productivity content of goods sold
to $X;t
to Home consumers, raising the price index other things equal.36 Higher import prices and lower
e¢ ciency of production prevail on a decline in the price of domestic non-tradables (due to lower
aggregate demand, as explained below) in pushing in‡ation upward.
    The output response depends on the relative importance of three margins of adjustment: (i)
expenditure-switching toward domestic goods (an expansionary force); (ii) a reduction in real in-
come that dampens aggregate consumption and investment; and (iii) a contractionary monetary
policy response. Expenditure-switching towards Home goods— which, other things equal, boosts
domestic demand and output— stems from the increase in the average price of imported varieties,
 1+    IM
       t      P~X;t
                T , which is only partly mitigated by the appreciation of the nominal exchange rate.37


    At the same time, higher tari¤s reduce aggregate real income (expenditure reduction).38 The
reason is again a combination of macroeconomic and microeconomic forces. At the macro level, the
increase in the price of imports makes investment in physical capital— which combines both Home
and Foreign goods— more costly. As a result, IK;t declines, reducing output over time. Moreover,
since households also consume a mix of both domestic and foreign goods, households …nd themselves
having to spend more of their reduced real income to consume any given amount of imports and
any given amount of the bundle of less-e¢ ciently-produced domestic tradables. At the micro level,
the appreciation of the domestic currency lowers Home exports (both the number of exporting
…rms and their average output decline), reducing the average productivity of domestic …rms— a
decline in NX;t =ND;t in the de…nition of z~t , re‡ecting the shift of market share towards relatively
less productive non-exporting …rms.39 Lower real income causes imports to decline, so net exports
increase, and Home experiences a current account surplus. But this improvement comes at the cost
of a recession.
    Finally, since the trade shock acts as a supply shock, the central bank faces a trade-o¤ between
  1=(1    ) T                1=(1  T ) ~T
ND;t T P~D;t        T
               , PX;t  = NDX;t        PX;t and P~X;t
                                                 T
                                                     = (1 + t ) "t P~D;t
                                                                      T
                                                                              zX;t . Notice that P~D;t
                                                                         z~D =~                    T
                                                                                                       = P~D
                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                             because Home
protectionism has no e¤ect on the rest of the world. Moreover, t = .
  36                                          T
     Notice that, in absolute terms, even $D;t    declines initially, since the number of domestic producers, ND;t , falls.
  37
     Notice that the Foreign domestic price TD;t and the iceberg trade cost t are not a¤ected by Home protectionism.
  38
     The e¤ects we describe are only partially mitigated by the increase in the tari¤ revenue that the government
rebates to households.
  39
     Notice that z~t declines even if the average productivity of exporters increases (due to the increase in the export-
productivity cuto¤ zX;t ).



                                                            25
stabilizing output and in‡ation. When the response to in‡ation is su¢ ciently aggressive (as implied
by our calibration), the policy rate increases, further depressing current demand. Both nominal
and real exchange rates appreciate.40 To isolate the role of contractionary monetary policy, Figure
10 (dashed lines) plots the dynamics in an economy without nominal rigidities. The contractionary
e¤ects of protectionism remain similar to the benchmark model, although the decline in output is
one-third smaller.
       In equilibrium, lower real income and the contractionary response of monetary policy push the
small open economy into a recession: consumption, investment, employment, and GDP decline.
Overall, these …ndings represent a combination of the results in Mundell (1961), Krugman (1982),
and Eichengreen (1981). The contractionary e¤ect of the tari¤ is as in Mundell and Krugman,
but is contrary to the short-run expansionary e¤ect discussed by Eichengreen. On the other hand,
the initial current account surplus is consistent with Eichengreen but in contrast to Krugman. In
Appendix F, we show that the contractionary e¤ects of protectionism are larger the higher and
more persistent the tari¤ increase.
       To understand the relative importance of macro and micro forces in accounting for the reces-
sionary e¤ects of protectionism, Figure 11 presents impulse responses for three simpli…ed versions
of the model. The …rst version assumes …nancial autarky (i.e., no international trade in bonds); the
second version abstracts from …rm-level dynamics (by assuming a constant number of symmetric
producers in the tradable sector); the third version abstracts from both …rm dynamics and physical
capital. Each margin of adjustment plays an important role in propagating the initial recession.
Under …nancial autarky, the appreciation of the real exchange rate is stronger, since relative prices
adjust more to preserve external balance. In turn, the stronger appreciation reduces the impact
of the trade policy shock. The absence of …rm-level dynamics removes the hump-shaped response
of output, making the recession less persistent. This happens because with a constant number of
symmetric producers there are no micro-level reallocations in the tradable sector.41 Finally, the
absence of both endogenous producer entry and physical capital accumulation results in a much
smaller initial decline of economic activity, since the reduction in real income no longer trans-
lates in a reduction of investment in both physical capital and …rm creation. In Appendix H, we
show that endogenous producer dynamics and physical capital accumulation are central to match
  40
     Notice that the real exchange rate appreciation holds true both when considering the welfare-consistent exchange
rate, Qt , and its data consistent counterpart, Q~ t = "t P~t =P~t .
  41
     Notice that the initial decline in output is lower in the presence of endogenous producer entry and …rm hetero-
geneity. This stems from the fact that the number of producers is predetermined, implying that production declines
more slowly.


                                                         26
quantitatively the VAR impulse responses presented in Figure 9 Panel A.
    Overall, the model accounts for the in‡ationary and recessionary e¤ects of protectionism under
a ‡exible exchange rate. The analysis shows that the macroeconomic impact of tari¤s on output
and in‡ation is smaller with a closed capital account. Furthermore, …rm and investment dynamics
are key ingredients in the negative macroeconomic e¤ects of protectionism.


The Role of Price Stickiness

In Appendix G, we extend the model to include nominal price rigidities following Cacciatore and
Ghironi (2012). We consider the empirically-motivated case of dollar pricing in the tradable sector,
in which both export and import prices in the small open economy are sticky in U.S. dollars (see
Goldberg and Tille, 2008, Gopinath and Rigobon, 2008, and Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon,
2010). In addition, we also consider producer currency pricing and local currency pricing in the
tradable sector as well as price stickiness in the non tradable sector. Qualitatively, the results are
not a¤ected by the introduction of price-setting frictions.


Protectionism in a Liquidity Trap

We now turn to the short-run transmission of protectionism when the economy is in a recession
that pushed the central bank against the ZLB constraint. Our interest re‡ects the observation
that macroeconomic applications of restrictive trade policy typically come to the forefront of public
debate when domestic production is bu¤eted by shocks. In our crisis scenarios, we follow the recent
literature and assume that a risk-premium shock              a;t   hits the small open economy, depressing
output and generating de‡ation. We assume that at quarter 0 the Home economy is hit by the
risk-premium shock.42 Next, we assume that at quarter 1 the small open economy increases trade
barriers. As before, we treat this policy shock as unanticipated.43
    From a theoretical standpoint, there are two key di¤erences relative to protectionism in normal
times. First, the increase in tari¤s occurs when aggregate income and demand are already low
(because of the recession). Second, the monetary policy response is constrained by the zero lower
bound on the nominal interest rate. In such a circumstance, an in‡ationary shock (such as protec-
  42
     We calibrate the size of the shock so that responses reproduce a peak-to-trough decline of output of about 4
percent, a value consistent with the experience of several small open economies following the collapse of Lehman
Brothers in September 2008. We set the persistence of the shock such that it takes about 3 years for the Home
economy to exit the ZLB in the absence of protectionism.
  43
     This amounts to considering an unanticipated trade policy shock assuming that all the state variables of the
model take the value implied by the impact response to the risk-premiumy shock.



                                                       27
tionism) lowers the real interest rate other things equal, boosting aggregate demand and output.
Ultimately, whether temporary protectionism can be expansionary at the ZLB is a quantitative
issue.
       The …rst two rows of Figure 12 present the responses to the risk premium shock in the absence of
protectionism (solid lines) and the responses to the same risk premium shock when tari¤s increase
(dashed lines). The last two rows of Figure 12 compare the net e¤ects of the temporary increase in
 IM     in the recession (solid lines) to the e¤ect of the same tari¤ increase in normal times (dashed
 t

lines). The net e¤ect of protectionism in a recession corresponds to the di¤erence between the
dynamics implied by the risk premium shock followed by the increase in tari¤s and the dynamics
of the risk premium shock alone.44 Figure 12 conveys two main messages. First, protectionism is
not an e¤ective tool to boost economic activity in a liquidity trap (…rst two rows), since GDP is
lower when the recession is followed by higher tari¤s. Second, protectionism has more detrimental
economic e¤ects in a liquidity trap relative to normal times (last two rows).
       The increase in trade barriers remains recessionary, i.e., the in‡ationary pressure is not su¢ cient
to boost consumption and output. Once again, the result depends on the interdependence between
capital accumulation and producer dynamics. In particular, higher tari¤s continue to reduce real
income (even more so when protectionism is implemented at times of low aggregate demand), re-
ducing investment and product creation other things equal. In turn, the reduction in aggregate
demand mitigates the in‡ationary pressure, and in equilibrium the policy shock is contractionary.
The in‡ationary boost from the imposition of tari¤s is extremely short lived, and the extra con-
traction imposed by protectionism on an already weak economy quickly prevails and turns the net
in‡ation e¤ect of the tari¤ to negative— since agents expect de‡ation already after one quarter,
the expected real interest rate E0 (1 + r1 ) that determines time-0 decisions increases. (Home’s real
interest rate is de…ned by 1 + rt = (1 + it )=(1 +          C;t )   and   C;t   Pt =Pt   1   1:) This worsens the
ZLB problem instead of ameliorating it. Notice that the net e¤ect of protectionism on in‡ation
is very similar in the liquidity trap relative to normal times. Since at the ZLB the central bank
does not o¤set the in‡ationary e¤ects of the trade policy shock, this result may seem surprising.
The explanation is that our parameterization implies a short-lived tari¤ increase. In such a cir-
cumstance, the de‡ationary pressure brought about by the contractionary e¤ects of higher tari¤s
  44
    The responses to protectionism at the ZLB and protectionism in normal times are aligned so the impact response
to protectionism at the ZLB (which happens in period 1) is aligned with the impact response to protectionism in
normal times (which happens in period 0). To show transparently the di¤erences in responses in the same diagram,
we are shifting the impulse responses to protectionism at the ZLB to the left by one period.




                                                       28
dominates. In Appendix F, we show that the results are not sensitive to the size and persistence
of the trade shock: Protectionism remains contractionary in a liquidity trap. Nevertheless, with
more persistent tari¤ shocks, the response of in‡ation at the ZLB becomes larger relative to normal
times.


6        Protectionism and Business Cycle Dynamics under a Fixed Exchange Rate

A long-standing argument in the literature is that, when the exchange rate is …xed, temporary
tari¤s are expansionary (at least in the absence of retaliation from trading partners). The textbook
argument relies on two channels: First, the lack of appreciation of the nominal exchange rate results
in stronger expenditure switching toward Home goods. Second, the response of the domestic central
bank is expansionary to maintain exchange-rate parity, sustaining aggregate demand in the short
run. We now re-evaluate these conclusions in the context of our model.
         Our interest stems from the observation that pegs, crawling pegs, or very narrow bands feature
prominently in the international monetary system (Reinhart and Rogo¤, 2004). A recent illustration
of the issue is the experience of Ecuador. Following the halving of oil prices in the second half of
2014, Ecuador— a dollarized economy— slipped into recession, accumulating a large trade de…cit. In
March 2015, the Ecuadorian government started to apply tari¤s on roughly a third of its imports,
ranging from 5 percent (capital goods) to 45 percent (…nal goods). The tari¤ increase was explicitly
temporary (lasting 15 months). During the following quarters, in 2015 and early 2016, the trade
balance of Ecuador e¤ectively improved, but real GDP dropped even more, with a signi…cant decline
in consumption and investment.45
         Figure 13 presents the dynamic adjustment to the same temporary increase in tari¤s discussed
in the previous section when the Home economy pegs the nominal exchange rate to Foreign. It
also presents the results for the three alternative versions of the model already discussed in the
previous section— …nancial autarky, no …rm dynamics, and no …rm dynamics and physical capital
accumulation. The key message is that protectionism remains contractionary in the benchmark
model. In particular, GDP declines, in‡ation increases, and the trade balance improves. By
contrast, Figure 13 shows that the standard argument about the expansionary e¤ects of tari¤s
under a peg holds true when the model abstracts from endogenous producer entry and capital
accumulation, or when the capital account is closed.
    45
    The protectionist measures were implemented under the provisions of Article XVII of the WTO, which allows
exceptional measures to respond to balance of payment crises in developing countries.



                                                     29
         What can explain these …ndings? In the benchmark model, the lack of exchange-rate appreci-
ation is not su¢ cient to ensure an expansionary response of the economy because higher import
prices continue to result in lower investment and producer entry, pushing the economy into re-
cession. Moreover, with an open capital account, the Home policy rate is tied to the (constant)
Foreign interest rate— under our perfect foresight scenario, it is straightforward to verify that
1 + it+1 = (1 + i ) = (1 + a       ;t+1 ),   where   is the (very small) bond adjustment cost. As a result,
the response of the Home central bank to protectionism is muted. Not surprisingly, the tari¤ shock
becomes expansionary under …nancial autarky. In this case, the monetary authority lowers the
policy rate to keep the exchange rate …xed, providing additional stimulus to the economy.46


7        Conclusions

We studied the consequences of protectionism for macroeconomic ‡uctuations. Using trade-policy
data at di¤erent frequencies, we estimated country-level and panel structural VARs …nding that
temporary trade barriers act as a supply shock, causing output to fall and in‡ation to rise in
the short run. Protectionism has at best a small positive e¤ect on the trade balance. Next, we
built a small-open economy model with …rm heterogeneity, endogenous tradability, and nominal
rigidity to study the channels through which protectionism a¤ects aggregate ‡uctuations. The
model successfully reproduces the VAR evidence and highlights the importance of both macro and
micro forces for the contractionary e¤ects of tari¤s. We then used the model to study scenarios
where temporary trade barriers have been advocated as potentially bene…cial, including recessions
with binding constraints on monetary policy easing or in the presence of a …xed exchange rate. The
main policy conclusion of our paper is that protectionism remains costly— at least for small open
economies— even when it is used temporarily, even when economies are stuck in liquidity traps,
and regardless of exchange rate arrangements.

References

 [1] Barattieri, A. (2014): “Comparative Advantage, Service Trade, and Global Imbalances,”Jour-
     nal of International Economics 92: 1-13.

 [2] Barbiero, O., E. Farhi, G. Gopinath, and O. Itskhoki (2017): “The Economics of Border
     Adjustment Tax,” mimeo, Harvard University and Princeton University.
    46
    The presence of price stickiness does not a¤ect these results, as the dynamics are only marginally stronger relative
to the ‡exible-price scenario. Details are available upon request.




                                                          30
 [3] Benigno, P. (2009): “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial Integration,”Journal of Money,
     Credit and Banking, 41: 121–149.

 [4] Bergin, P. R and G. Corsetti (2015): “Beyond Competitive Devaluations: The Monetary
     Dimensions of Comparative Advantage,” CEPR DP 10718.

 [5] Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003): “Plants and Productivity in
     International Trade,” American Economic Review 93: 1268-1290.

 [6] Born, B. and Pfeifer, J. (2016): “The New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve: Calvo vs. Rotem-
     berg,” Dynare WP 51, CEPREMAP.

 [7] Bown, C. P. (2011): “Taking Stock of Antidumping, Safeguards and Countervailing Duties,
     1990?2009,” The World Economy 34: 1955-1998.

 [8] Bown, C. P. (2016): “Global Antidumping Database,” The World Bank (available at
     http://econ.worldbank.org/ttbd/gad/).

 [9] Bown, C. P. and M. A. Crowley (2013): “Import Protection, Business Cycles, and Exchange
     Rates: Evidence from the Great Recession,” Journal of International Economics 90: 50-64.

[10] Bown, C. P. and M. A. Crowley (2014): “Emerging Economies, Trade Policy, and Macroeco-
     nomic Shocks,” Journal of Development Economies 111: 261-273.

[11] Broda, C., and D. E. Weinstein (2010): “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and
     Price Implications,” American Economic Review 100: 691-723.

[12] Cacciatore, M. (2014): “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Labor Market
     Frictions,” Journal of International Economics 93: 17-30.

[13] Cacciatore, M., R. Duval, G. Fiori, and F. Ghironi (2016): “Market Reforms at the Zero
     Lower Bound,” mimeo, HEC Montréal, International Monetary Fund, North Carolina State
     University, and University of Washington.

[14] Cacciatore, M., and F. Ghironi (2012): “Trade, Unemployment, and Monetary Policy,”mimeo,
     HEC Montréal and University of Washington.

[15] Chan, K. S. Y. (1978): “The employment e¤ects of tari¤s under a free exchange rate regime :
     A monetary approach,” Journal of International Economics, 8: 415-423.

[16] Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
     Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113: 1-45.

[17] Correia, I., E. Farhi, J. P. Nicolini, and P. Teles (2011): “Unconventional Fiscal Policy at the
     Zero Lower Bound,” American Economic Review 103: 1172-1211.

[18] Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. A. Samuelson (1977): “Comparative Advantage, Trade, and
     Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,”American Economic Review 67:
     823-839.

[19] Eaton, J., and G. M. Grossman (1981): “Tari¤s as Insurance: Optimal Commercial Policy
     when Domestic Markets Are Incomplete,” NBER WP 797.



                                                 31
[20] Eichengreen, B. (1981): “A Dynamic Model of Tari¤s, Output and Employment under Flexible
     Exchange Rates,” Journal of International Economics 11: 341-359.

[21] Eichengreen, B. (1983): “E¤ective Protection and Exchange-Rate Determination,”Journal of
     International Money and Finance 2: 1-15.

[22] Eichengreen, B. (2016): “What’s the Problem with Protectionism?” Project Syndicate, July
     13.

[23] Erceg, C., A. Prestipino, and A. Ra¤o (2017): “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Trade Policy,”
     mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

[24] Farhi, E. Gopinath. G. and O. Itskhoki (2014): “Fiscal Devaluations,” Review of Economic
     Studies, 81(2): 725-760.

[25] Fisher, J. D. M. (2015): “On the Structural Interpretation of the Smets–Wouters Risk Premium
     Shock,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47: 511-516.

[26] Ghironi, F., and M. J. Melitz (2005): “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
     Heterogeneous Firms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120: 865–915.

[27] Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik (2016): “The E¤ects of Trade Policy,”prepared for the Handbook
     of Commercial Policy, edited by K. Bagwell and R. Staiger, Jan. 2016.

[28] Goldberg, L. S., and C. Tille (2008): “Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade,” Journal
     of International Economics 76: 177–192.

[29] Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki, and R. Rigobon (2010): “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate
     Pass-Through,” American Economic Review 100: 306–336.

[30] Gopinath, G., and R. Rigobon (2008): “Sticky Borders,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 123:
     531–575.

[31] Kichian, M. (2015): “Identi…cation-Robust Estimates Of The Canadian Natural Rate Of In-
     terest,” L’Actualité Economique 91: 161-176.

[32] Kilian, L. (1998): “Small-Sample Con…dence Intervals For Impulse Response Functions,”The
     Review of Economics and Statistics 80(2): 218-230.

[33] Kilian, L. (2009): “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply
     Shocks in the Crude Oil Market,” American Economic Review 99: 1053-1069.

[34] Kilinc, M. and C. Tunc (2014): “Identi…cation of Monetary Policy Shocks in Turkey: A
     Structural VAR Approach,” Turkish Central Bank WP 14/23.

[35] Krugman, P. (1982): “The Macroeconomics of Protection with a Floating Exchange
     Rate,”Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 16: 141-182.

[36] La¤argue, J.-P. (1990): “Résolution d’un Modèle Macroéconomique avec Anticipations Ra-
     tionnelles,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 17: 97-119.

[37] Levin, A., Lin, C. F. and J. C. S. Chu (2002): “Unit root tests in panel data: asymptotic and
     …nite-sample properties,” Journal of Econometrics, 108(1): 1-24.


                                               32
[38] Lindé, J., and A. Pescatori (2017): “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Trade Tari¤s: Revisiting
     the Lerner Symmetry Result,” mimeo, International Monetary Fund.

[39] Marx, K., and F. Engels (1848): The Communist Manifesto.

[40] Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
     Industry Productivity,” Econometrica 71: 1695-1725.

[41] Mendoza, E. G. (1991): “Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy,”American Economic
     Review 81: 797–818.

[42] Mundell, R. (1961): “Flexible Exchange Rates and Employment Policy,”Canadian Journal of
     Economics and Political Science 27: 509-517.

[43] Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogo¤ (2004): “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrange-
     ments: A Reinterpretation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 1-48.

[44] Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
     DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97: 586-606.

[45] Staiger, R. W. and F. A. Wolak (1994): “Measuring Industry-Speci…c Protection: Antidump-
     ing in the United States,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics 1994:
     51-118.

[46] Turnovsky, S. J. (1985): “Domestic and Foreign Disturbances in an Optimizing Model of
     Exchange Rate Determination,” Journal of International Money and Finance 4: 151-171.

[47] Wieland, J. (2016): “Are Negative Supply Shocks Expansionary at the Zero Lower Bound?”
     mimeo, University of California-San Diego.




                                             33
                                                                                         .02
40




                                                                                         .01
30




                                                                                         0
20




                                                                                         −.01
10




                                                                                         −.02
0




     1995q1             2000q1               2005q1         2010q1              2015q1

                            Antidumping Initiatives          GDP Growth




              Figure 1: Anti-dumping initiatives and real GDP growth, Canada
40




                                                                                         .05
30




                                                                                         0
20




                                                                                         −.05
10




                                                                                         −.1
0




     1995q1             2000q1               2005q1         2010q1              2015q1

                            Antidumping Initiatives          GDP Growth




              Figure 2: Anti-dumping initiatives and real GDP growth, Turkey.




                                               34
                                 Ϯ͘KƉĞŶŝŶŐŽĨŝŶǀĞƐƚŝŐĂƚŝŽŶ                 ƚĂƌŝĨĨƐĐĂŶďĞƌĞƚƌŽĂĐƚŝǀĞ
                                 • WƵďůŝĐůǇĂŶŶŽƵŶĐĞĚ
                                 • ǀŝĚĞŶĐĞƐƵƉƉŽƌƚŝŶŐƉĞƚŝƚŝŽŶĚŝƐĐůŽƐĞĚƚŽƚŚĞƉƵďůŝĐ




35
     ϭ͘/ŶĚƵƐƚƌǇƉƌŽĚƵĐĞƌƐĨŝůĞĂƉĞƚŝƚŝŽŶ                         ϯ͘/ŶǀĞƐƚŝŐĂƚŝŽŶKƵƚĐŽŵĞ
         • &ŝůŝŶŐŝƐŶŽƚƉƵďůŝĐ                                    • >ĂƌŐĞŵĂũŽƌŝƚǇŽĨŝŶǀĞƐƚŝŐĂƚŝŽŶƐĞŶĚƵƉǁŝƚŚƚĂƌŝĨĨƐ

        • ZĞŐƵůĂƚŝŽŶ ŝŵƉŽƐĞƐĚĞĐŝƐŝŽŶͲĚĞůĂǇƐ͗                      • dĂƌŝĨĨƐƌĞŵĂŝŶŝŶƉůĂĐĞĨŽƌƐĞǀĞƌĂůǇĞĂƌƐ
        Ͳ YƵĂůŝĨŝĞĚƉƌŽĚƵĐĞƌƐ͛ƐƵƉƉŽƌƚ
        Ͳ WƌŽĚƵĐĞĞǀŝĚĞŶĐĞĂďŽƵƚĚƵŵƉŝŶŐ                           • dĂƌŝĨĨƐƉƌŽƉŽƌƚŝŽŶĂůƚŽĚƵŵƉŝŶŐ͗ĂŐĞŶƚƐĐĂŶĨŽƌĞĐĂƐƚƚĂƌŝĨĨƐ
                                                                     ǁŚĞŶŝŶǀĞƐƚŝŐĂƚŝŽŶďĞŐŝŶƐ


                    Figure 3: Institutional details about antidumping investigations and applied antidumping tariffs.
                            Antidumping Initiatives                         GDP Growth
                       5
                                                                0.05
                       4
                                                                   0
                       3

                       2                                        -0.05

                       1                                         -0.1

                       0                                        -0.15

                                5         10          15                5          10    15


                                    Inflation                           NX over GDP
                                                                0.15
                      0.2

                                                                  0.1
                      0.1

                       0                                        0.05

                     -0.1                                          0

                     -0.2
                                                                -0.05

                                5         10          15                5          10    15




Figure 4: Quarterly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in Canada. GDP growth and
net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                            Antidumping Initiatives                         GDP Growth
                       5
                                                                   0
                       4

                       3                                         -0.2

                       2
                                                                 -0.4
                       1

                       0                                         -0.6

                                5         10          15                5          10    15


                                    Inflation                           NX over GDP
                                                                  0.4
                       2
                                                                  0.3
                      1.5

                       1                                          0.2

                      0.5                                         0.1

                       0
                                                                   0
                     -0.5
                                5         10          15                5          10    15




Figure 5: Quarterly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in Turkey. GDP growth and
net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                           36
                     Antidumping Initiatives                          Industrial Production
                                                               0
               2

               1                                             -0.2

               0
                                                             -0.4
                          5           10          15                      5          10          15

                                Inflation                                     Net Exports
              0.4                                            0.1

              0.2
                                                               0
               0

             -0.2                                            -0.1
                          5           10          15                      5          10          15

                              Interest Rate                         Nominal Exchange Rate
             0.02
                0                                            0.1
            -0.02
            -0.04                                              0
            -0.06
            -0.08                                            -0.1
                          5           10          15                      5          10          15


Figure 6: Monthly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in Canada. Industrial produc-
tion, net exports, and nominal exchange rate are in percentage points. The inflation rate and the interest rate are
annualized.




                     Antidumping Initiatives                          Industrial Production
               3
                                                               0
               2
                                                             -0.2
               1                                             -0.4

               0                                             -0.6
                                                             -0.8
                          5           10          15                      5          10          15

                                Inflation                                     Net Exports
                                                             0.2
               1

              0.5                                            0.1
               0
                                                               0
             -0.5
                          5           10          15                      5          10          15

                              Interest Rate                         Nominal Exchange Rate
              0.1                                            0.5

               0
                                                               0
             -0.1

             -0.2
                                                             -0.5
                          5           10          15                      5          10          15


Figure 7: Monthly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in Turkey. Industrial production,
net exports, and nominal exchange rate are in percentage points. The inflation rate and the interest rate are
annualized.



                                                        37
                         AUS                                       BRA                                           CAN                                       CHL                                      COL



                                                                                    .6 .8 1 1.21.41.6
                                           8 10 12 14




                                                                                                                                  0 2 4 6 8 10




                                                                                                                                                                            4 6 8 10 12
       4
Tariff




                                            Tariff




                                                                                         Tariff




                                                                                                                                      Tariff




                                                                                                                                                                               Tariff
2 3    1




                                                 6




                2000   2005 2010   2015                   2000   2005 2010   2015                       2000   2005 2010   2015                   2000   2005 2010   2015                  2000   2005 2010   2015
                           Year                                      Year                                          Year                                      Year                                     Year


                         IDN                                       IND                                           ISL                                       ISR                                      KOR
                                           5 1015202530
2 3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                            5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                  1 1.5 2 2.5 3
   Tariff




                                               Tariff




                                                                                    Tariff




                                                                                                                                      Tariff




                                                                                                                                                                                Tariff
                                                                                    1 2      0




                2000   2005 2010   2015                   2000   2005 2010   2015                       2000   2005 2010   2015                   2000   2005 2010   2015                  2000   2005 2010   2015
                           Year                                      Year                                          Year                                      Year                                     Year


                         MEX                                       MYS                                           NOR                                       NZL                                      PER




                                                                                                                                                                            5 10 15
5 10 15




                                                                                    .6 .8 1 1.21.4
                                                 5




                                                                                                                                  1 1.5 2 2.5 3
                                            3 4
Tariff




                                           Tariff




                                                                                         Tariff




                                                                                                                                      Tariff




                                                                                                                                                                            Tariff
                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                                  0
       0




                                                 1




                2000   2005 2010   2015                   2000   2005 2010   2015                       2000   2005 2010   2015                   2000   2005 2010   2015                  2000   2005 2010   2015
                           Year                                      Year                                          Year                                      Year                                     Year


                         PHL                                       PRY                                           THA                                       TUR                                      URY
                                           2 4 6 8 1012




                                                                                                                                                                            4 6 8 10 12
2 3 4 5 6 7




                                                                                                                                  2 3 4 5 6
                                                                                    10 20 30
   Tariff




                                               Tariff




                                                                                     Tariff




                                                                                                                                     Tariff




                                                                                                                                                                               Tariff
                                                                                             0




                2000   2005 2010   2015                   2000   2005 2010   2015                       2000   2005 2010   2015                   2000   2005 2010   2015                  2000   2005 2010   2015
                           Year                                      Year                                          Year                                      Year                                     Year


                         ZAF
3 3.5 4 4.5 5
    Tariff




                2000   2005 2010   2015
                           Year

                                          Figure 8: Weighted average of applied tariffs, 1999-2016.




                                                                                                               38
                                        Tariff                                GDP Growth
                                                                     0
                       1.5

                                                                   -0.1
                        1
                                                                   -0.2

                       0.5
                                                                   -0.3


                        0                                          -0.4
                             2     4        6      8   10                 2    4    6       8   10


                                       Inflation                              NX over GDP
                                                                   0.4
                       0.4
                                                                   0.3
                       0.3

                       0.2                                         0.2


                       0.1                                         0.1

                        0
                                                                     0
                             2     4        6      8   10                 2    4    6       8   10


Figure 9, Panel A: Panel-VAR, impulse responses to a one-standard deviation increase in detrended tariffs. Tariffs,
GDP growth, and net exports over GDP are in percentage points.




                                        Tariff                                GDP Growth
                                                                 0.05
                       1.5
                                                                     0


                        1                                        -0.05

                                                                  -0.1
                       0.5
                                                                 -0.15

                        0                                         -0.2
                             2     4        6      8   10                 2    4    6       8   10

                                       Inflation                              NX over GDP
                       0.3
                                                                   0.3


                       0.2                                         0.2


                                                                   0.1
                       0.1

                                                                     0

                        0
                             2     4        6      8   10                 2    4    6       8   10




Figure 9, Panel B: Model-implied, annualized impulse responses to a tariff increase. The tariff shock matches size
and persistence of the equivalent shock in the panel VAR (Figure 9A). Tariffs, GDP growth, and net exports over
GDP are in percentage points.




                                                            39
                                  Consumption                                  GDP                             Investment                             Hours
                                                                                                0.5
                         0                                                                                                                 0
                                                          0.05
                                                                                                  0
                       -0.1                                  0

                                                          -0.05                                 -0.5                                     -0.5
                       -0.2
                                                           -0.1
                                                                                                 -1
                       -0.3                               -0.15
                                                                                                -1.5                                      -1
                                                           -0.2

                              5    10    15     20   25           5       10     15   20   25             5     10   15     20      25          5   10       15    20      25

                                    Inflation                         Real Interest Rate                   Trade Balance/GDP                    Real Exchange Rate

                         1                                  5.5                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                         -0.2

                       0.8
                                                                                                0.4                                      -0.4
                                                             5
                       0.6
                                                                                                                                         -0.6
                       0.4                                                                      0.2




40
                                                            4.5
                                                                                                                                         -0.8
                       0.2
                                                                                                  0
                         0                                                                                                                -1
                              5    10    15     20   25           5       10     15   20   25             5     10   15     20      25          5   10       15    20      25

                              Number of Producers                 Number of Exportes                    10 -4
                                                                                                       ×Average Firm Productivity                        Tariff
                       0.1
                                                          -0.15                                                                            3                  Benchmark
                         0                                                                                                                                    Real Model
                                                                                                  0
                                                           -0.2
                       -0.1                                                                                                                2
                                                          -0.25                                  -5
                       -0.2

                                                                                                                                           1
                       -0.3                                -0.3                                 -10
                       -0.4
                                                          -0.35                                                                            0
                              5    10    15     20   25           5       10     15   20   25             5     10   15     20      25          5   10       15    20      25




     Figure 10: Responses to a temporary increase in Home trade barriers in normal times, benchmark model (continuos lines) and an alternative version without
     nominal rigidities (dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations from the steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.
                                                         GDP                        Inflation                   Trade Balance/GDP            Real Exchange Rate
                                                                          1                               0.6
                                               0                                                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                          0.4                         -0.4
                                             -0.1                        0.5
                                                                                                          0.2                         -0.6




                           Baseline
                                                                                                                                      -0.8
                                             -0.2                                                          0
                                                                          0                                                            -1
                                                    10   20    30   40         10      20       30   40           10   20   30   40            10   20   30       40

                                                         GDP                        Inflation                   Trade Balance/GDP            Real Exchange Rate
                                            0.05                                                           1                            0
                                                                         0.3

                                               0                         0.2
                                                                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                           0
                                            -0.05
                                                                         0.1
                                             -0.1                                                                                      -2
                                                                          0                                -1




                     Financial Autarky
                                                    10   20    30   40         10      20       30   40           10   20   30   40            10   20   30       40

                                                         GDP                        Inflation                   Trade Balance/GDP            Real Exchange Rate
                                               0
                                                                                                                                      -0.2
                                                                         1.5




41
                                            -0.05                                                         0.4                         -0.4
                                                                          1                                                           -0.6
                                             -0.1                                                         0.2                         -0.8
                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                        -1




                     No Entry
                                            -0.15
                                                                          0                                0                          -1.2
                                                    10   20    30   40         10      20       30   40           10   20   30   40            10   20   30       40

                                                         GDP                        Inflation                   Trade Balance/GDP            Real Exchange Rate
                                             0.1                          2
                                                                                                          0.4                         -0.2
                                                                                                                                      -0.4
                                            0.05                                                                                      -0.6
                                                                          1                               0.2                         -0.8
                                               0                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                      -1.2
                                                                          0                                0                          -1.4




                         No Capital/Entry
                                                    10   20    30   40         10      20       30   40           10   20   30   40            10   20   30       40




     Figure 11: Responses to a temporary increase in Home tariffs in normal times, flexible exchange rate. The top raw: baseline model; second raw: baseline model
     under financial autarky; third raw: baseline model without firm dynamics; fourth raw: baseline model without firm dynamics and physical capital accumulation.
     Responses show percentage deviations from the steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.
                                                    Consumption                                 GDP                                Investment
                                           -2
                                                                               -2
                                           -3                                                                           -10
                                                                               -3
                                           -4                                                                           -20
                                                                               -4




                              Recession
                                           -5                                  -5                                       -30

                                                5   10       15     20   25          5     10         15      20   25         5   10       15         20           25

                                                    CPI Inflation                        Real Interest Rate                        Home Tariff
                                                                                4                                        3
                                      -1.5                                                                                                       No Trade Policy
                                                                                                                                                 Trade Policy
                                           -2                                                                            2
                                                                                3
                                      -2.5
                                                                                                                         1




                         Recession
                                           -3                                   2
                                      -3.5                                                                               0
                                                5   10       15     20   25          5     10         15      20   25         5   10       15         20           25

                                                    Consumption                                 GDP                                Investment
                                           0
                                                                                0




42
                                                                                                                         0
                                      -0.1
                                                                              -0.1
                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                              -0.2
                                      -0.3




                         Net Effect
                                      -0.4                                    -0.3                                       -2
                                                5   10       15     20   25          5     10         15      20   25         5   10       15         20           25

                                                    CPI Inflation                        Trade Balance/GDP                         Home Tariff
                                           1                                  0.6                                        3
                                                                                                                                                    Steady State
                                          0.5                                                                                                       Recession
                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                         2
                                           0
                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                         1




                         Net Effect
                                      -0.5
                                                                                0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                5   10       15     20   25          5     10         15      20   25         5   10       15         20           25




     Figure 12: Top two panels: recession (continuous lines) versus recession followed by higher Home tariffs (dashed lines); Bottom two panels: net effect of higher
     Home tariffs in normal times (continuous lines) and in a recession with binding ZLB (dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady
     state. The inflation rate is annualized.
                                                         GDP                       Inflation               Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
                                             0.1                                                     0.6
                                                                         3                                                        -0.2
                                                                         2                           0.4                          -0.4
                                               0
                                                                         1
                                                                                                     0.2                          -0.6
                                                                         0




                       Baseline
                                             -0.1                                                                                 -0.8
                                                                         -1                           0
                                                    10   20    30   40        10      20   30   40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                                         GDP                       Inflation               Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
                                             0.3                                                      1                             0
                                                                          8
                                                                          6
                                             0.2                          4
                                                                                                      0                            -1
                                                                          2
                                             0.1                          0
                                                                         -2                                                        -2
                                                                                                      -1




                         Financial Autarky
                                                    10   20    30   40        10      20   30   40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                                         GDP                       Inflation               Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
                                         0.15
                                                                         3                           0.6




43
                                             0.1                                                                                  -0.2
                                                                         2                           0.4
                                         0.05                                                                                     -0.4
                                                                         1
                                               0                                                     0.2                          -0.6
                                                                         0




                    No Entry
                                    -0.05                                -1                           0                           -0.8

                                                    10   20    30   40        10      20   30   40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                                         GDP                       Inflation               Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
                                             0.3                         4                           0.6
                                                                                                                                  -0.2
                                             0.2                         2                           0.4
                                                                                                                                  -0.4
                                                                                                     0.2                          -0.6
                                             0.1
                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                  -0.8
                                               0                                                      0




                         No Capital/Entry
                                                    10   20    30   40        10      20   30   40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40




     Figure 13: Responses to a temporary increase in Home tariffs in normal times, fixed exchange rate. The top raw: baseline model; second raw: baseline model
     under financial autarky; third raw: baseline model without firm dynamics; fourth raw: baseline model without firm dynamics and physical capital accumulation.
     Responses show percentage deviations from the steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.
  Technical Appendix to “Protectionism and the Business Cycle”
   Alessandro Barattieri              Matteo Cacciatorey                         Fabio Ghironiz
       ESG UQAM                     HEC Montréal and NBER                   University of Washington,
                                                                           CEPR, EABCN, and NBER



                                                    Abstract

          This Appendix gathers supplementary material to Barattieri, Cacciatore, and Ghironi (2018).




      ESG UQAM. Mail: Case Postale 8888, sucursale Centre-ville Montreal (Quebec) H3C 3P8. E-mail: barat-
tieri.alessandro@uqam.ca URL: https://www.sites.google.com/site/barattierialessandro/.
    y
      Institute of Applied Economics, HEC Montréal, 3000, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal (Québec),
Canada. E-mail: matteo.cacciatore@hec.ca. URL: http://www.hec.ca/en/profs/matteo.cacciatore.html.
    z
      Department of Economics, University of Washington, Savery Hall, Box 353330, Seattle, WA 98195, U.S.A. E-mail:
ghiro@uw.edu. URL: http://faculty.washington.edu/ghiro.
A    Data Description

Here we describe in detail the variables used in Section 2 of the main paper.
    Antidumping Initiatives. Our baseline measure of antidumping initiatives is the number
of HS-6 products a¤ected by new antidumping investigations in a given quarter or month. The
data come from the Global Antidumping Database (Bown, 2016). We match the date of each
anti-dumping investigation recorded in the GAD to the number of HS-6 products covered by each
investigation.
    Tari¤s. In the panel VAR, we use data from the UN-WITS Database. We aggregate HS-2
product-level applied tari¤ rates using an import-weighted average of tari¤s for each country and
year. In our baseline speci…cation, we use constant weights (using imports data for the year 1999).
We linearly detrend the tari¤ measure for each country.
    Real GDP. In the quarterly VAR, we use data from the OECD quarterly national account
database. We use the measure VPVOBARSA (U.S. dollars, volume estimates, …xed PPPs, OECD
reference year 2010, annual levels, seasonally adjusted). In the panel VAR, we use data from the
World Bank World Developing Indicators. Annual GDP is measured in 2010 USD.
    In‡ation. For the quarterly and monthly VARs, we use the Core CPI In‡ation series (“All
Items, Less Food and Energy”) provided by the OECD prices database for Turkey and Canada. For
India, only CPI In‡ation (“All Items”) is available. Since these series are not seasonally adjusted, we
deseasonalize each series by regressing the in‡ation rate on quarterly (monthly) dummies. Moreover,
in Turkey, there is a clear regime shift before and after 2004 (Turkey announced the adoption of
in‡ation targeting in 2002). We therefore use a regime-speci…c demeaned series for Turkey. In the
panel VAR, we use annual CPI in‡ation data coming from the World Bank World Development
Indicators.
    Real Net Exports. In the quarterly VAR, exports and imports of good and services are from
the OECD quarterly national account database. We use the measure VPVOBARSA (U.S. dollars,
volume estimates, …xed PPPs, OECD reference year 2010, annual levels, seasonally adjusted). In
the monthly VAR, we use data on exports and imports of goods from the OECD main indicator
database. The data are reported in USD Billions. Thus, we de‡ate each series using country-
speci…c CPI indexes. Since in India the dynamics of net exports feature clear time trends, we
linearly detrend the series. In the panel VAR, we construct net exports over GDP using data on
exports and imports from the World Bank Development Indicators.



                                                 A-1
        Industrial Production. In the monthly VAR, we use data for from the OECD main economic
indicators. In the baseline VAR, we linearly detrend the series.
        Nominal Exchange Rates. The Nominal E¤ective Exchange Rates is from the Bank of
International Settlement. We use the growth rate of the nominal e¤ective exchange rate, where
due to the BIS convention, an increase in the rate denotes an appreciation.
        Interest Rates. In the quarterly VAR, we use the interbank overnight interest rate provided
by the OECD main economic indicators. In the monthly VAR, we use the overnight interest rate
provided by the OECD main economic indictors for India and Canada. For Turkey, we use the
average daily interest rate on the interbank REPO rate provided by the Bolsa Istanbul. We linearly
detrend the Turkish series, since it features a clear downward trend during the sample period we
consider.
        Oil Price. The Oil price series is the Global Price of WTI Crude provided by the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The real price of oil is obtained by de‡ating the nominal price of oil
using the U.S. CPI.
        Real Economic Activity Index. We use the index of global real economic activity in
commodity markets developed by Lutz Kilian. The series is available for the period 1968:M1
to 2017:M9.1 We took simple averages when aggregating at quarterly frequency.
        Stock prices. We use the year-to-year growth of overall stock prices provided at quarterly
frequency by the OECD Main Economic Indicators for both Canada and Turkey.
        OECD Composite Leading Indicators. We use the OECD amplitude-adjusted Compos-
ite Leading Indicator from the OECD’s main economic indicators. The details about the index
construction can be found at http://www.oecd.org/sdd/leading-indicators/41629509.pdf.


B        VAR Robustness

As discussed in the main text, we conduct several robustness checks. We report the results for all
the scenarios that we consider for the quarterly VAR. The results for the monthly VAR are very
similar and are available upon request.


Additional Controls

An issue related to anticipation e¤ects concerns the possibility that antidumping investigations also
re‡ect expectations about future economic conditions that are not captured by past information
    1
        Data are available at http://www-personal.umich.edu/˜
                                                            lkilian/paperlinks.html.


                                                          A-2
from the variables included in the VAR. Decision lags in the opening of investigations imply that new
information at time t does not a¤ect the time-t number of new antidumping initiatives. However,
lagged news about future economic conditions may a¤ect current antidumping initiatives.
   We address this issue in two ways. First, we include in the VAR variables that contain informa-
tion about economic agents’ expectations about future economic activity. We consider four time
series: an index of share prices provided by the OECD, the real price of oil, an index of global real
economic activity in industrial commodity markets (Kilian, 2009), and an index of future economic
activity again constructed by the OECD. Figures A.1 to A.8 report the results obtained for Canada
and Turkey. In all cases, and for both countries, our results are very similar to those presented in
the main text.
   Second, Table A.1 shows that the identi…ed structural trade-policy shocks are not Granger-
caused by the four time series described above. We report the F-statistic of joint signi…cance of
the coe¢ cients of the …rst two lags of each control variable.


Alternative Identi…cation Scheme

We investigated whether the results are sensitive to the speci…c recursive structure implied by the
assumption that antidumping initiations are exogenous to current economic conditions. We then
order the trade policy measure last in the VAR— thus allowing trade policy to react contempora-
neously to economic conditions. Figures A.9 and A.10 report the results for Canada and Turkey.
The results are similar to those presented in the main text.


Alternative Measures of Protectionism

Antidumping Initiatives

As explained in the main text, we consider alternative measures of antidumping initiatives. Our
baseline measure does not include the products recorded at 4-digits level of disaggregation. A
possible alternative approach could be imputing investigations recorded at 4-digits to all 6-digit sub-
products contained in a given 4-digits sector. However, this would imply overstating the importance
of such investigations— not all 6-digit products that are part of the 4-digit aggregate are necessarily
subject to the investigation. As a reasonable alternative, we compute a measure where each time a
product is recorded as being subject to an antidumping investigation, we count it as one, regardless
of the level of disaggregation provided by the GAD database. This allows us to account for the



                                                 A-3
fact that our baseline measure could miss some products e¤ectively subject to an antidumping
investigation. At the same time, this alternative measure avoids the risk of overstating the number
of products subject to a new investigation.
   In addition, for both the baseline measure and the alternative measure described above, we
considered a version that only includes the subset of initiatives that e¤ectively ended with the
imposition of an antidumping tari¤.
   The results obtained for the quarterly and monthly data for Turkey and Canada using these four
di¤erent measures are reported by Figures A.11 and A.12. In each …gure, the …rst panel reproduces
the result obtained with our baseline measure. The second panel report the results obtained with
the measure counting as one each product subject to an investigation. The third panel reports
the results when the baseline measure only includes antidumping initiatives that resulted in an
antidumping tari¤. Finally, the fourth panel reports the results when the alternative measure
only includes antidumping initiatives that resulted in an antidumping tari¤. For both Canada and
Turkey, the recessionary and in‡ationary e¤ects of protectionism are very robust to the alternative
measures used.


Total Temporary Trade Barriers

As explained in the main text, antidumping investigations account for between 80 and 90 percent
of total temporary trade barriers. We checked whether our results are robust to the use of a trade
policy measure that includes other temporary trade barriers (global safeguards and countervailing
duties). Figures A.13 and A.14 report the results obtained for Canada and Turkey using this
di¤erent trade policy measure. Also in this case, the results are very similar to those reported in
the main text.


Detrended GDP

In the main text, we presented evidence using the growth rate of real GDP for the quarterly VAR.
Here we present the results we obtained using the detrended level of GDP.
   Figure A.15 reports the responses of GDP, in‡ation and net exports over GDP for Canada (top
panel) and Turkey (bottom panel). We omit the responses of the trade policy measure to improve
the readability of the …gure (and because they are almost identical to the ones reported in Figures
3 and 4 in the main text). As for the case presented in the main text, a shock to the number of
products subject to new antidumping investigation increases in‡ation and reduces output, with a


                                               A-4
modest positive e¤ect on the trade balance over GDP.


Panel VAR: Imports and Exports Dynamics

Figure A.16 reports impulse responses from the panel-VAR including (linearly detrended) real
imports and exports. The …gure shows that following a tari¤ increase, both imports and exports
decrease. However, the decline in imports is stronger than the decline in exports.


C        Additional Empirical Evidence: India

We corroborate the evidence provided in the main text for Turkey and Canada by using Indian
data— together with Turkey, India is the main user of antidumping initiatives among developing
countries. Figure A.17 reports the results using quarterly data from 1996:Q2 to 2015:Q4.2 Following
a trade policy shock, there is a statistically signi…cant decline in real GDP. Net exports over GDP
increase, while we do not …nd a signi…cant in‡ationary e¤ect. It is important to stress, however,
that data limitations imply that only a series for headline in‡ation (as opposed to core in‡ation)
is available.
        In Figure A.18 we report the results obtained for India using monthly data.3 Also in this case,
the results are similar to those obtained for Canada and Turkey: protectionism triggers a fall in
industrial production, increasing net exports over GDP. In‡ation, as in the VAR with quarterly
data, at …rst decreases (thought the fall is not signi…cant) and then slowly rises to a positive and
signi…cant peak that is reached after 6 months.


D        Model Equilibrium Conditions

Demand Schedules

The demand for tradables is CtT = (1             N)   PtT =Pt     N
                                                                      Ct ; the demand for non-tradables is CtN =
                                                                                                                          T
 N       PtN =Pt   N                                                          T = (1
                       Ct . Home demand for domestic tradable consumption is CD;t                       X)
                                                                                                              T =P T
                                                                                                             PD;t t           CtT ,
                                                                                      T
                                             T =
while the demand for the imported bundle is CX;t                       T =P T
                                                                      PX;t                CtT . Finally, Home demand
                                                                X          t
                                                                            T
                                    T (!) = P T (!) =P T
for a domestic tradable variety is CD;t                                          T , while the demand for a For-
                                                                                CD;t
                                                D;t      D;t
                                     h                        i                 T
                           T (!) =
eign tradable product is CX;t           1 + tIM PX;t
                                                  T (!) =P T                         T .
                                                                                    CX;t
                                                          X;t

    2
     The choice of the sample period is due to data availability. Here we report the responses using detrended GDP
and industrial production. We also considered the growth rates, obtaining similar qualitative results.
   3
     The period covered is 1995:M5 to 2015:M2, due to the limited availability of the industrial production series from
the OECD.


                                                         A-5
Model Aggregation
                                                                                    T
                         T (z) = P T (z) =P T
Home domestic demand is YD;t                                                             T , while export demand is
                                                                                        YD;t
                                  D;t      D;t


                                                    h                                        i     T
                                    T                          IM          T         T                  T
                                   YX;t (z) =             1+   t          PX;t (z) =PX;t               YX;t ;


where    IM
         t    > 0 is an ad-valorem import tari¤ imposed by Foreign. The terms YD;t
                                                                               T and Y T
                                                                                      X;t

denote, respectively, Home and Foreign aggregate demand of the basket of Home tradable goods.
Due to the …xed export cost, …rms with low productivity levels z may decide not to export in any
given period. When making this decision, a …rm decomposes its total real pro…t dTt (z) into portions
earned from domestic sales, dTD;t (z), and from potential export sales, dTX;t (z). These pro…t levels,
expressed in units of Home consumption, are given by the following expressions:

                                                                                't
                                           dTD;t (z)              T
                                                                  D;t (z)
                                                                                    T
                                                                                   YD;t (z) ;
                                                                                z

and
                                            h                                   't i T
                              dTX;t (z)         Qt      T
                                                        X;t (z)    (1 + t )         YX;t (z)            't fX;t :
                                                                                z

A …rm will export if and only if the expected pro…t from exporting is non-negative. This will be
the case as long as productivity z is above a cuto¤ level zX;t such that: zX;t = inffz : dTX;t (z) > 0g.
We assume that the lower-bound productivity zmin is low enough relative to the export costs that
zX;t is above zmin . Firms with productivity levels between zmin and the export cuto¤ level zX;t
produce only for their domestic market in period t. The set of exporting …rms ‡uctuates over time
with changes in the pro…tability of export.
   In every period, a mass ND;t of tradable-sector …rms produces in the Home country. Among
these …rms, there are NX;t = [1                 G (zX;t )] ND;t exporters. As in Melitz (2003) and Ghironi and
Melitz (2005), all the information on the distribution of productivity levels G(z) that is relevant
for aggregate outcomes can be summarized by appropriately de…ned average productivity levels.
De…ne an average productivity level z~D for all producing …rms that serve the domestic market and
an average z~X;t for all Home exporters:

              Z                                                             "                      Z                            #1=(   T   1)
                  1                       1=(   T    1)                                                1
                              1                                                          1                          1
        z~D           z   T
                                  dG(z)                   ,       z~X;t                                    z    T
                                                                                                                        dG(z)                   ;
               zmin                                                             1       G(zX;t )   zX;t


where z~D and z~X;t are based on weights proportional to relative …rm output shares. The model


                                                                     A-6
can be restated in terms of average (representative) …rms. The average price of Home …rms in
their domestic market is ~TD;t                   T (~
                                                 D;t zD ),   while the average price of Home exports is ~TX;t
                                                                                                          T
 T (~
 X;t zX;t ).   Average domestic tradable output is Y~D;t
                                                     T =                           ~TD;t =       T
                                                                                                 D;t
                                                                                                               T , while average export
                                                                                                              YD;t
                              T
is Y~X;t
     T = ~T =         T            T . The average pro…t from domestic sales is d~T
                                  YX;t                                                                                     dTD;t (~
                                                                                                                                  zD ), while the
          X;t         X;t                                                         D;t

average export pro…t is d~TX;t            dTX;t (~
                                                 zX;t ). Thus, the average total pro…t of Home …rms is given by
d~Tt = d~TD;t + (NX;t =ND;t ) d~TX;t .
    Following Melitz (2003) and Ghironi and Melitz (2005), we assume that z is drawn from a Pareto
distribution with lower bound zmin and shape parameter                                >      T         1. The share of exporting …rms
                                                                                      =(   T      1)
is then given by NX;t =ND;t = (zmin =~
                                     zX;t ) [ = (                      T   + 1)]                       , while the zero-pro…t condition
that determines the productivity cuto¤ zX;t is such that d~X;t = (                                 T      1) = [           T   + 1)] 't fX;t .


Equilibrium Conditions

In equilibrium, households and non-tradable …rms are symmetric. Labor market clearing requires:


            Zt Kt L1t       = YtN + ND;t Y~D;t
                                           T
                                                zD + (1 + t ) NX;t Y~X;t
                                               =~                    T
                                                                         =~
                                                                          zX;t + NE;t fE;t + NX;t fX;t :


The lump-sum transfer is:

                                                                   2
                                                          A ;t+1                                  ~T
                                  Tt =           "t P t                + dN
                                                                          t +
                                                                                           IM
                                                                                           t  X;t YX;t :
                                           2               Pt

Aggregate demand of the …nal consumption basket must be equal to the sum of market consumption,
investment in physical capital, and the cost of adjusting nominal wages:

                                                         h                                 i
                                                                           w             2
                                         Yt = Ct + IK;t + 1                    (   w;t )     wt Lt :
                                                                       2

Table A.2 summarizes the equilibrium conditions of the model. Eight Foreign variables directly
                                                                                                                                           T
a¤ect macroeconomic dynamics in the small open economy: Yt , it+1 ,                                       C
                                                                                                          t   ,    T
                                                                                                                   t   ,   T ,
                                                                                                                           X;t   ~TX;t , Y~X;t , and
NX;t . Aggregate demand, Yt , the nominal interest rate, it+1 , and in‡ation,                                              C   , are determined
                                                                                                                           t

by treating the rest of the world (Foreign) as a closed economy that features the same production
structure, technology and frictions that characterize the small open economy. Here we focus on
the determination of the real price of the basket of tradable goods,                                           T   , the real price of the
                                                                                                               t

exported consumption bundle,               T ,   the real average price of an exported variety, ~TX;t , the average
                                           X;t

export demand, Y~X;t
                 T , and the number of Foreign exporters, N
                                                           X;t . Since the small open economy is



                                                               A-7
in…nitesimally small relative to the rest of the world, these variables a¤ect macroeconomic dynamics
in the small open economy without having any e¤ect on the rest of the world.
     To determine price and quantities related to exports and imports, we assume that Foreign
producers solve a pro…t maximization problem that is equivalent to that faced by Home producers.
Therefore:
                                                                                                                   T        T
                        Y~X;t
                           T                                                it     T                                                    T
                                                                                                T                                                   T       N
                              =     X (1               N)         1+        t    ~X;t                 NX;t         1       T
                                                                                                                                        t                       Yt ;

                                         T                                                          k         k
where ~X;t = Qt (1 +            t   )   D;t   and NX;t = zmin =~
                                                               zX;t                                          T 1   ND;t . In turn, the Foreign average
export productivity, z~X;t , is determined by the zero-pro…t condition:

                                              k        (    T       1) 't YX;t
                                                                                (1 +                    t   ) = fX;t 't ;
                                                  (    T         1)k z~X;t NX;t

where       t    > 0 denotes iceberg trade costs faced by Foreign exporters. Finally,                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                                                                       t    =    T
                                                                                                                                                                                 D;t   =
                                                            1=(1      T)     T                                         T
[                                       T
    T=( T        1)] 't =~
                         zD and         X;t   = NX;t                       ~X;t . The variables                    D;t ,        ND;t , and 't that appear above
are determined also by treating the rest of the world (Foreign) as a closed economy.


E     Data-Consistent Variables

De…nition

                                                                       T
First, decompose the price of domestic and imported tradable goods as PD;t =                                                                                               T P~T     and
                                                                                                                                                                           D;t D;t
 T =
PX;t            T P~T
                X;t X;t ,   where
                                                                            1                                      1
                                                           T            1                       T              1
                                                           D;t        ND;t T and                X;t         ND;t T :

As in Ghironi and Melitz (2005), P~D;t   ~ T represents average prices that are not a¤ected by
                                   T and P
                                           X;t

changes in the number of goods available to consumers. Now recall that

                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                       1                1
                                                                       T 1                                                      T               T
                                PtT                                                                          T
                                                                                    T
                                        = (1                     X)   PD;t                  +       X       PX;t                                        ;

and consider the decomposition: PtT                                    TP~T
                                                                       t t ,       where

                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                               1                                           1        T       1       T
                                    T                                      T            T                     T
                                    t             (1             X)        D;t              +       X         X;t




                                                                                  A-8
captures ‡uctuations in PtT due to variety e¤ects, i.e., ‡uctuations that would occur even in the
absence of changes in the average prices P~D;t   ~ T . As a result:
                                           T and P
                                                   X;t

                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                     1   T                                        1       T   1       T
                        T ~T                            T ~T                                      T ~T
             PtT        t Pt   = (1           X)        D;t PD;t             +    X               X;t PX;t                                :


    By combining the above results, we can decompose the CPI index Pt as follows:

                                                                                                                      1
                                                                     1   N                        1               1       N
                   Pt          ~
                             t Pt = (1             N)
                                                             T ~T
                                                             t Pt            +        N       PtN
                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                              ;


where the overall CPI de‡ator         t   is de…ned by:

                                          h                                               i       1
                                                                T 1      N                    1       N
                                  t           (1        N)      t            +    N                       :


In turn, given any variable Xt in units of consumption, its data-consistent counterpart is:

                                                             Pt Xt
                                               XR;t                = Xt          t:
                                                              P~t

Model Fit

In the main paper, we present impulse responses for welfare-consistent variables, i.e., variables
de‡ated by the CPI index Pt . Here we show that our results are not a¤ected by de‡ating nominal
variables using the data-consistent price index P~t . For instance, Figure A.19 reproduces Panel B
in Figure 9 using the data-consistent price index P~t to construct in‡ation and real GDP. In each
subplot, dashed lines plot con…dence bands from the panel-VAR estimates.


F    Sensitivity Analysis: Size and Persistence of Tari¤ Shocks

Figure A.20 assesses the sensitivity of the results to tari¤ shocks of di¤erent size (we consider
positive tari¤ shocks of size equal to 5, 10, and 15 percent). The top row assumes that the tari¤
increase occurs in normal times, while the bottom row refers to a recession. The third row plots
the di¤erence between the …rst and the second row. The negative short-run response of output
is essentially monotonic in the size of the shock, implying that the contractionary e¤ects are the
higher the tari¤ increase.
    Figure A.21 plots the impulse responses following a 5 percent increase in the Home tari¤ for



                                                               A-9
three di¤erent levels of persistence (             it   ). We consider            it   = 0:75,         it   = 0:8, and   it   = 0:85.
As for Figure A.20, the top row assumes that the tari¤ increase occurs in normal times, while
the bottom row refers to a recession. The …gure shows that protectionism remains recessionary,
regardless of the persistence of the tari¤ shock. However, there is a di¤erence between normal times
and ZLB. In normal times, the recession is stronger when the tari¤ shock is more persistent. At
the ZLB, the opposite is true— a more persistent shock induces a milder contraction. The reason
for these di¤erent results is that the ZLB the higher persistence induces a longer lasting increase
in in‡ation, which other things reduces the real interest rate by more. Notice however, that the
same argument does not hold true when considering shocks of larger size (see Figure A.20). The
reason is twofold. First, the short-run income loss is signi…cantly larger when the size the tari¤
shock increases. Second, larger shocks can trigger a contractionary monetary policy response if
their impact on in‡ation is su¢ ciently big.


G       The Role of Price Stickiness

Non-Tradable Sector

We introduce price stickiness by following Rotemberg (1982) and assuming that …nal producers
must pay a quadratic price adjustment cost:

                                                                !2
                                       N    PtN (i)
                                                               1      PtN (i) YtN (i) ;
                                       2    PtN 1 (i)

where     N   0 determines the size of the adjustment cost.4 Per-period (real) pro…ts are given by
                                 82                                  !2 3                       9
                                 <                       PtN (i)            PtN   (i)           =
                                               N
                        dN
                         t (i) =  41                                   5                   't       YtCN (i) :
                                 :             2         PtN 1 (i)              Pt              ;


Firms maximize
           " 1 the expected# present discounted value of the stream of current and future real
            X
pro…ts: Et            N                                           su
               t;t+s ds (i) , where, as in the main text, t;t+s     C;t+s =uC;t . Optimal price
               s=t
setting implies that the real output price is equal to a markup,                           N    (i), over marginal cost, 't :
                                                                                           t


                                           N               PtN (i)          N
                                           t   (i)                 =        t   (i) 't ;
                                                             Pt
    4
     The total real adjustment cost implies a loss of revenue when implementing a price change. The size of this loss
is assumed to be larger when revenue increases.



                                                              A-10
where the endogenous, time-varying markup                               N       (i) is given by
                                                                        t


      N                                                                                 N
      t   (i)                                                           8                                                                                               9;
                            h                             i             >
                                                                        <                              (1 +                                                             >
                                                                                                                                                                        =
                                                                                                               N;t (i))                 N;t (i)
                                                      2
                 (   N    1) 1        N
                                      2   (   N;t (i))        +    N                                                           (1+ N;t+1 (i)) Yt+1
                                                                                                                                                N (i)   2
                                                                        >
                                                                        :            Et          t;t+1     N;t+1 (i)                            N (i)
                                                                                                                                                                        >
                                                                                                                                                                        ;
                                                                                                                                 1+ C;t+1     Yt+1



where      N;t (i)       PtN (i) =PtN 1 (i)         1. Price stickiness introduces endogenous markup variation as
the cost of adjusting prices gives …rms an incentive to change their markups over time in order to
smooth price changes across periods.
                                     h                                                       i    1
                                                                                         2
    Notice that in equilibrium, YtN = 1                           ( =2) (           N;t )             CtN , where CtN =                             N
                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                                      Yt .


Tradable Sector

We introduce costly price adjustment in the tradable sector by following Cacciatore and Ghironi
(2014). To preserve model tractability in the presence of producer heterogeneity, Cacciatore and
Ghironi assume that tradable consumption goods are produced by symmetric monopolistically com-
petitive multi-product …rms. Each …rm purchases intermediate input and produces di¤erentiated
varieties of its sectoral output. In equilibrium, some of these varieties are exported while the others
are sold only domestically. With ‡exible prices, the tradable sector is isomorphic to the bench-
mark model (i.e., to Ghironi and Melitz, 2005).5 We now present the details of this alternative
model, considering three alternative cases: producer currency pricing (PCP), local currency pricing
(LCP), and the empirically relevant scenario for small open economies of dollar currency pricing
(i.e., export prices are set in U.S. dollar everywhere).
    As in the benchmark model, the tradable consumption basket CtT aggregates Home and Foreign
tradable consumption sub-baskets in Armington form:

                                  "                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                           #        T
                                                                                1            1                 T                T       1
                                                    1                   T
                           CtT   = (1          X)   T
                                                           T
                                                          CD;t              T       +       X
                                                                                             T         T
                                                                                                      CX;t         T
                                                                                                                                            :


The price index that corresponds to the basket CtT is given by


                                                              1
                                                                                        h                          i1          T        1
                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                T
                         PtT =                     T                                                  it    T
                                                                    T
                                  (1          X ) PD;t                  +           X       1+        t    PX;t                                     :

   5
     This is true as long as the elasticity of substitution across di¤erentiated varieties (denoted with                                                    !   below) is equal
to the elasticity of substitution of tradable consumption goods ( T ) in the benchmark model.




                                                                        A-11
In contrast to the benchmark model, there is a continuum (0; 1) of symmetric tradable sectors. The
                               T aggregates sectoral consumption goods C T (i):
domestic tradable consumption CD;t                                      D;t


                                              Z    1                                   T =( T   1)

                                   T                    T
                                  CD;t   =             CD;t (i)(   T   1)=    T
                                                                                  di                 :
                                               0


                                                                    hR                          i T =(           T   1)
                                                               T =       1 T        ( T 1)= T di
A similar basket describes Foreign tradable consumption: CX;t           0 C X;t (i)                                    .
                                          hR                  i1=(1 T )                hR                             i1=(1   T)
                                     T =      1 T       1 T di                 T =         1 T      1
The corresponding price indexes are PD;t     0 P D;t (i)                and  P X;t        0 PX;t (i)
                                                                                                                  T di             ,
both expressed in Home currency.
    In each tradable consumption sector i, there is a representative, monopolistically competitive
…rms that produces the sectoral output bundle YtT (i), sold to consumers in Home and Foreign.
Producer i is a multi-product …rm that produces a set of di¤erentiated product varieties, indexed
                                               R1                         ! =( ! 1)
by ! and de…ned over a continuum : YtT (i) = !2 YtT (!; i)( ! 1)= ! d!              , where ! > 1
denotes the symmetric elasticity of substitution across product varieties.6 We assume that                   !   =   T.


    Each product variety Y T (!; i) is created and developed by the representative producer i. The
number of products (or features) created and commercialized by each producer is endogenous. At
each point in time, only a subset of varieties               t          is actually available to consumers. To create
a new product, the producer needs to undertake a sunk investment, fE;t , in units of intermediate
input. Product creation requires each producer to create a new plant that will be producing the
new variety.7 Plants produce with di¤erent technologies indexed by relative productivity z. To
save notation, we identify a variety with the corresponding plant productivity z, omitting !. Upon
product creation, the productivity level of the new plant z is drawn from a common distribution
G(z) with support on [zmin ; 1). This relative productivity level remains …xed thereafter. Each
plant uses the intermediate input to produce its di¤erentiated product variety, with real marginal
cost:
                                                                       't
                                                        'Tt (z) =         :                                      (A-1)
                                                                       z

    At time t, the tradable Home produce i commercializes ND;t (i) varieties and creates NE;t (i)
new products that will be available for sale at time t + 1. New and incumbent plants can be hit by
a “death” shock with probability             2 (0; 1) at the end of each period. The law of motion for the
   6
     Sectors (and sector-representative …rms) are of measure zero relative to the aggregate size of the economy. Notice
that YtT (i) can also be interpreted as a bundle of product features that characterize the …nal product i.
   7
     Alternatively, we could decentralize product creation by assuming that monopolistically competitive …rms produce
product varieties (or features) that are sold to …nal producers, in this case interpreted as retailers. The two models
are isomorphic. Details are available upon request.


                                                             A-12
stock of producing plants is ND;t+1 (i) = (1                                                 )([ND;t (i) + NE;t (i)].
      When serving the Foreign market, each producer faces per-unit iceberg trade costs,                                                                                   t    > 0, and
…xed export costs, fX;t . Fixed export costs are denominated in units of intermediate input and
paid for each exported product. Thus, the total …xed cost is NX;t (i)fX;t (i), where NX;t (i) denotes
the number of product varieties (or features) exported to Foreign. Absent …xed export costs, each
producer would …nd it optimal to sell all its product varieties in Home and Foreign. Fixed export
costs imply that only varieties produced by plants with su¢ ciently high productivity (above the
cuto¤ level zX;t , determined below) are exported.8
      De…ne two special “average”productivity levels (weighted by relative output shares): an average
z~D for all producing plants and an average z~X;t for all plants that export:

                Z                                       1                                                                 "Z                                           #        1
                       1                                                                                                       1                                               ! 1
                                !   1
                                                       ! 1                                              1                                       !       1
       z~D =                z           dG(z)                   ;           z~X;t (i) =                                                     z               dG(z)                          :
                   zmin                                                                          1    G(zX;t (i))             zX;t (i)


                                                                                                                                                                 1=( !     1)
Assume that G( ) is Pareto with shape parameter kp >                                                    !       1. As a result, z~D =                                           zmin and
           1=( !    1)
z~X;t =                  zX;t , where                      kp = (kp              !       + 1). The share of exporting plants is given by:

                                                                                                                     kp
                                                                                                        zmin                   kp
                            NX;t (i)          [1           G(zX;t (i))] ND;t (i) =                                             ! 1     ND;t (i):                                           (A-2)
                                                                                                      z~X;t (i)

      The output bundles for domestic and export sale, and the corresponding unit costs, are de…ned
as follows:

                       Z                                                         !
                                                                                                              "Z                                                           #       !
                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                            1                      !       1                 !       1                              1                               !       1
       T                           T                                                              T                           T
      YD;t (i) =                  YD;t (z; i)          !       dG(z)                     ,       YX;t (i) =                  YX;t (z; i)                !       dG(z)                          ;
                           zmin                                                                                   zX;t (i)
                                                                                                                                                                                           (A-3)
                   Z                                                    1                                  "Z                                                      #       1
                       1                                            1       !
                                                                                                                1                                                      1       !
                                          1                                                                                             1
 'TD;t (i) =                    'Tt (z)                                                      'TX;t (i) =                  'Tt (z)
                                                !                                                                                               !
                                                    dG(z)                        ,                                                                  dG(z)                          : (A-4)
                    zmin                                                                                      zX;t (i)

      Notice that using equations (A-1) and (A-4), the real costs of producing the bundles YD;t (i)
and YX;t (i) can be expressed as:

                                                                    1         't                                               1          't
                             'TD;t (i) = [ND;t (i)] 1                   !        ;              'TX;t (i) = [NX;t (i)] 1           !             :                                         (A-5)
                                                                             z~D                                                       z~X;t (i)

             T (i) the price (in Home currency) of the product bundle Y T (i) and let P T (i) be
Denote with PD;t                                                       D;t             X;t
  8
      Notice that zX;t is the lowest level of plant productivity such that the pro…t from exporting is positive.



                                                                                             A-13
                                                        T (i). Each producer i faces the following
the price (in Foreign currency) of the exported bundle YX;t
domestic and foreign demand:

                                                                   !    T
                                                         T (i)
                                                        PD;t
                                    T                                        T
                                   YD;t (i)     =         T
                                                                            YD;t ;
                                                         PD;t

                                            "                            #     T
                                                 1+     it     T (i)
                                                              PX;t
                              T                         t                           T
                             YX;t (i)   =                 T
                                                                                   YX;t ;
                                                         PX;t

       T and Y T are aggregate demands of the Home tradable consumption basket in Home
where YD;t    X;t

and Foreign, respectively.
   Prices in the tradable sector are sticky: Tradable producers must pay quadratic price adjustment
costs when changing domestic and export prices. We consider to alternative assumptions about
the currency denomination of export prices: producer currency pricing (PCP) and local currency
pricing (LCP).
   Producer Currency Pricing (PCP)
                       T (i) and the domestic currency price of the export bundle, P T;h (i),
   Each producer sets PD;t                                                          X;t
                                            T (i) = P T;h (i) =" , where " is the nominal exchange
letting the price in the foreign market be PX;t      X;t        t         t

rate. Absent …xed export costs, the producer would set a single price PD;t (i) and the law of one
                                                                                      T (i) =
price (adjusted for the presence of trade costs) would determine the export price as PX;t
(1 + t ) PD;t (i) ="t . With …xed export costs, however, the composition of domestic and export
bundles is di¤erent, and the marginal costs of producing these bundles are not equal. Therefore,
producers choose two di¤erent prices for the Home and Foreign markets even under PCP.
   The nominal costs of adjusting domestic and export price are, respectively

                                                             !2
                                         T (i)
                                        PD;t
                               T                                   T        T
                                     T
                                                         1        PD;t (i) YD;t (i) ;
                               2    PD;t        1 (i)


and                                                          !2
                                      T;h
                               T     PX;t (i)                      T;h      T
                                     T;h
                                                         1        PX;t (i) YX;t (i) ;
                               2    PX;t    1 (i)

where   T   0 determines the size of the adjustment costs (domestic and export prices are ‡exible




                                                        A-14
if   T     = 0). Per-period (real) pro…ts are given by:
               8               ("                                                         #                            )                                           9
                                                                                      2
               >
               >
                                                          T (i)
                                                         PD;t                                  T (i)
                                                                                              PD;t                            T (i)
                                                                                                                             PD;t
                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                                   >
                                                                                                                                                                   >
               >
               >                    1        T
                                                                                 1                         'TD;t (i)                            T
                                                                                                                                               YD;t                >
                                                                                                                                                                   >
               >
               >                          2          T
                                                    PD;t         1 (i)
                                                                                                Pt                             T
                                                                                                                              PD;t                                 >
                                                                                                                                                                   >
               >
               <     ("                                                  #                                               )"                          #             >
                                                                                                                                                                   =
                                                                     2                                                                                    T
dTt (i) =                                T;h
                                        PX;t (i)                              T;h
                                                                             PX;t (i)                          T
                                                                                                                               1+    it
                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                           T;h
                                                                                                                                          PX;t (i)
                                                                                                                                                                T >     :
               >
               > +         1    T
                                                             1                                  (1 +      t ) 'X;t (i)                   T                     YX;t >
               >
               >
                               2         T;h
                                        PX;t     1 (i)
                                                                               Pt                                                    "t PX;t                        >
                                                                                                                                                                    >
               >
               >                                                                                                                                                    >
                                                                                                                                                                    >
               >
               :                                                                                                                                                    >
                                                                                                                                                                    ;
                                                                     't [NE;t (i) fE;t + NX;t fX;t (i)]

                                          T (i), P T;h (i), N
    The representative producer chooses PD;t      X;t        E;t (i), and zX;t (i) in order to maximize
                                                                           P1          T
the expected present discounted value of the stream of real pro…ts, Et       s=t s;t ds (i) , subject to
                                                                                     1=( !     1)
the constraints (A-2), (A-5), and z~X;t (i) =                                                       zX;t (i).9
         Since tradable consumption-producing sectors are symmetric in the economy, from now on we
omit the index i to simplify notation when presenting the …rst-order conditions. The …rst-order
condition with respect to zX;t yields:

                                                                                        T
                                                                                       YX;t
                                             kp          (   !        1)
                                                                             'TX;t              (1 + t ) = fX;t 't :
                                              (    !         1)kp                     NX;t

The above conditions states that, at the optimum, marginal revenue from adding a variety with
productivity zX;t to the export bundle has to be equal to the …xed cost. Thus, varieties produced by
plants with productivity below zX;t are distributed only in the domestic market. The composition
of the traded bundle is endogenous and the set of exported products ‡uctuates over time with
changes in the pro…tability of export.
         The …rst-order condition with respect to ND;t+1 determines product creation:
                              8                          2                                                                                           39
                              >
                              <                                                       't+1 fE;t+1
                                                                                                                  NX;t+1                              >
                                                                                                                                                      =
                                                         6                                                        ND;t+1 fX;t+1                      7
                't fE;t   = Et (1        )       t;t+1   4                                      YT                      YT                           5 :
                              >
                              :                                  +       1
                                                                                     'TD;t+1 ND;t+1 + 'TX;t+1 NX;t+1  X;t+1     N
                                                                                                                                           t+1
                                                                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                                      ;
                                                                      !      1                D;t+1            X;t+1 ND;t+1




In equilibrium, the cost of producing an additional variety, 't fE;t , must be equal to its expected
bene…t (which includes expected savings on future sunk investment costs augmented by the marginal
revenue from commercializing the variety, net of …xed export costs, if it is exported).
         The (real) price of Home output for domestic sales is a time-varying markup                                                                     T     over the
                                                                                                                                                         D;t

domestic marginal cost, 'TD;t :
                                                                  T              PD;t                T    T
                                                                  D;t                 =              D;t 'D;t :
                                                                                  Pt
     9
         Equation (A-2) implies that by choosing zX;t the producer also determines NX;t .



                                                                                      A-15
The time-varying domestic markup,                                     T ,   is given by:
                                                                      D;t


              T                                                                                    T
              D;t                                                                        8                                                                      9;
                                                                                         >
                                                                                         <                            1+       T          T                     >
                                                                                                                                                                =
                                                                       2                                                       D;t        D;t
                            (         1) 1            T         T           +                                                      2
                                T                     2         D;t                  T                                (1+    T
                                                                                                                                     )              T
                                                                                                                                                YD;t+1
                                                                                         >
                                                                                         :         Et      t;t+1
                                                                                                                             D;t+1         T                    >
                                                                                                                                                                ;
                                                                                                                       1+    C;t+1         D;t+1 Y T
                                                                                                                                                      D;t



where 1 +       T                T =P T
                                PD;t
                D;t                  D;t         1.   The (real) price of Home output for export sales (in units of Home
consumption) is a time-varying markup                                       T        over the marginal cost of the export bundle, 'TX;t :
                                                                            X;t


                                                                            T
                                                                           PX;t                    (1 + t ) 'TX;t
                                                            T                                T
                                                            X;t                      =       X;t                         :
                                                                           Pt                             Qt

The time-varying export markup,                                 T ,    is given by:
                                                                X;t


        T                                                                                    T
        X;t   =                                                                  8                                                                          9;       (A-6)
                                                                                 >
                                                                                 >                                1+     T;h         T;h                    >
                                                                                                                                                            >
                                                                 2               <                 "                     X;t         X;t
                                                                                                                                                        #   =
                                                          T;h                                                                 2
                    (   T           1) 1     T
                                             2            X;t         +      T                                    1+    T;h                     T
                                                                                                                                         T;h YX;t+1
                                                                                 >
                                                                                 >           Et
                                                                                                                        X;t+1                               >
                                                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                 :                      t;t+1     1+    C;t+1            X;t+1 Y T
                                                                                                                                                X;t
                                                                                                                                                            ;


where
                                                                        T;h                              T
                                                          T;h          PX;t                   Qt         X;t
                                             1+           X;t   =      T;h
                                                                                     =                  T
                                                                                                                  (1 +         C;t ) :
                                                                      PX;t                   Qt 1       X;t 1
                                                                                 1

As expected, price stickiness introduces endogenous markup variations both in the domestic and
export markets. In equilibrium,

                                                                h                                      2
                                                                                                              i   1
                                                           T                                       T                   T
                                                          YD;t = 1                ( =2)            D;t                CD;t


and
                                                                                                          2       1
                                                           T                                       T;h                 T
                                                          YX;t = 1               ( =2)             X;t                CX;t :

   Local Currency Pricing (LCP)
   Under LCP, the export price is set in Foreign currency. The nominal costs of adjusting the
export price is now given by:

                                                                                          !2
                                                                 T (i)
                                                                PX;t
                                                      T                                               T        T
                                                             T
                                                                                         1        "t PX;t (i) YX;t (i) :
                                                      2     PX;t 1 (i)




                                                                                         A-16
                                  T (i) to maximize:
Therefore, each producer chooses PX;t

                    8            ("                                                           #                            )                                           9
                    >                                          T (i)                      2        T (i)                          T (i)              T                 >
                    >
                    >                                         PD;t                                PD;t                           PD;t                                  >
                                                                                                                                                                       >
                    >
                    >                    1       2
                                                     T
                                                              T                   1                 Pt         'TD;t (i)              T
                                                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                         YD;t          >
                                                                                                                                                                       >
                    >
                    >
                                                             PD;t   1 (i)                                                            PD;t                              >
                                                                                                                                                                       >
                    <           ("                                                #                                                  )                                 =
                                                                              2
        dTt (i) =                                         T (i)
                                                         PX;t                             T (i)
                                                                                      "t PX;t                                                 T (i)
                                                                                                                                             PX;t
                                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                                                           :
                    >
                    > +              1       T
                                             2            T (i)         1                 Pt               (1 + t ) 'TX;t (i)                  T
                                                                                                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                                                                 YX;t >
                                                                                                                                                                      >
                    >
                    >
                                                         PX;t                                                                                 PX;t                    >
                                                                                                                                                                      >
                    >
                    >                                                                                                                                                 >
                                                                                                                                                                      >
                    >
                    :                                                                                                                                                 >
                                                                                                                                                                      ;
                                                                       't [NE;t (i) fE;t + NX;t fX;t (i)] :


In the symmetric equilibrium, the time-varying markup,                                                         T ,   is now given by:
                                                                                                               X;t


             T                                                                                        T
             X;t                                                                          8                                                                       9;
                                                                                          >
                                                                                          <                         1+         T         T                        >
                                                                                                                                                                  =
                                                                        2                                                      X;t       X;t
                        (        1) 1                    T       T            +                                                          2
                            T                                    X;t                  T                            Qt+1 (1+
                                                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                                                         )               T
                                                         2                                >
                                                                                          :           Et                             X;t       T YX;t+1           >
                                                                                                                                                                  ;
                                                                                                              t;t+1 Qt 1+            C;t+1     X;t Y T
                                                                                                                                                         X;t



where 1 +      T        T =P T
                     = PX;t
               X;t          X;t                  1.

       Notice that with a …xed exchange rate, there would be no di¤erence in the equilibrium allocation
                                                         T (i) = P T;h (i) =" . Therefor the
between PCP and LCP. To see this, recall that under PCP PX;t      X;t        t

adjustment cost under PCP can be written as

                                                                                                   !2
                                                                  T (i) "
                                                                 PX;t
                                                 T                        t                                T           T
                                                              T
                                                                                                  1       PX;t (i) "t YX;t (i) :
                                                 2           PX;t      1 (i) "t       1


       With a …xed exchange, "t ="t                          1   = 1. Therefore, the adjustment cost under PCP becomes:

                                                                                              !2
                                                                   T (i)
                                                                  PX;t
                                                         T                                             T           T
                                                                  T
                                                                                          1           PX;t (i) "t YX;t (i) ;
                                                         2       PX;t       1 (i)


                                                        T (i) = P T;h (i) in deviations from steady
which is identical to the cost under LCP. Furthermore, PX;t      X;t

state, since "t = " (constant).10
       Dollar Currency Pricing (DCP)
       In this case, Home export prices are determined as under LCP, while U.S. exporters set prices
under PCP.
  10
    Absent …rm heterogeneity, the exact equivalence between LCP and PCP would no longer hold, since there would
be a single Rotemberg adjustment cost for total sales under PCP. Nevertheless, the equilibrium allocations remain
very similar.




                                                                                          A-17
Impulse Responses

Figure A.22 presents the impulse responses following a temporary increase in tari¤s under PCP,
Figure A.23 considers LCP, while Figure A.24plots dynamics under DCP. In all scenarios, we as-
sume that the exchange rate is ‡exible. As in the main text, we consider four model speci…cations:
the baseline model (…rst row), the baseline model under …nancial autarky (second row), the baseline
model without endogenous …rm dynamics (third row), and the baseline model without …rm dynam-
ics and endogenous physical capital accumulation. In the three scenarios, the recessionary e¤ects
are initially stronger relative to the ‡exible price scenario, since price stickiness increases the tari¤
pass through on …nal consumers. Not surprisingly, the contractionary e¤ects of tari¤s are larger
under LCP. This happens because the appreciation of the exchange rate does not pass-through on
import prices under LCP, implying that the higher tari¤ results in higher import prices. While this
e¤ect increases expenditure switching toward Home goods, it also reduces real income (and thus
investment) by more. As a result, the recession is stronger.11


H      The Role of Macro and Micro Dynamics

Figure A.25 and A.26 assess the relative importance of macro and micro forces for the model’s
ability to match the panel-VAR evidence presented in Figure 9 (Panel A). Figure A.25 plots
welfare-consistent measures for in‡ation and real GDP, while Figure A.26 considers data-consistent
measures. We consider three simpli…ed versions of the model. The …rst version assumes …nancial
autarky (i.e., no international trade in bonds); the second version abstracts from …rm-level dy-
namics (by assuming a constant number of symmetric producers in the tradable sector); the third
version abstracts from both …rm dynamics and physical capital. Each margin of adjustment plays
an important role in matching the data. Both …gures show that physical capital accumulation and
producer-level dynamics are central to reproduce the panel-VAR evidence. The intuition mirrors
the discussion in the main text.




  11
    Results are similar when considering a …xed exchange rate. Notice that in this case, the equilibrium allocation
implied by the model is identical under producer currency pricing and local currency pricing. While the exact
equivalence depends on the existence of producer heterogeneity, allocations remain nearly identical even in the
absence of endogenous producer entry.


                                                      A-18
                                                      Table A.1

                                                      ^Canada
                                                      u ;t               ^T;turkey
                                                                         u
                                   P oilt   1            0:093              0:080
                                                         [0:070]            [0:064]

                                   P oilt   2            0:079              0:077
                                                        [0:070]            [0:064]

                                   pval F test           0:388              0:457


                                   GREAt        1        0:051              0:040
                                                        [0:043]             [0:042]

                                   GREAt        2        0:005              0:031
                                                         [0:043]           [0:042]

                                   pval F test           0:136              0:629


                                   Stocki;t     1        0:023              0:013
                                                         [0:60]            [0:012]

                                   Stocki;t     2        0:071              0:005
                                                         [0:059]            [0:012]

                                   pval F test           0:282              0:478


                                   CLIt     1            0:681              0:100
                                                         [1:27]             [0:326]

                                   CLIt     2            0:671              0:099
                                                          [1:27]           [0:328]

                                   pval F test           0:689              0:948


    Note: OLS regressions where the dependent variable is the estimated structural trade-policy structural
                                                    T urkey
                                   ^Canada
shock in the quarterly VAR (either u ;t    or u
                                              ^      ;t     ).    The regressors include: the real price of oil (P oilt ),

an index of global real economic activity in industrial commodity markets (GREAt ), a country-speci…c index

of share prices (Stockit ), and a country-speci…c index of future economic activity (CLIt ). pvalF testdenotes

the p-value of a F-test of joint signi…cance of the coe¢ cients.




                                                        A-19
                                                                     TABLE A.2: MODEL EQUATIONS

1 = (1                                  T 1          N                        N 1                N
                        N)              t                    +       N        t
                                                     1           T                                   1        T
 T   = (1                                   T                                            T
 t                              X)          D;t                      +       X           X;t
 T                  1=(1             T)
 D;t   = ND;t                               ~TD;t
 T                  1=(1             T)
 X;t   = NX;t                               ~TX;t
                                                             1          T                        1         T
                                                                     YD;t                                YX;t
Zt Kt L1t
                                                         1                                   1
           = YtN + ND;t T                                             z~D  + NX;t T                      z~X;t    + NE;t fE;t + NX;t fX;t
                h                                                           i
                                                                          2
Yt = Ct + IK;t + 1   2 (
                     w
                                                                     w;t )    wt L t
YtN =               N
                                N
                                t
                                            N
                                                Yt
 N     =                1) 't
                 N
 t          (   N
                            1
         T 1 ~
YD;t = ND;t  YD;t
                            1
         T 1 ~
YX;t = NX;t  YX;t
                                                                                                     T        T
                                                                                         T
Y~D;t
  T = (1                                                                                             1
                                 X ) (1                  N)          ~TD;t                   ND;t            T        T
                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                              T        N
                                                                                                                                           Yt
                                                                                     T        T
                                                                         T
Y~X;t
  T =                                                                                1
                    X (1                  N)        ~TX;t                    NX;t            T           T
                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                  T       N
                                                                                                                              Yt
                                't
~TD;t =         (   T
                        T
                            1) z~D
                                t 't
~TX;t =         (   T
                        T
                            1) Qt z~X;t

ND;t = (1                        ) (ND;t             1   + NE;t              1)
                                        k        k
                    zmin
NX;t =              z~X;t
                                                T 1      ND;t
                   8                                        2                                                                                                               39
                   <                                                                                                                NX;t+1                                   =
                                                                                                 't+1 fE;t+1                        ND;t+1 fX;t+1
't fE;t        = Et (1                          )     t;t+1 4                                                                                                               5
                   :                                                      +       1               't+1 YD;t+1
                                                                                                                          +       't+1 YX;t+1 NX;t+1                         ;
                                                                                 T       1         z~D ND;t+1                     z~X;t NX;t+1 ND;t+1 t+1
k (    T     1) 't YX;t
 ( T       1)k z~X;t NX;t t                     = fX;t 't
                                                                                                                                                                     vL;t
wt =                                                                 (                                    "                                          2          #)
                                                                                                                                                                     uC;t
                    1)(1                    2
                                                                                                                          1+ w;t+1 (             )       Lt+1
           (                        w
                                    2       w;t (h)   )+         w       w;t (1+ w;t )               Et       t;t+1 w;t+1 1+
                                                                                                                             C;t+1                        Lt

                                                                     t;t+1
1+         at   = (1 + it+1 ) Et                              1+         C;t+1
                                                                                                 t;t+1        Qt+1
1+ a            ;t+1        +        at      = 1 + it+1 Et                               1+                    Qt
                                                                                                  C;t+1
                 1+i
Qt a   ;t+1= Qt 1+ t a ;t + NX;t Qt ~TX;t Y~X;t
                                            T   NX;t ~X;t Y~X;t
                                                            T
                 n C;t                                                                                                                               o
(1 + it ) = max 1; (1 + it 1 )%i [(1 + i) (1 + Ct )% (Ygt )%Y ]1                                                                                %i

                                 wt
(1 +        w;t )       =       wt 1        (1 +             C;t )
                                     N
(1 +        N;t )       =           N
                                     t
                                            (1 +             C;t )
                                    t 1




                                                                                                     A-20
                                 Real Price of Oil                           Antidumping Intiatives
                        0
                                                                    4
                     -0.02                                          2

                     -0.04                                          0

                             2   4     6     8       10   12             2      4     6     8   10    12

                                  GDP Growth                                        Inflation
                      0.05                                        0.2
                         0
                     -0.05                                          0
                      -0.1
                     -0.15                                        -0.2

                             2   4     6     8       10   12             2      4     6     8   10    12

                                  NX over GDP
                      0.15
                       0.1
                      0.05
                         0
                     -0.05

                             2   4     6     8       10   12




Figure A.1: Quarterly VAR including the real price of oil, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives
in Canada. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                 Real Price of Oil                           Antidumping Intiatives

                     0.02                                           4

                        0                                           2

                     -0.02                                          0

                             2   4     6     8       10   12             2      4     6     8   10    12

                                  GDP Growth                                        Inflation
                       0.2
                                                                    2
                        0
                      -0.2                                          1
                      -0.4
                      -0.6                                          0

                             2   4     6     8       10   12             2      4     6     8   10    12

                                  NX over GDP
                       0.4


                       0.2


                        0

                             2   4     6     8       10   12




Figure A.2: Quarterly VAR including the real price of oil, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives
in Turkey. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                           A-21
                                    Global REA                           Antidumping Intiatives
                       0
                                                                4

                      -2                                        2

                                                                0
                      -4
                            2   4      6   8     10   12             2      4     6     8   10    12

                                 GDP Growth                                     Inflation

                       0                                      0.2


                     -0.1                                       0

                                                              -0.2
                     -0.2
                            2   4      6   8     10   12             2      4     6     8   10    12

                                NX over GDP
                      0.2

                      0.1

                       0


                            2   4      6   8     10   12




Figure A.3: Quarterly VAR including the real economic activity index, one-standard deviation increase in antidump-
ing initiatives in Canada. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is
annualized.




                                    Global REA                           Antidumping Intiatives
                       3
                       2                                        4

                       1                                        2
                       0
                                                                0
                      -1
                            2   4      6   8     10   12             2      4     6     8   10    12

                                 GDP Growth                                     Inflation
                      0.2
                       0                                        2

                     -0.2
                                                                1
                     -0.4
                     -0.6                                       0

                            2   4      6   8     10   12             2      4     6     8   10    12

                                NX over GDP

                      0.4

                      0.2

                       0

                            2   4      6   8     10   12




Figure A.4: Quarterly VAR including the real economic activity index, one-standard deviation increase in antidump-
ing initiatives in Turkey. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is
annualized.



                                                       A-22
                       4                                  0.05
                                                                0
                       2                                  -0.05
                                                              -0.1
                       0
                                                          -0.15
                               5        10        15                 5        10       15


                                                          0.15
                     0.2
                                                              0.1
                                                          0.05
                       0
                                                                0

                     -0.2                                 -0.05

                               5        10        15                 5        10       15



                       0

                      -2

                      -4
                               5        10        15




Figure A.5: Quarterly VAR including the OECD year-to-year growth of overall stock prices, one-standard deviation
increase in antidumping initiatives in Canada. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The
inflation rate is annualized.




                                                                0
                       4
                                                              -0.2
                       2                                      -0.4
                                                              -0.6
                       0
                               5        10        15                 5        10       15


                       2                                      0.4

                       1                                      0.2

                       0
                                                                0
                               5        10        15                 5        10       15




                       0

                      -5

                     -10

                               5        10        15




Figure A.6: Quarterly VAR including the OECD year-to-year growth of overall stock prices, one-standard deviation
increase in antidumping initiatives in Turkey. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The
inflation rate is annualized.



                                                       A-23
                                                             0.1
                      4

                      2                                        0


                      0                                      -0.1

                               5       10        15                 5       10        15



                     0.2                                     0.1


                      0                                        0

                    -0.2
                                                             -0.1
                               5       10        15                 5       10        15


                     0.1


                      0


                    -0.1

                               5       10        15




Figure A.7: Quarterly VAR including the OECD Composite Leading Indicator (CLI), one-standard deviation in-
crease in antidumping initiatives in Canada. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The
inflation rate is annualized.




                                                             0.2
                      4                                        0
                                                             -0.2
                      2                                      -0.4
                                                             -0.6
                      0
                                                             -0.8
                               5       10        15                 5       10        15


                      2
                                                             0.4
                      1
                                                             0.2

                      0                                        0

                               5       10        15                 5       10        15




                      0

                    -0.5

                     -1
                               5       10        15




Figure A.8: Quarterly VAR including the OECD Composite Leading Indicator (CLI), one-standard deviation in-
crease in antidumping initiatives in Turkey. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The
inflation rate is annualized.



                                                      A-24
                                 GDP Growth                                    Inflation
                                                              0.3
                     0.05

                        0                                     0.2

                     -0.05
                                                              0.1
                      -0.1

                                                               0
                     -0.15


                             2   4    6     8   10    12            2      4     6     8   10    12


                                 NX over GDP                            Antidumping Intiatives
                       0.2
                                                               5
                     0.15
                                                               4
                       0.1                                     3

                     0.05                                      2

                        0                                      1

                                                               0
                     -0.05
                                                              -1
                             2   4    6     8   10    12            2      4     6     8   10    12




Figure A.9: Quarterly VAR, alternative recursive ordering, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives
(ordered last) in Canada. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is
annualized.




                                 GDP Growth                                    Inflation
                                                               2
                        0
                                                              1.5
                      -0.2
                                                               1

                      -0.4                                    0.5

                      -0.6                                     0


                             2   4    6     8   10    12            2      4     6     8   10    12


                                 NX over GDP                            Antidumping Intiatives
                       0.3
                                                               5

                       0.2                                     4

                                                               3
                       0.1
                                                               2

                                                               1
                        0
                                                               0

                             2   4    6     8   10    12            2      4     6     8   10    12




Figure A.10: Quarterly VAR, alternative recursive ordering, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initia-
tives (ordered last) in Turkey. GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate
is annualized.



                                                       A-25
                                  GDP Growth                                 Inflation
                      0.05                                     0.2
                         0
                     -0.05                                       0
                      -0.1
                     -0.15                                     -0.2
                                 5          10        15                 5           10       15

                      0.05                                     0.2
                         0
                     -0.05
                                                                 0
                      -0.1
                     -0.15
                                                               -0.2
                                 5          10        15                 5           10       15

                       0.1                                     0.2

                        0                                        0

                      -0.1                                     -0.2
                                 5          10        15                 5           10       15
                       0.1                                     0.2
                        0
                                                                 0
                      -0.1
                                                               -0.2
                                 5          10        15                 5           10       15




Figure A.11: Quarterly VAR, alternative trade policy measures. First panel: baseline measure; Second panel:
antidumping initiatives include products recorded at 4-digits; Third panel: only initiatives that end up with the
imposition of antidumping tariffs; Fourth panel: only initiatives that end up with the imposition of antidumping
tariffs including products recorded at 4-digits. One-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in Canada.
GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                        A-26
                                  GDP Growth                                 Inflation
                                                               2
                        0
                      -0.2                                     1
                      -0.4
                                                               0
                      -0.6
                                 5          10        15                 5           10       15

                        0                                      2
                      -0.2
                                                               1
                      -0.4
                      -0.6                                     0

                                 5          10        15                 5           10       15
                                                               2
                        0
                      -0.2                                     1
                      -0.4
                                                               0
                      -0.6
                                 5          10        15                 5           10       15

                        0                                      2
                      -0.2
                                                               1
                      -0.4
                      -0.6                                     0

                                 5          10        15                 5           10       15




Figure A.12: Quarterly VAR, alternative trade policy measures. First panel: baseline measure; Second panel:
antidumping initiatives include products recorded at 4-digits; Third panel: only initiatives that end up with the
imposition of antidumping tariffs; Fourth panel: only initiatives that end up with the imposition of antidumping
tariffs including products recorded at 4-digits. One-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in Turkey.
GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                        A-27
                               TTB Initiatives                           GDP Growth
                                                              0.1
                       8
                                                          0.05
                       6
                                                                0
                       4
                                                          -0.05
                       2
                                                              -0.1
                       0
                                                          -0.15
                      -2
                               5         10       15                 5         10      15


                                   Inflation                         NX over GDP
                     0.4

                     0.3                                      0.1

                     0.2                                  0.05
                     0.1
                                                                0
                       0
                                                          -0.05
                     -0.1


                               5         10       15                 5         10      15




Figure A.13: Quarterly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in temporary trade barriers initiatives in Canada.
GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                               TTB Initiatives                           GDP Growth
                       5
                                                                0
                       4

                       3                                      -0.2

                       2
                                                              -0.4
                       1
                                                              -0.6
                       0

                               5         10       15                 5         10      15


                                   Inflation                         NX over GDP
                       2
                                                              0.3
                     1.5

                       1                                      0.2

                     0.5                                      0.1

                       0
                                                                0
                     -0.5
                               5         10       15                 5         10      15




Figure A.14: Quarterly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in temporary trade barriers initiatives in Turkey.
GDP growth and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                       A-28
                                    GDP                Inflation                NX over GDP
                          0.1                                             0.1
                                                0.2
                        0.05
                           0                    0.1                     0.05
                 CAN




                        -0.05
                                                  0
                                                                           0
                         -0.1
                        -0.15                   -0.1
                                                                        -0.05
                         -0.2
                                                -0.2

                                5     10   15          5      10   15            5    10      15


                                    GDP                Inflation                NX over GDP

                         -0.2                     2                       0.4

                         -0.4                   1.5
                                                                          0.3
                         -0.6                     1
                  TUR




                         -0.8                                             0.2
                                                0.5
                           -1                                             0.1
                                                  0
                         -1.2
                                                -0.5                       0
                         -1.4

                                5     10   15          5      10   15            5    10      15




Figure A.15: Quarterly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in Canada and Turkey.
GDP and net exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                       A-29
                                                                            0.4
                     1.5                          0

                                                                            0.3
                                                -0.1
                      1
                                                                            0.2
                                                -0.2
                     0.5                                                    0.1
                                                -0.3
                                                                             0
                      0
                           2   4   6   8   10          2   4   6   8   10         2   4   6   8   10



                      0

                                                  0
                    -0.2

                    -0.4                        -0.2

                    -0.6                        -0.4

                    -0.8
                                                -0.6
                     -1
                           2   4   6   8   10          2   4   6   8   10




Figure A.16: Panel-VAR, impulse responses to a one-standard deviation increase in detrended tariffs. Tariffs,
GDP growth, exports, and imports are in percentage points.




                                                           A-30
                            Antidumping Initiatives                            GDP
                                                                  0.1
                       6
                                                                    0

                       4                                          -0.1

                                                                  -0.2
                       2
                                                                  -0.3

                       0                                          -0.4

                                5         10          15                 5       10    15


                                    Inflation                            NX over GDP
                                                                  0.3
                      0.5

                                                                  0.2
                       0
                                                                  0.1

                     -0.5                                           0


                                                                  -0.1
                                5         10          15                 5       10    15




Figure A.17: Quarterly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in India. GDP and net
exports over GDP are in percentage points. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                           A-31
                            Antidumping Initiatives                       Industrial Production
                       3                                            0

                       2
                                                                  -0.2
                       1

                       0                                          -0.4

                                5           10        15                     5          10        15

                                      Inflation                                  Net Exports
                       1                                          0.4


                       0                                          0.2


                                                                    0
                      -1
                                5           10        15                     5          10        15

                                    Interest Rate                        Nominal Exchange Rate
                       0
                                                                  0.1
                     -0.1
                                                                    0
                     -0.2

                     -0.3                                         -0.1

                                5           10        15                     5          10        15




Figure A.18: Monthly VAR, one-standard deviation increase in antidumping initiatives in India. Industrial produc-
tion, net exports, and nominal exchange rate are in percentage points. The inflation rate and the interest rate are
annualized.




                                                           A-32
                    2




                                                                       −.4 −.3 −.2 −.1 0
                                                                           GDP Growth
                      1.5
               Tariff
                 1  .5
                    0




                              0   2      4          6   8       10                         0   2      4          6   8      10
                                             year                                                         year

                                  Welfare cons          Data cons                              Welfare Cons          Data Cons
                                  PVAR Low              PVAR High                              PVAR Low              PVAR High
                    .6




                                                                       −.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4
                                                                           NX over GDP
                         .4
                Inflation
               0    .2
                    −.2




                              0   2      4          6   8       10                         0   2      4          6   8      10
                                             year                                                         year

                                  Welfare Cons          Data Cons                              Welfare Cons          Data Cons
                                  PVAR Low              PVAR High                              PVAR Low              PVAR High



Figure A.19: Panel-VAR confidence bands (dashed lines) and annualized, model-based, impulse responses.
Continuos lines plot welfare-consistent variables, while dashed lines plot data-consistent variables. The
response of tariffs and net exports over GDP is not affected by the specific price deflator we consider.




                                                                    A-33
                              Consumption                         GDP                           Inflation                         Import Tariff
                    0                                                                  1
                                                         0                                                              12                         ∆τ = 0.034
   Steady State




                                                                                     0.8                                10                         ∆τ = 0.068
                  -0.5                                 -0.2                                                                                        ∆τ = 0.136
                                                                                     0.6                                 8
                                                       -0.4
                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                     0.4
                   -1                                  -0.6                                                              4
                                                                                     0.2
                                                       -0.8                                                              2
                  -1.5                                                                 0
                         5       10          15   20          5   10     15   20            5     10         15   20          5       10           15           20
                              Consumption                         GDP                           Inflation                         Import Tariff
                                                         0
                                                                                     0.5                                12                         ∆τ = 0.034
                                                                                                                        10                         ∆τ = 0.068
   Recession




                  -0.5                                                                                                                             ∆τ = 0.136
                                                       -0.5
                                                                                       0                                 8
                                                                                                                         6
                   -1
                                                        -1                                                               4
                                                                                     -0.5
                                                                                                                         2
                  -1.5

                         5       10          15   20          5   10     15   20            5     10         15   20          5       10           15           20
                             ∆ Consumption                        ∆GDP                          ∆Inflation                        ∆Import Tariff
                                                                                       0                                 1

              -0.05                                    -0.2
                                                                                     -0.2                              0.5
Difference




                                                       -0.4
                  -0.1                                                               -0.4                                0
                                                       -0.6
                                                                                     -0.6
              -0.15                                    -0.8                                                            -0.5

                                                        -1                           -0.8
                                                                                                                        -1
                         5       10          15   20          5   10     15   20            5     10         15   20          5       10           15           20




Figure A.20: Responses to a temporary increase in Home tariffs, shocks with different size (5, 10, and 15 percent)
and different initial conditions: steady state (first row) and a recession with binding ZLB (second row). The third
row plots the difference between the first and the second row for each variable. Responses show percentage deviations
from the initial steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                                              A-34
                              Consumption                          GDP                           Inflation                                 Import Tariff
                    0
                                                                                      0.25                               3                                   ρ τ = 0.56
                                                          0
   Steady State




                  -0.1                                                                 0.2                              2.5                                  ρ τ = 0.65

                                                        -0.1                                                                                                 ρ τ = 0.75
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                      0.15
                  -0.2                                                                                                  1.5
                                                        -0.2                           0.1
                                                                                                                         1
                  -0.3
                                                                                      0.05
                                                        -0.3                                                            0.5
                                                                                        0
                         5       10          15   20           5   10     15    20           5     10         15   20                  5       10           15            20
                              Consumption                          GDP                           Inflation                                 Import Tariff
                                                          0
                                                                                       0.2                               3                                   ρ τ = 0.56
                  -0.1
                                                                                                                        2.5                                  ρ τ = 0.65
                                                        -0.1
   Recession




                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                             ρ τ = 0.75
                                                                                                                         2
                  -0.2
                                                        -0.2                            0
                                                                                                                        1.5
                  -0.3                                                                -0.1                               1
                                                        -0.3
                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                      -0.2
                  -0.4                                  -0.4
                         5       10          15   20           5   10     15    20           5     10         15   20                  5       10           15            20
                             ∆ Consumption                         ∆GDP                          ∆Inflation                   × 10-7       ∆Import Tariff

              -0.02                                                                                                      3
                                                       -0.05                            0
Difference




              -0.03                                     -0.1
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                      -0.1
                                                       -0.15
              -0.04                                                                                                      1
                                                        -0.2                          -0.2


              -0.05                                    -0.25
                                                                                                                         0
                         5       10          15   20           5   10     15    20           5     10         15   20                  5       10           15            20




Figure A.21: Responses to a temporary increase in Home tariffs, shocks with persistence (0.56, 0.65, and 0.75) and
different initial conditions: steady state (first row) and a recession with binding ZLB (second row). The third row
plots the difference between the first and the second row for each variable. Responses show percentage deviations
from the initial steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                                               A-35
                                         GDP                        Inflation               Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
                               0                          2                           0.4
         Baseline




                                                                                                                   -0.5

                             -0.2                         1                           0.2
                                                                                                                    -1

                                                          0                            0
                             -0.4                                                                                  -1.5
                                    10   20    30   40         10      20   30   40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                         GDP                        Inflation               Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
         Financial Autarky




                                                                                       1                             0
                                                          1
                               0
                                                         0.5                                                        -1
                             -0.1                                                      0
                             -0.2                         0                                                         -2
                             -0.3                                                      -1
                                    10   20    30   40         10      20   30   40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                         GDP                        Inflation               Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate

                               0                          2                           0.4
         No Entry




                                                                                                                   -0.5
                             -0.1
                                                          1                           0.2
                             -0.2                                                                                   -1
                             -0.3                                                      0
                                                          0
                                                                                                                   -1.5
                                    10   20    30   40         10      20   30   40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                         GDP                        Inflation               Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
         No Capital/Entry




                             0.2                                                      0.4
                                                          2
                             0.1                                                                                   -0.5
                                                                                      0.2
                               0                          1                                                         -1

                             -0.1                         0                            0                           -1.5
                                    10   20    30   40         10      20   30   40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40




Figure A.22: Effects of a temporary increase in Home trade barriers in normal times, sticky prices (producer currency
pricing). The top raw: baseline model; second raw: baseline model under financial autarky; third raw: baseline
model without firm dynamics; fourth raw: baseline model without firm dynamics and physical capital accumulation.
Responses show percentage deviations from the steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                                            A-36
                                        GDP                       Inflation                 Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
                                                                                                                     0
                                                        3
        Baseline




                              0                                                       0.4                          -0.5
                                                        2
                            -0.2                        1                             0.2                           -1

                                                        0                                                          -1.5
                            -0.4                                                       0
                                   10   20    30   40        10      20   30     40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
        Financial Autarky




                                        GDP                       Inflation                 Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
                             0.2                                                       1                             0
                                                        3
                               0
                                                        2                                                           -1
                            -0.2
                                                        1                              0                            -2
                            -0.4
                            -0.6                        0                                                           -3
                            -0.8                        -1                             -1
                                   10   20    30   40        10      20   30     40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                        GDP                       Inflation                 Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
                            0.2                                                                                      0
                                                        3
        No Entry




                                                                                      0.4                          -0.5
                              0                         2
                                                        1                             0.2                           -1
                            -0.2
                                                        0                                                          -1.5
                            -0.4                                                       0
                                                        -1
                                   10   20    30   40        10      20   30     40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                        GDP                       Inflation                 Trade Balance/GDP             Real Exchange Rate
        No Capital/Entry




                             0.3                                                                                     0
                                                        3                             0.4
                             0.2                                                                                   -0.5
                                                        2
                             0.1                                                      0.2
                                                        1                                                           -1
                               0
                                                        0                                                          -1.5
                            -0.1                                                       0
                                                        -1
                                   10   20    30   40        10      20   30     40            10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40




Figure A.23: Effects of a temporary increase in Home trade barriers in normal times, sticky prices (local currency
pricing). The top raw: baseline model; second raw: baseline model under financial autarky; third raw: baseline
model without firm dynamics; fourth raw: baseline model without firm dynamics and physical capital accumulation.
Responses show percentage deviations from the steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                                          A-37
                                           GDP                     Inflation              Trade Balance/GDP              Real Exchange Rate
                                                                                        0.6
                                 0                           2
             Baseline




                                                                                        0.4                       -0.5
                               -0.1
                                                             1                          0.2                        -1
                               -0.2
                                                             0                           0                        -1.5
                                      10   20    30   40          10   20    30    40         10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
       Financial Autarky




                                           GDP                     Inflation              Trade Balance/GDP              Real Exchange Rate
                              0.02                                                       1                          0
                                                           0.08
                                 0                         0.06                                                    -1
                              -0.02                        0.04                          0
                                                                                                                   -2
                              -0.04                        0.02
                              -0.06                          0                           -1                        -3
                                      10   20    30   40          10   20    30    40         10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                           GDP                     Inflation              Trade Balance/GDP              Real Exchange Rate
                                                                                        0.6
                                                             2
             No Entry




                                 0                                                      0.4                       -0.5
                               -0.1                          1                          0.2                        -1
                               -0.2
                                                             0                           0                        -1.5
                                      10   20    30   40          10   20    30    40         10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40
                                           GDP                     Inflation              Trade Balance/GDP              Real Exchange Rate
           No Capital/Entry




                              0.15                           2                          0.4
                                                                                                                  -0.5
                               0.1
                                                             1                          0.2                        -1
                              0.05
                                 0                           0                           0                        -1.5
                                      10   20    30   40          10   20    30    40         10   20   30   40             10   20   30   40




Figure A.24: Effects of a temporary increase in Home trade barriers in normal times, sticky prices (dollar currency
pricing). The top raw: baseline model; second raw: baseline model under financial autarky; third raw: baseline
model without firm dynamics; fourth raw: baseline model without firm dynamics and physical capital accumulation.
Responses show percentage deviations from the steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                                            A-38
                                                                            −.15 −.1 −.05 0 .05
                     2




                                                                                 GDP Growth
                       1.5
                Tariff
                 1   .5
                     0




                              0   2          4          6      8       10                         0   2      4          6      8       10
                                                 Year                                                            Year

                                      Baseline              Autarky                                   Baseline              Autarky
                                      No entry              No entry No K                             No Entry              No Entry No K
                     .5




                                                                            −.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4
                                                                               NX over GDP
                .1 .2 .3 .4
                  Inflation
                     0




                              0   2          4          6      8       10                         0   2      4          6      8       10
                                                 Year                                                            Year

                                  Baseline                  Autarky                                   Baseline              Autarky
                                  No Entry                  No Entry No K                             No Entry              No Entry No K



Figure A.25: Annualized responses to a temporary increase in Home tariffs in normal times. Real GDP and
inflation are measured using the welfare-consistent price deflator Pt . Continuos line: baseline model; dashed
lines: baseline model under financial autarky; dash-dot-dot lines: baseline model without firm dynamics;
dash-dot lines: baseline model without firm dynamics and physical capital accumulation. Responses show
percentage deviations from the steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                                        A-39
                     2




                                                                                    .05
                                                                         GDP Growth
                       1.5




                                                                               0
                Tariff
                 1




                                                                         −.05
                     .5




                                                                                −.1
                     0




                               0   2      4          6      8       10                       0   2      4          6      8       10
                                              Year                                                          Year

                                   Baseline              Autarky                                 Baseline              Autarky
                                   No Entry              No Entry No K                           No Entry              No Entry No K
                     .6




                                                                         −.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4
                                                                            NX over GDP
                          .4
                 Inflation
                0    .2
                     −.2




                               0   2      4          6      8       10                       0   2      4          6      8       10
                                              Year                                                          Year

                                   Baseline              Autarky                                 Baseline              Autarky
                                   No Entry              No Entry No K                           No Entry              No Entry No K



Figure A.26: Annualized responses to a temporary increase in Home tariffs in normal times. Real GDP and
inflation are measured using the data-consistent price deflator P̃t . Continuos line: baseline model; dashed
lines: baseline model under financial autarky; dash-dot-dot lines: baseline model without firm dynamics;
dash-dot lines: baseline model without firm dynamics and physical capital accumulation. Responses show
percentage deviations from the steady state. The inflation rate is annualized.




                                                                     A-40
