NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC AND POLICY UNCERTAINTY:
EXPORT DYNAMICS AND THE VALUE OF AGREEMENTS
Jeronimo Carballo
Kyle Handley
Nuno Limão
Working Paper 24368
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24368

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018

We thank the University of Maryland BSOS for financial support for part of this project. We also
acknowledge financial support from the NSF under grants SES-1360738 (Handley) and
SES-1360780 (Limão). We received helpful comments from George Alessandria, Kyle Bagwell,
Chad Bown, Dave Donaldson, Nina Pavcnik, Bob Staiger, Dan Trefler, and many others
including seminar and conference participants at the ASSA 2014 meetings, SEA meetings,
Toronto, Ryerson, Rochester, UBC, IMF/World Bank, Kentucky, Stanford, Dartmouth, U.S.
Census Bureau, UC-Denver, FRB-KC, SITE, Columbia University, and Hong Kong University.
This research was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers at the
Census HQ and Michigan Research Data Centers. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All
results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. We thank Clint
Carter for assistance and timely disclosure review of all results. Yue Fang and Frank Li
(Michigan) and Marisol Rodríguez Chatruc (Maryland) provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jeronimo Carballo, Kyle Handley, and Nuno Limão. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Economic and Policy Uncertainty: Export Dynamics and the Value of Agreements
Jeronimo Carballo, Kyle Handley, and Nuno Limão
NBER Working Paper No. 24368
March 2018
JEL No. E02,E3,E61,F02,F1,F14,F15,F55,F6
ABSTRACT
We examine the interaction of economic and policy uncertainty in a dynamic, heterogeneous
firms model. Uncertainty about foreign income, trade protection and their interaction dampens
export investment. This can be mitigated by trade agreements, which are particularly valuable in
periods of increased demand volatility. We use firm data to establish new facts about U.S. export
dynamics in 2003-2011 and estimate the model. We find a significant role for uncertainty in
explaining the trade collapse in the 2008 crisis and partial recovery in its aftermath. Consistent
with the model predictions, we find that the negative effects worked (1) through the extensive
margin, (2) in destinations without preferential agreements with the U.S. (accounting for over
half its trade) and (3) in industries with higher potential protection. U.S. exports to nonpreferential markets would have been 6.5% higher under an agreement—equivalent to an 8%
foreign GDP increase. These findings highlight and quantify the value of international policy
commitments through agreements that mitigate uncertainty, particularly during downturns.
Jeronimo Carballo
University of Colorado, Boulder
Jeronimo.Carballo@colorado.edu
Kyle Handley
University of Michigan
Ross School of Business - R3434
701 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
handleyk@umich.edu

Nuno Limão
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
limao@econ.umd.edu

1

Introduction

Uncertainty increases during downturns and a growing literature examines the effects of either economic or
policy uncertainty shocks (Bloom, 2014). The interaction between these shocks may amplify uncertainty; for
example, government actions to ameliorate downturns can increase policy uncertainty (Pastor and Veronesi,
2013). Policymakers attempt to address this by committing to predictable policy regimes.1 We model the
interaction of economic and policy uncertainty and show how governments can address it through agreements.
We focus on trade policy given its international externalities; responsiveness to economic (and political)
shocks (cf. Bown and Crowley, 2013a); and because trade can expose industries to more foreign volatility
(cf. DiGiovanni and Levchenko, 2012; Fillat and Garetto, 2015). We estimate the model using data on
firms’ international trade decisions during the 2008 recession and recovery—a period when international
trade collapsed and fear of a tariff war was widespread.
The impact of uncertainty on firm investments is theoretically understood (cf. Bernanke, 1983; Dixit,
1989) and there is growing empirical evidence for this mechanism (Bloom, 2009; Bloom et al., 2007). However,
the evidence is scarcer when it comes to policy uncertainty. This is unfortunate since thousands of firms
worldwide rank it as an important business constraint (World Bank, 2004) and some prominent policy makers
and economists believed it held back the U.S. recovery from the 2008 crisis.2 The scarce evidence is partly
due to the difficulty in measuring policy uncertainty, identifying its causal impact on specific investment
decisions (Rodrik, 1991), and unbundling it from economic uncertainty.
The international trade setting provides a useful framework to overcome these problems. First, a firm’s
entry into an export market involves a sunk cost (cf. Roberts and Tybout, 1997) that can generate a
higher option value of waiting to enter when uncertainty increases. Adverse foreign income shocks may
trigger changes to trade policy and protectionist remedies in the destination market that expose the firm to
international policy uncertainty. They include the threat of increasing protection by ending an agreement
(e.g. Brexit), starting a trade war (e.g. the U.S. under the 45th president, cf. Handley and Limão, 2017b) or
other policies that may magnify the shock to exporters while targeting other objectives.3 Second, detailed
records of firms’ international transactions allow us to identify market entry, exit and sales at the product
level and at a high frequency. Finally, firms face very heterogeneous economic and trade policy uncertainty
across different countries.
The trade setting is also interesting in its own right. First, the global integration of production and
the increasing share of exports in firms’ sales have considerably increased exposure to foreign trade policy
uncertainty (TPU). Second, while many trade models assume policy is a static parameter, Handley (2014)
and Handley and Limão (2015) show it can be quite uncertain. Third, the impact of TPU during a period
of high economic uncertainty has not been explored. Fourth, preferential trade agreements (PTAs) increase
bilateral trade (cf. Baier and Bergstrand, 2007). Understanding the potential insurance value emphasized
by various PTAs can help explain why they have such large trade effects, which has become particularly
1 For

example, in 2016 the G-20 stated that ‘’We will [..] clearly communicate our macroeconomic and structural policy
actions to reduce policy uncertainty, minimize negative spillovers and promote transparency.” G-20 Leaders’ Communique:
Hangzhou Summit, September 5, 2016, <http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2016/160905-communique.html > (accessed 1/19/2018).
2 See
for
example,
“Minutes
of
the
Federal
Open
Market
Committee,”
August
9,
2011,
<http://federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20110809.htm> (accessed 1/19/2018); “Uncertainty and the Slow
Recovery,” Wall Street Journal, January 4, 2010. Becker, Gary S., Steven J. Davis and Kevin M. Murphy
3 These other objectives could include increasing local demand and prices (Eichengreen, 1981) or devaluing exchange rates
through import tariffs, export subsidies and other instruments (Farhi et al., 2013).

1

important given recent U.S. threats to exit NAFTA and the U.K. vote to leave the EU.4
Our work also contributes to understanding the magnitude and dynamics of the Great Trade Collapse
(GTC). This worldwide 12 percent contraction of trade in 2009 was the largest since World War II. The 2.7
percent decline in world GDP was insufficient to account for the magnitude of the GTC in the context of
standard models, which sparked considerable research. Different hypotheses to explain the magnitude of the
GTC include: (i) changes in the composition of demand (Eaton at al., 2016); (ii) the collapse of trade credit
(Chor and Manova, 2012; Amiti and Weinstein, 2011); (iii) the disintegration of international supply chains
(Bems et al., 2011); (iv) the inventory cycles of firms (Alessandria et al., 2010); and (v) economic uncertainty
(Novy and Taylor, 2014). Each of these factors can explain part of the collapse but not necessarily all of it
nor the fast partial recovery of international trade.
The collapse was particularly large for certain countries; U.S. exports between 2008Q3 and 2009Q2
contracted by 22% whereas its GDP contracted by 3%. Most research has focused on the collapse but U.S.
aggregate exports started expanding again by the end of 2009, which suggests a change in expectations
about future conditions. Despite this change, the initial decline was so large that it took until 2010Q4 for
exports to recover to their pre-crisis peak. Figure 1 provides an initial piece of evidence that PTAs provided
some insurance for U.S. exporters. We fit a local polynomial mean through the U.S. cumulative bilateral
export growth to PTA and non-PTA destinations. The average growth relative to 2002 behaves similarly for
both groups until the financial crisis in 2008Q4— denoted by the solid red line. Afterwards, PTA exports
decline by slightly less, recover to the pre-crisis peak earlier, and ultimately have higher cumulative growth
from 2009. This average differential growth was large enough to halt the decline in the aggregate share of
exports to PTAs seen in Figure 2(a), and reverse it. In section 2 we show that this differential is robust to
controlling for standard determinants of trade including income and price index changes and is only present
for countries with sufficiently high income risk.
One possible explanation for this export differential is an increase in applied protection in non-PTA
markets. However, the WTO and other organizations monitored and ultimately found only limited increases
in such measures.5 Kee et al. (2013) find that new trade barriers affected only 1% of traded products and
accounted for less than 2% of the observed collapse.6 These facts lead us to explore an alternative explanation
of the GTC and the recovery: changes in uncertainty about other countries’ policies combined with economic
uncertainty. Several factors suggest the crisis increased firm uncertainty about future protection. First,
there was widespread discussion of a trade war—similar to the one in the 1930’s partially triggered by the
depression—that prompted members of the G-20 and other institutions to assure that “We will not repeat
the historic mistakes of protectionism of previous eras.” 7 Second, there was recent econometric evidence
of increases in import protection following downturns (Bown and Crowley, 2013b). Early in the crisis
such increases seemed likely given some government interventions to stimulate markets while discriminating
4 See

Limão (2016) for a review of the motives and trade effects of PTAs including the role of uncertainty.
OECD and UNCTAD 2010, “Report on G20 Trade and Investment Measures.”
6 We also verify that changes in applied protection do not substantially affect U.S. exports in this period. This is in sharp
contrast with the Great Depression of 1930, where increases in barriers affected 35% of tariff schedule lines and accounted for
a large fraction of the trade contraction (Madsen, 2001).
7 G-20 Communique, April 2, 2009. <www.g20.utoronto.ca/2009/2009communique0402.html>. According to the Director
General of the WTO this institution provides “ [...] the everyday economy, with a collective insurance policy against the disorder
caused by unilateral actions, whether open or disguised; a guarantee of security for transactions in times of crisis, henceforth
an element of resilience that is vital to the running of a globalized world. In short, a global insurance policy for a global real
economy. This is why it is extremely important to continue with the Doha Round amidst the turmoil currently affecting the
world of finance, but which might just hit the world economy tomorrow, so that the WTO can continue to act as a shock
absorber.” Pascal Lamy, 10/1/2008, <www.wto.org/english/news_e/sppl_e/sppl102_e.html> (accessed 12/16/2017)
5 WTO,

2

against foreign firms, e.g. the “Buy American” clause in the U.S. stimulus bill (Eichengreen and Irwin, 2010).
Moreover, WTO members with which the U.S. did not have PTAs had room to increase import protection
in a legal way both because several have applied tariffs below the binding ceilings negotiated at the WTO
(Foletti et al., 2011) and access to various escape clauses (as we discuss in section 2). One measure of this
TPU is the fraction of U.S. newspaper articles about international trade that also included terms related
to uncertainty. We construct such an index in section 4 and find a clear increase around the months of the
GTC, which is partially reversed by the end of 2009.
We address the following specific questions: How do international economic and trade policy uncertainty
and their interaction affect firms’ trading decisions? What was the role of this uncertainty during the
collapse and subsequent recovery and how was it affected by international trade agreements? Our approach
to answering these questions is first, to document the dynamics of U.S. exports during the GTC using
aggregate and firm level data. Second, we develop a model consistent with the main features of the data
and then empirically assess the role of TPU, economic uncertainty and their interaction in the GTC for U.S.
firms’ exporting behavior.
An important part of the mechanism we explore is the impact of uncertainty via firm export investments
to specific markets, for which we use the Longitudinal Firm Trade Transaction Database (LFTTD) from the
Census Bureau. We highlight three key findings from this data. First, the export collapse was dramatic but
followed by a quick partial recovery. The collapse started in the fourth quarter of 2008 and reached its trough
in the second quarter of 2009. While most measures of export value and export participation return to their
pre-crisis peak by the end of 2011, they remained well below the levels implied by their pre-crisis growth
trend. Second, both the intensive and extensive margins played important roles. The share of the extensive
margin —the creation and destruction of bilateral firm-country-product trade flows—was about one third
of the contraction of U.S. export growth, a larger role than has been documented for other countries. The
number of exporting firms declines by about 9% and the number of firm-country-product varieties declines
by 11% between 2008Q3 and 2009Q2. Underlying the net (negative) growth in firm export participation
and export flows across products is a substantial degree of churning. While many firms continue domestic
operations during the recession, there is a persistent growth reduction in the number of products exported
and countries served. Third, there were significant differences in the margins of adjustment across countries.
Firms adjusted significantly less through the extensive margin when exporting to PTAs than to non-PTA
countries.
Some of these stylized facts motivate elements of the dynamic model we develop where heterogeneous
firms face policy and economic uncertainty. We expand the framework in Handley and Limão (2015) in three
ways that are central for the analysis of the GTC. First, we introduce demand uncertainty arising from trade
policy and economic conditions (aggregate income). Second, we examine the dynamics of exporting more
broadly, including export exit and re-entry. Third, we derive the policy preferences of a government in terms
of foreign policy level and uncertainty.
To understand the basic insight underlying the approach consider the following setup. Firms pay a sunk
cost to start exporting under demand uncertainty; this generates an option value of waiting to enter any
given foreign market (defined as a country-industry pair iV ). Shocks to foreign demand, a, arrive with
probability γ, and are drawn from a distribution Mi (a). In this setting, a higher γ implies a more volatile
and thus uncertain demand, which increases the option value of waiting to enter. Moreover, increases in γ are
amplified in riskier markets—those with a distribution Mj (a) that is second order stochastically dominated

3

by Mi (a)—since firms face a higher expected profit loss if conditions worsen.
We model joint shocks and derive the associated predictions as follows. The demand level aiV (yi /ς iV )
is increasing in income, yi , and decreasing in a protection measure, ς iV , which shifts demand away from
foreign goods. In the presence of a single source of shocks an increase in risk in either implies higher demand
risk. However, in the presence of multiple shocks we must account for their interaction so we derive the
distribution of aiV as a function of the underlying joint density, hiV (y, ς). We argue that trade agreements
can affect the risk of trade policy but not necessarily that of the income process. Thus we model them as
a choice of current policies and their future distribution conditional on income. For specific distributions
we show that increases in conditional policy risk also increase demand risk and lower entry. Moreover, if a
riskier conditional policy distribution is more likely in low income periods (as suggested by the evidence in
Bown and Crowley, 2013a) then there would be good reason for firms to be concerned about this channel in
the GTC.
More generally, we show that a government that values export market access and is export risk averse
prefers a trade agreement characterized by foreign reductions in current protection and demand risk. We
characterize the effects of such an agreement on entry and exports: upon implementation it increases entry
by reducing both current protection and uncertainty. However, the agreement has two opposing effects
on entry and exports if there is an exogenous future increase in volatility, γ. Low policy barriers increase
current exports but also increase future market access risk: if a shock does occur, there is more to lose —
a negative effect that is increasing in γ. The offsetting insurance effect captures the complementarity of
volatility and risk: increases in γ are mitigated for PTAs since they contain policy commitments that lower
demand risk.
The model guides the empirical approach. It provides a decomposition of demand risk into a policy
component and a policy and income interaction that capture the proportional profit loss for exporters when
conditions worsen. The joint risk component is proportional to the tail risk in income that we estimate by
for each destination. The model predicts that volatility shocks have differential effects based on the policy
risk. Thus we explore variation across U.S. export destinations depending on whether they have a PTA. We
also exploit variation in policy risk across industries, which depends among other things on the degree of
import market power a country has in an industry, as found in Broda et al. (2008). Using their definition
in Figure 2(b) we can already see that the behavior of the aggregate PTA share is driven precisely by those
industries, where importers have higher market power.
To test this in more detail we use the firm level data, interact the economic and policy risk measures,
and allow them to have time-varying coefficients. The latter occurs in the model only when there is an
uncertainty regime switch due, for example, to a shock to demand volatility, γ. We use quarterly data to
identify if there was a regime switch, to allow for offsetting shocks within any given year, and to match
the timing of the GTC closely. We control for changes in foreign GDP and include country-industry and
quarter-year fixed effects in the baseline to control for other potential factors affecting export outcomes.
We highlight the following empirical results. First, net exit was higher in non-PTA markets with higher
income and policy risk and these risks are complements. Second, for PTA markets there is market access
risk, but it is more than offset by the insurance effect so that uncertainty had a differentially smaller impact
in those markets. Third, the net exit of varieties translates into significant export effects through the
contribution of the extensive margin to total growth; we find no evidence of PTA uncertainty differentials
for continuing firms. Fourth, the PTA uncertainty differentials reach their peak in the first four quarters of
4

the crisis and are reversed only partially in the remaining two years. Therefore the cumulative impact is
significant even three years after the start of the crisis.
We find additional evidence for the policy risk channel by splitting the sample according to import market
power. The higher net exit for non-PTA relative to PTA markets is stronger in high market power industries
and translate into large export impacts. Moreover, these market power differentials are only present in the
extensive margin.
We quantify the role of uncertainty and agreements by computing counterfactual paths for net exit and
exports relative to a scenario where their respective growth remains at its pre-crisis average. By 2011Q4
average net exit for non-PTA destinations was 15 log points below the no-crisis path. Most of this effect
would be eliminated if those countries had a PTA. Applying this counterfactual to average exports we find
similar results for the extensive margin. This implies that aggregate U.S. exports to non-PTA destinations
would have been 6.5% higher under an agreement—equivalent to an 8%GDP increase in those destinations.
Our findings suggest that the current network of trade agreements can lower uncertainty, particularly
PTAs in high policy risk industries. The role of GATT/WTO membership is less clear. This institution
was meant to prevent a recurrence of the 1930’s trade war. While our results indicate an initial increase
in uncertainty in WTO members—the large majority of the non-PTA countries in our sample—it did not
translate into substantial protection and the risk receded partially, perhaps because of WTO monitoring
mechanisms and commitments.8 Thus we contribute to the understanding of policy flexibility and potential
protectionism over the business cycle (Bagwell and Staiger, 2003; Barattieri et al., 2017) and the role of
trade policy commitments in the presence of economic and lobbying shocks (Amador and Bagwell, 2013;
Beshkar et al., 2015; Limão and Maggi, 2015) and the implications of potentially high tariffs if cooperation
breaks down (Nicita et al., forth.; Ossa, 2014).
In section 2 we provide descriptive evidence of U.S. export dynamics in 2003-11. This informs the
theoretical model we develop in section 3. In section 4, we test several entry and export growth predictions
and quantify how these outcomes were affected by uncertainty and agreements during the GTC and recovery.

2

U.S. Export Dynamics and the Great Trade Collapse –
Market and Firm Heterogeneity

Our contribution in this section is twofold. First, we provide reduced form evidence that U.S. bilateral
export growth in the trade collapse was heterogeneous across PTA and non-PTA markets and that this
differential is related to the degree of economic uncertainty. We then discuss these findings in the context
of the institutional features of the GATT/WTO and the PTAs. Second, we employ customs transaction
quarterly data to characterize U.S. firms’ export dynamics, decompose aggregate exports into intensive and
extensive margins of adjustment and show they were heterogeneous across PTA status in a way that is
consistent with the uncertainty mechanism. These findings motivate and inform the theoretical model and
the subsequent empirical approach.
8 WTO Director General Pascal Lamy noted this at the time in 2009, stating that “Today as the economic crisis bites
into our economies, and as protectionist pressures knock on our doors, we must recall the importance of the insurance policy against protectionism that the WTO offers through 60 years of global rule-making, and its dispute settlement system.”
www.wto.org/english/news_e/sppl_e/sppl112_e.htm

5

2.1

Market Heterogeneity: Economic and Policy Uncertainty

Figure 1 shows that average U.S. export growth was relatively higher to PTA destinations in the GTC.
We quantify this differential using a difference-in-difference (D-i-D) specification and find that it cannot be
explained by standard gravity determinants unless augmented to include the interaction of economic and
policy uncertainty. We describe these regressions and our sample in detail in Appendix C.1.
Similarly to Figure 1, we use the change in exports relative to the corresponding quarter in 2002 for
country i at time t , ∆t,2002 ln Xit . We control for a common annual trend as well as quarter dummies, Qt .
We include indicators for P T Ait and CRISISt —unity starting in 2008Q4—and their interaction.9 During
the crisis there was a 38 log point (lp henceforth) decline in exports to non-PTA partners (relative to the
trend), which is 11 lp below the growth to PTAs.
ä
100 × ∆t,2002 ln
X it = 11.3CRISISt × P T Ait − 38.3CRISISt − 4.1 P T Ait + 13.4 T REN Dt + Qt
[7.2]
[4.3]
[3.4]
[0.7]

This 11 lp differential could be due to variation in importer real GDP and prices. To examine this we control
for these importer determinants, as well as for supplier shocks—measured by U.S. production and U.S. GDP
deflator changes. After controlling for these standard gravity determinants the mean interaction is still 10
lp, but the time trend becomes small and insignificant.
To understand the dynamics instead of simply the mean effects we re-run this gravity equation omitting
the P T A × CRISIS and the time trend and then plot a local polynomial through the residuals in Figure
3(a). The non-PTA residuals (solid blue) show that the standard gravity determinants account for the trend
prior to the crisis but the collapse and recovery are still evident. In contrast, the PTA residuals (solid red)
are flat when the crisis starts and increase substantially in the last 4-5 quarters of the sample.
If economic risk has heterogeneous effects over time and markets with different TPU then accounting for
it should reduce the difference in the residuals between PTAs and other destinations. The measure we use
here is the standard deviation of real, annual log GDP growth in each country from 2000-2012. We augment
the standard gravity specification described above with this measure of realized demand volatility and its
interaction with PTA and Crisis. The local polynomial through its residuals are shown as dashed lines in
Figure 3(a). We find that the PTA and non-PTA lines are now considerably closer, particularly during the
onset of the crisis. There is still some divergence in the last period of the sample that suggests the model
and subsequent estimation should allow for the impact of uncertainty to change during the recovery.
Using this last specification we compute the differential PTA effects for alternative economic risk levels.
The left panel in Figure 3(b) shows that prior to the crisis the differential is positive but mostly independent
of economic risk. However, during the crisis the differential is strongly increasing in economic risk (right
panel). At the lowest risk level the differential between PTA and non-PTA exports is similar across periods
but at the mean economic risk that differential was 12 lp.
This evidence suggests that the interaction of economic and policy uncertainty can reduce exports.
However, we must go beyond aggregate data to better identify the mechanism at work, control for other
factors and quantify the roles of economic and policy uncertainty. The model derives conditions when these
interactions are important and demonstrates how they operate through firms’ investment decisions, and
9 P T A controls for any growth differential for the countries that switched into PTA status during the pre-crisis period. The
it
PTA countries are fixed during the crisis period.

6

provides a framework to measure risk and model the adjustment dynamics.
2.1.1

Discussion and Interpretation

Trade agreements typically constrain the flexibility of policymakers to respond to shocks by including permanent commitments to reduce trade barriers. These commitments could actually increase risk because a
policymaker cannot use trade policy to respond to other shocks. Our results thus far suggest that even if such
forces are at work, there is some beneficial interaction between trade agreements, potential protectionism,
and income risk that increases export growth, especially during a period of widespread, adverse economic
shocks.
The differential we identified applies to PTAs specifically and raises the question of why this is present
relative to WTO commitments that most non-PTA countries in our sample also undertook. Here we describe
two broad reasons. First, tariff commitments in the WTO take the form of maximum tariffs, often positive,
and several countries’ applied tariffs were below them; in the PTAs we consider those commitments are
typically a zero tariff. Moreover, the WTO explicitly allows for those commitments to be renegotiated up
whereas the expectation in PTAs has been that the commitments would remain fixed (that may be changing
with Brexit and U.S. renegotiations). Second, agreements are self-enforcing and thus cooperation is typically
higher in PTAs where monitoring of policies is easier and incentives to retaliate are stronger since there are
fewer other countries to free ride on. In contrast, the incentive to deviate and increase protection for a
short-run payoff can be large in downturns (Bagwell and Staiger, 1990; 2003) and in the presence of scarce
enforcement power the WTO has safety valves that allow its members to legally increase protection above
negotiated levels (cf. Hoekman and Kostecki, 2009, Ch.9). For example, article XIX provides a safeguard
allowing governments to increase protection when a domestic industry is hurt by imports, since PTA partners
are often exempted from such safeguards a U.S. firm faces a lower risk of protection in PTA markets.

2.2

Firm Heterogeneity and Dynamics

To understand the broad patterns of firm-level export dynamics during the GTC and if uncertainty contributed to it via an option value of waiting we now examine firm export entry and exit behavior.
2.2.1

Entry and Exit Dynamics

Aggregate U.S. exports reached their pre-crisis peak in the second quarter of 2008 after several years of
sustained growth. On the extensive margin, U.S. exports reached a peak in 2008Q3. This is shown in Figure
4 where we define varieties as a firm-country-product triplet (the product is an HS10 code). Normalizing
varieties to unity at their peak in 2008Q3 we see that by the first quarter of 2009 the total number of
varieties exported by the U.S. to all destinations decreased by 11%, which is striking given their average
annual growth between 2002 and 2007 was 6.5%. By the end of 2010 exports recover to their pre-crisis peak
level but remained below their pre-crisis trend.
The large changes in the extensive margin are not merely driven by the granularity of varieties. In Figure
4 we see similar patterns for firm-destinations and the total number of exporting firms. Large net entry
changes can occur relatively fast if there is enough churning, which is what we observe in exporting. For
example, between 2003 and 2007 the average gross entry rate for firms exporting in quarter t but not at t − 4
7

was 38% and the gross exit was 34%; for the first 4 quarters of the crisis entry fell to 33% and exit jumped
to 38%. Moreover, the decline in annual export net entry is not simply a reflection of domestic behavior
in the Great Recession. Prior to the crisis average annual domestic entry and exit were both roughly 10%.
During the first 4 quarters of the crisis, entry fell to 7.7% and shutdowns increased to 11%.10
In section 4 we focus on quarterly, year-on-year entry and exit rates within country-industry pairs, where
churning is even higher. To illustrate, Figure 6(a) uses our subsequent regression subsample to plot the
cumulative change in net entry and the contributions of entry and exit in deviations relative to trend growth
from 2003Q1 to 2008Q3. Both entry and exit contribute equally in the first year of the trade collapse. But
while exit rates recover to trend, the entry contribution remains depressed through 2011.11
2.2.2

Aggregate Growth Decomposition

To determine the quantitative importance of these variety dynamics for aggregate exports we decompose
the growth of the latter into its intensive and extensive margins.12 We index trade value flows, xm
vi,t , by
firm-product (v), destination (i), time (t) and type m ∈ {EN T RY, EXIT, CON T }. The extensive margin
is the sum of ENTRY (xvi,t > 0 and xvi,t−4 = 0) and EXIT (xvi,t = 0 and xvi,t−4 > 0). The intensive margin
is comprised of continuers (xvi,t , xvi,t−4 > 0). We compute a midpoint growth rate that can accommodate
zeros for entry and exit as
m
xm
vi,t − xvi,t−4
.
x̂m
t = 1 m
m
2 [xvi,t + xvi,t−4 ]
This growth rate is bounded on [−2, 2], symmetric around zero, and equivalent to log changes up to a 2nd
xvi,t +xvi,t−4
in average total exports from t to t − 4.
order Taylor expansion. We compute the share sm
vi,t =
Xt +Xt−4
We let Im = 1 if a trade flow belongs to margin m and write the aggregate export midpoint growth rate as
the sum of these mutually exclusive margins
X̂t =

ØØ
i,v

m

m
Im × sm
vi,t × x̂vi,t .

(1)

In Figure 5 we plot the resulting annual growth, by quarter, of the intensive and extensive (the sum of
entry and exit) margins. Both contribute negatively to total export growth during the start of the crisis.
The decline in the intensive margin was relatively larger but so was its reversal. One potential reason is that
adjustments through the extensive margin may be dampened by the presence of sunk costs of entering (and
exiting).
This decomposition also shows the extensive margin in terms of varieties is important for U.S. export
growth. Before the crisis this margin accounted for about half of that growth, 57% and 43% in the third
quarter of 2007 and 2008, respectively. 13 From 2008Q4 to 2009Q3, the extensive margin accounted for
about 25% of the observed decline in aggregate exports. After exports started to grow again the extensive
10 These extensive margin figures for exporting reflect the universe of all trade transactions in the LFTTD matched to a firm
in a Census Business Register. The domestic entry and exit rates are for the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). Our
subsequent aggregate decompositions in Figures 5-6 and Table 1 reflect the regression sample described in section 4.4.
11 The high export churning rate in the presence of sunk costs is important since it allows a relatively fast adjustment when
conditions worsen even if exit from a market is mainly due to attrition. See, for example, Ghironi and Melitz (2005) and Bilbiie
et al. (2012)
12 See Data Appendix B.2 for more details.
13 Kehoe and Ruhl (2013) find a smaller role of the extensive margin and only towards countries with trade policy changes,
but they use product level data.

8

margin contributed positively, but a smaller share than prior to the crisis. The average extensive margin
share was 24% and 36% for the years beginning in 2009Q4 and 2010Q4. We summarize these results in Table
1.
In Figure 6(b) we use our regression sample and decompose the net extensive margin into its components
and their contribution to cumulative total export growth relative to the 2003Q1-2008Q3 trend. The contribution of gross entry to total export growth falls about 5 percentage points and the contribution of exit falls
about 7 percentage points in 2008Q4 to 2009Q3. This is a net swing of about 12 points in the contribution
of the extensive margin to total export growth. The deviation from trend diminishes over time, but remains
important even after the intensive margin begins to recover toward trend after 2009. In fact, by the last
period in the sample the net extensive margin contributed about -8 percentage points to the cumulative
decline of -20 for exports.
2.2.3

Growth Decompositions by PTA Status

In Figure 7(a) we decompose the margins of export growth in Figure 5 by PTA status. The export decline
toward PTAs was more strongly affected by the intensive margin, whereas for non-PTAs both margins are
important. The contribution of the extensive margin prior to the crisis was, on average, similar for PTA and
non-PTA destinations. But the contribution of the extensive margin for non-PTA countries was higher in
each quarter of the GTC.
We also compute cumulative growth rates by PTA status relative to its trend prior to the GTC. In the
left panel of Figure 7(b) we see that by 2009Q3 the extensive margin is 15 percentage points of the total
40 point reduction in exports for non-PTA countries. In the right panel of Figure 7(b) for PTA exports the
total reduction in trade is slightly less, around 35 percent, but the extensive margin is less than 10 points
of the total. The decline in cumulative growth from the extensive margin is greater for non-PTA exports
until the end of 2010 when it is again similar to the PTA contribution. A full three years after the onset of
the trade collapse, total exports to non-PTA markets are about 25 percentage points below trend with the
extensive margin contributing 10 points. PTA exports are less than 15 points below trend, of which only 5
points are due to the extensive margin.
2.2.4

Robustness and Comparison with Other Countries

The collapse in the number of U.S. exporting firms and the role of the extensive margin in the GTC is larger
than that reported for the few other countries where such data has been analyzed. For France the decline
in the number of exporters was 7% between October 2008 and April 2009 (Bricongne et al. 2012), but this
simply accelerated an existing downward trend whereas in the U.S. the decline reversed a strongly positive
trend. In Belgium there is actually an increase in exporting firms of about 1% between the first semester
of 2008 and that of 2009 (Behrens et al., 2013). In both France and Belgium, the intensive margin explains
more of the decline in exports during the collapse and that is also the case for Spain (Eppinger et al., 2017).
There are at least two plausible reasons for the extensive margin to have played a larger role in the U.S.
than in European countries. First, most of the exports are headed to PTA partners: 65% and 76% of French
and Belgian exports respectively went to the EU-27. The PTA share would be even higher if it also included
the EU’s additional PTAs with many other countries. The firm and aggregate dynamics reflect the incentives
to trade within PTAs and in that sense are consistent with our findings for the U.S. PTA sub-sample, where
9

we find a larger intensive margin contribution. Second, there are different ways to measure the contributions
of the intensive and extensive margins. Similarly to the French study, we use midpoint growth rates but we
focus on quarterly rather than monthly data. The Belgian study defines the intensive margin as the average
exports per firm and compares aggregates of the first 6 months of 2008 with the first 6 months of 2009. If
we do the same we continue to find a large extensive margin effect.
To summarize, by the end of 2011 export growth remained substantially below the pre-crisis trend,
particularly for non-PTA destinations, and there were significant roles for the intensive and extensive margins
dynamics. The decompositions show that: (i) the extensive margin played an important role in the recent
evolution of U.S. exports, and accounted for up to a third of annual export growth in the 3 years after
the onset of the financial crisis; (ii) the intensive margin collapse (and recovery) was somewhat faster and
stronger than the extensive margin; and (iii) there is less extensive margin adjustment toward PTA markets.
We now provide a model to better interpret these facts and provide an econometric framework to estimate
the impact of economic and policy uncertainty on firm export decisions.

3

Export Dynamics under Economic and Policy Uncertainty

We develop a dynamic model of firm export decisions under multiple uncertainty shocks to provide insight
about their interaction and guide the estimation. We extend Handley and Limão (2015) in three dimensions.
First, we allow destination specific export exit and re-entry, which captures the heterogeneity just documented. Second, we allow for uncertainty in any foreign “business conditions”, denoted a, that summarizes the
impact of not only foreign trade policy but any other shocks affecting export profit, e.g. income. Third,
we model the government preferences for foreign market access under uncertainty to derive predictions for
PTAs upon accession and in response to uncertainty shocks.
We show that increases in uncertainty in a lower net export entry due to a standard option value of
waiting argument. The uncertainty increases can arise from increases in either demand volatility or its
tail risk and we show these are complements. These results apply to any setting with multiple sources of
underlying risks in a, provided they arrive simultaneously. We decompose the risk in a into a policy and
an economic component and show that the impact of PTAs on entry and trade occurs via changes in policy
risk, both directly and through its interaction with economic risk.
We allow for states with high or low risk in a arising from different policy risk and allow PTAs to affect
their likelihood. PTAs can increase entry by lowering the probability of high risk periods, an insurance effect.
We also allow PTAs to affect the current policy level, which increases entry upon implementation but also
introduces a potential future loss in this preferential market access. Therefore, lower entry due to increases
in demand volatility, e.g. in the Great Recession, is mitigated by PTAs that provide insurance against loss
of future market access but amplified by their current market access risk.

3.1

Environment

The operating profit for an incumbent monopolistically competitive firm that exports a differentiated good, v,
to country i is determined as follows. At the start of each period t a firm can observe all relevant information
before making its production and pricing decisions for that period. This assumption, and the absence of any

10

adjustment costs, implies that, after entry with a particular technology, firms simply maximize operating
profits in a market, π ivt , period by period, which are derived similarly to monopolistic competition models
in a deterministic setting.
There are V +1 industries; one producing a homogeneous, freely traded numeraire good and the remaining
producing differentiated goods. Total expenditure on goods in country i is denoted by Yit with a fixed
exogenous fraction εV spent on each industry V and the remaining on the numeraire. Consumers have
constant elasticity of substitution preferences over goods in each industry V with σ = 1/ (1 − ρ) > 1. A firm
v faces a standard CES demand in i at time t,
è
é
−σ
p−σ
qivt = DiV t (τ iV t )
ivt
ûú
ý
ü

(2)

aiV t

σ−1

where DiV t = εV Yit (PiV t )
and PiV t is the CES price aggregator over varieties in each V . The consumer
price is equal to the producer price, pivt , times the ad valorem tariff policy factor in industry V , τ iV t ≥ 1.
From the firm’s perspective, the “business conditions” term, aiV t , is exogenous and summarizes all payoff
relevant information for the current period.
The supply side is also standard in trade models. There is a single factor, labor, which has constant
marginal productivity in the numeraire sector, so the wage is normalized to unity. Differentiated goods are
produced with a constant marginal cost, characterized by a labor coefficient of cv , which is heterogeneous
across firms. As we noted, at the start of each period firms know the demand conditions, their productivity
and σ. Therefore they choose prices to maximize operating profits in each period, π ivt = (pivt − cv ) qivt ,
leading to the standard mark-up rule over cost, pv = cv /ρ where ρ = (σ − 1)/σ. Using the optimal price and
demand we obtain the export revenue received by the producer, and the associated operating profit:
pivt qivt = aiV t c1−σ
ρσ−1
v

(3)

π ivt = aiV t c1−σ
σ̃
v

(4)

where σ̃ ≡ (1 − ρ) ρσ−1 .14 We describe the main results in the context of policies that affect demand but
they apply to any set of policies that affect profitability in a market (e.g. by multiplying aiV t by a probability
of expropriation or a profit tax). The broader interpretation is useful in the context of recent agreements
that address several policies beyond tariffs (cf. Limão, 2016).

3.2

Exporter Dynamics

We now examine the firm’s export decisions. Given this environment we can analyze firm decisions in any
given industry-export market separately so below we omit the industry subscript; unless otherwise stated all
the variables vary by industry-export market, except for cv .15 Firms face uncertainty about the future path
of business conditions, at , which they take as given. We assume the mass of exporters relative to domestic
producers in the foreign destination is sufficiently small that their entry decisions have a negligible impact
14 We can extend the framework to allow for upgrades and downgrades of technology; for now (4) represents the exporting
operating profit of a firm that drew a technology cv and observed demand conditions in importer i industry V of aiV t .
15 To focus on export entry decisions we assume zero domestic entry costs and a constant domestic mass of potential firms in
each industry. These assumptions imply a fixed number of active domestic firms, which is relaxed in the estimation section.

11

on the price index in that destination.16
To start exporting to a specific market a firm must incur a sunk cost, K. Given the current conditions it
will be optimal to enter if the expected value of exporting, Πe , net of K is at least as high as the expected
value of waiting, Πw . So the marginal entrant at any given at is the firm with cost equal to the cutoff, cU
t ,
defined by
!
"
! U "
Πe at , cU
(5)
t , r − K = Πw ct , r .

Before export entry the firm observes the current conditions in the market, at , and uses this along with
information about the demand “regime” defined below to form expectations regarding future profits. Firms
believe that a demand shock in the following period occurs with probability γ and when it does the new
demand parameter, a′ , is drawn from some distribution H (a), independent of the current business conditions.
Firms take the demand regime r = {γ, H (a)} as given and time-invariant. This characterization allows for
persistent demand in a tractable way. Moreover, different regimes can encompass a range of situations, e.g.
if γ = 0 there is no uncertainty; if γ = 1 then demand is i.i.d; alternatively if γ ∈ (0, 1) then there are
imperfectly anticipated shocks of uncertain magnitude. The results in this section can be applied to any
underlying shocks of a that arrive simultaneously at rate γ and yield an a′ with a time-invariant distribution
H (a). In the next section we describe the regime in terms of more fundamental economic and policy
processes.
We can generalize certain results to allow for period fixed costs, which would lead some incumbent firms
to choose not to export in particular periods or simply exit. However, because of data limitations we are not
able to distinguish between certain types of decisions.17 Thus, the theory focuses on a simple setting where
firms have no per period fixed cost, so that after entry they always optimally choose to export. We allow a
firm’s export entry capital to specific markets to depreciate; when it does so fully the firm can only export
if it again pays a sunk cost that is independent of whether or not it previously exported. The depreciation
process is simple: at the end of each period the export capital either fully depreciates or remains intact. The
firm correctly expects this to occur with a fixed probability d, which is independent across markets. This
process generates exit from exporting without firm death, so the model is still consistent with that observed
feature in the data and allows for exit in a subset of markets (whereas if the firm only exited upon death it
would always exit all markets). We also allow for re-entry, which is again observed in the data, provided the
firm decides to pay K again.
Given this setup, the initial entry decision is independent of whether a firm will ever be able to re-enter
that market or not after re-paying the cost, provided we use an effective discount rate that reflects the
probability that the capital survives. The intuition should be clear: the re-entry decision of any given firm
is independent of its past export status if it has lost all its export capital (there is no other measure of
experience or presence in the market that is relevant for exporting); and so each entry decision can be made
16 The standard assumption, that we also make, is that monopolistically competitive firms are sufficiently small relative to
the total number (measure) of firms in industry V available in country i to take into account any effect that they may have
on the price index or aggregate goods’ expenditure. To this we add a “small” exporter assumption which allows us to provide
sharper results by focusing on the direct effects of the demand uncertainty on operating profits rather than indirect general
equilibrium effects. Handley and Limão (2017) allow for general equilibrium effects of policy uncertainty via impacts on the
price index. Doing so introduces adjustment dynamics, as the price index adjusts to entry and exit, and tends to attenuate,
rather than overturn, the direct effects of tariff policy on entry decisions. Carballo (2015) extends this framework to analyze
related-party trade.
17 For example, without data on capital expenditures for particular export decisions we are unable to distinguish between a
firm that suspends exporting for a number of periods and then restarts (without paying a re-entry cost) and one that chose to
exit (and sold any residual exporting capital) but subsequently decides to re-enter.

12

independently of future re-entry. This implies that we can solve the dynamic entry decision problem as if
the firm had only one possibility to enter an export market and had to choose when to do so, and then note
that if it ever loses its capital (with probability d) it will again be in the position to make another entry
decision unless the firm as a whole dies (with probability δ). So the firm’s effective discount rate used to
value future export payoffs is β = (1 − δ) (1 − d) < 1.18
One implication of this framework is that while exit rates are exogenous, the measured gross exit still
depends on current conditions and thus on entry cutoffs. In stationary states, where cU
t and entry decisions
are unchanged relative to the previous period, the measured gross exit rate is simply the death rate δ, since
the firms that lost their export capital re-enter. The same is true if conditions have improved. However, in
periods where conditions worsened the measured exit is above δ since some surviving firms that lost their
export capital prefer not to enter. The adjustment dynamics relevant for the empirical approach are derived
in section 3.5.
The expected value of starting to export at time t conditional on observing current conditions at is
Πe (at , c, r) = π(at , c) + β[(1 − γ)Πe (at , c, r) + γEΠe (a′ , c, r)],
ûú
ý ü
ûú
ý
ü
No Shock

(6)

Shock

which includes current operating profits upon entering and the discounted future value. Without a shock
the firm value next period remains Πe (at , c, r). If a shock arrives then a new a′ is drawn, so the third term is
the ex-ante expected value of exporting following a shock, EΠe (a′ , c, r) = Eπ(a′ , c)/ (1 − β), where E denotes
the expectation over a fixed and known distribution, H.19
The expected value of waiting is
Πw (c, r) =0 + β (1 − γ + γH(ā))Πw (c, r) +β γ (1 − H(ā)) (EΠe (a′ ≥ ā, c, r) − K) .
ûú
ý
ü
ûú
ý
ü

(7)

EΠe (a′ ≥ ā, c, r) = Eπ (a′ ≥ ā, c, r) + β(1 − γ)EΠe (a′ ≥ ā, c, r) + βγEΠe (a′ , c, r).

(8)

Wait

Enter

A non-exporter at t receives zero profits from that activity today. The continuation value remains at Πw if
either demand is unchanged, with probability 1 − γ, or changes to some level that is not sufficiently high to
induce entry, with probability γH(ā). If demand changes and is above some endogenous trigger level, a′ ≥ ā,
then we obtain the third term, reflecting the expected value of exporting net of the sunk cost, K, conditional
on the new demand being high enough to trigger entry. The conditional expected value of exporting if a′ ≥ ā
is given by

A firm with costs cv is indifferent between entering or waiting if demand is at a threshold level acv = ā (cv ).
Instead, of solving for ā (cv ) we characterize the marginal exporting firm at any current demand, which is
! U " 20
characterized by a cost parameter cU
If a firm has costs equal to this threshold
t defined by at = ā ct .
18 Since there is a fixed probability of death, δ, there is an equal probability of new firms being born to replace those that die,
which maintains a constant mass of active domestic firms.
19 This term is time invariant because the distribution of future conditions after a shock, H(a′ ), is time invariant so even if
there is a new a at t + 1 this provides no additional information at time t about future conditions. The conditional mean of a
and the expected value of exporting, Πe (at , c, r), vary over time since they depend on current conditions.
20 We can do so since a is common to all firms exporting to a given market in a given industry and the marginal cost is the
only source of heterogeneity among such firms. Assuming a continuum of firms in any given industry with productivity that
can be ranked according to a strictly increasing CDF, we can find the marginal export entrant for any at .

13

then in that period all other firms in that industry with lower costs also export to that particular destination.
We obtain an expression for this cutoff by using the entry condition in (5); the value functions in (6), (7)
and (8), and the expression for EΠe . As an intermediate step to gain some intuition we note that for the
marginal entrant the sunk cost must equal the following:
! ′
"
U
βγ Eπ(a′ , cU
βγ (1 − H(at )) π(at , cU
π(at , cU
t ) − Eπ a ≥ at , ct
t )
t )
+
+
.
K=
1 − β(1 − γ) 1 − β 1 − β(1 − γ)
1−β
1 − β(1 − γ)

(9)

π(a ,cD )

t t
, i.e. it would be equal to the present
If γ = 0 then there is no demand uncertainty and K = 1−β
discounted value of profits evaluated at the current demand. If demand can change then the current profit is
discounted at a higher rate that captures the probability of a demand shock; K must now cover the value of
profits until demand changes (first term), plus the expected profits following the change (second term), and
the third term, which is the expected loss of entering today given that conditions can eventually improve.
This last term is negative and captures the option value of waiting.

Re-arranging eq. (9) and using the operating profit function we obtain cU
t for any at :
cU
t

=

cD
t

5

at σ̃
× Ut =
(1 − β)K

1
6 σ−1

6 1
5
βγ [ω (at ) − 1] σ−1
× 1+
1 − β (1 − γ)

(10)

Thus, the cutoff under uncertainty is lower than the deterministic cutoff, cD
t , whenever the uncertainty term,
denoted by Ut , is lower than unity. This occurs if and only if ω (at ) − 1 < 0. This term is a measure of tail
risk conditional on a shock.
ω (at ) − 1 = −H(at )

at − E(a′ ≤ at )
∈ (−1, 0]
at

(11)

It represents the expected proportional reduction in operating profits if we start at at and a shock occurs
with probability H(at ) that worsens conditions (see Appendix A.1).
We examine the effects of an increase in demand regime uncertainty defined as follows.
Definition: Uncertainty Ranking r′ = {γ ′ , H ′ (a)} is more uncertain than r if it has either higher
volatility, defined as γ ′ > γ, and/or risk, defined as H second-order stochastically dominating (SSD) H ′ .
Proposition 1: Uncertainty Shocks and Entry
′
U
An increase in the demand regime uncertainty reduces net entry: cU
t (r ) ≤ ct (r). Moreover, the volatility
′
∂ ln cU
∂ ln cU
t (γ,H )
t (γ,H)
≤
.
and risk components of uncertainty have a complementary effect on entry:
∂γ
∂γ
∂ ln cU

Let us first consider increases in γ at a given H. First note that ∂γ t ≤ 0 from eq. (10) with a strict
′
U
′
inequality for all at > amin since in that case ω (at ) < 1 and thus cU
t (γ , H) < ct (γ, H) iff γ > γ. The
higher probability of a shock makes both higher and lower demand levels more likely but it is only the latter
possibility that affects the entry decision, because the benefits of demand levels above the entry trigger also
accrue to waiting firms since they can enter.
Next consider a regime with a riskier distribution H ′ at a given γ. From eq. (11) we see that this change
′
U
′
in distribution only affects the proportional loss term and thus cU
t (H ) ≤ ct (H) iff it implies ω (at ) ≤ ω (at ).
In the appendix we show that this condition holds for any at iff H SSD H ′ : the latter has thicker tails and
14

thus implies larger losses conditional on a bad shock.21
Neither of the effects above requires additional restrictions on the long-run mean of a across the regimes.
However, both results hold if we restrict that mean to be identical so we can identify pure risk effects in the
following sense. If we consider H ′ to be a mean preserving spread of H then by construction a has the same
long-run mean under both, and this spread implies that H SSD H ′ so the result follows for all at < amax .
Any shocks to γ leave the long-run mean of a unaffected, since E (a′ ) is determined by H. Moreover, if we
evaluate shocks to γ at the long-run mean of demand conditions, at = E (a′ ), then these shocks will not affect
the mean of a at any point T , i.e. E (aT |at ) = E (a′ ) for all T and is independent of γ. So the proposition
holds even if we constrain the regimes to have the same long-run mean of a.
The entry results in proposition 1 also apply to total industry exports since in this model they are
proportional to entry.
The proposition also points that the reduction in entry due to increases in γ is magnified for countries or
∂ ln cU
industries with a riskier H, which follows directly from the first two parts since ∂γ t ∝ ω(a). Our empirical
approach explores this insight by examining whether a given common increase in γ, the probability of
a demand shock, had differential effects across riskier industries or countries. To better understand our
empirical approach and the need for modeling the different shocks consider the following first order Taylor
approximation of (10) for γ around 0 and some ω around a pre-GTC initial value, a0 :
ln cU
t

5
6
β
1
at σ̃
1
[ω (a0 ) − 1] γ t +
ln
+ et
=
σ−11−β
σ−1
(1 − β)K

(12)

where et is an approximation error. If the only source of foreign demand uncertainty was trade policy shocks
then the predictions during the GTC for entry would be clear: we could measure variation in the potential
loss ω (a0 ) across countries or industries then changes in its estimated coefficient would inform us whether
γ t changed. For example, whether there was an increase in γ for non-PTA relative to PTA destinations.
However, there exist multiple sources of uncertainty and it is then less clear how to measure ω and even if we
could measure the overall risk in a we would then still want to identify the contributions of alternative shocks.
Therefore, in the following section we derive the cutoff in the presence of multiple shocks and the conditions
under which they reduce entry and exports and how PTAs can affect economic and policy uncertainty.

3.3

Economic and Policy Sources of Demand Uncertainty

We now unbundle demand uncertainty into an economic and a policy component and examine how they
affect firm decisions. The first step is to characterize uncertainty using a generalized demand regime via a
mixture of distributions that allows us to represent heterogeneous risk across destination and subsequently
derive how it is affected by PTAs. The second step is to decompose business conditions into its underlying
shocks.
21 The weak inequality simply allows for the possibility that the distributions overlap at low a . Handley and Limão (2015)
t
derive the impact of γ in the context of tariff uncertainty. Proposition 1 applies it to a general demand shock and extends it
by providing necessary and sufficient conditions on H for entry to fall.

15

3.3.1

Heterogeneous Uncertainty States

We define a generalized demand regime rm = {γ, M (ms , Hs (a))} containing an arrival parameter for any
demand shock, γ, and a CDF M from which a is drawn after any type of shock. The multiple shocks are
Ø
reflected in the distribution M (ms , Hs (a)) =
ms Hs (a), which is a mixture over S ≥ 1 exogenous
s∈S
distributions Hs for the mutually exclusive combinations of states with fixed mixing weights ms ∈ [0, 1]
Ø
and
ms = 1. This approach has two advantages. First, it can capture multiple sources of shocks
s
driving a without assuming explicit distributions. Second, by varying the weights across what we refer to
as uncertainty states, s, we can characterize heterogeneity in risk across destinations or industries and
isolate the source of that risk, e.g. by shifting probability from a cooperation state s with negligible policy
risk to another where it is high. Our notation distinguishes between the exogenous distribution H used in
the previous section because M can reflect endogenous mixing weights over distributions Hs . The following
extension of proposition 1 establishes the basic results we will explore when governments are choosing a
PTA.
Proposition 2: Uncertainty Shocks and Entry Under Multiple Shocks
Under an uncertainty demand regime rm = {γ, M (ms , Hs (a))} with volatility γ and conditional
probability ms for each shock s
(a) the entry cutoff is
1
6 σ−1
6 1
5
βγ [ω̄ t − 1] σ−1
at σ̃
× 1+
=
(1 − β)K
1 − β (1 − γ)
Ø
ω̄ t − 1 =
ms ω s (at ) − 1 ∈ (−1, 0]

cU
t

5

(13)
(14)

s∈S

′

ω s (at ) − 1 = −Hs (at )

at − Es (a ≤ at )
∈ (−1, 0]
at

(15)

(b) shifts towards any given riskier shock, ∆ms′ = −∆ms > 0 where Hs SSD Hs′ increase overall demand
U
uncertainty and lower entry cU
t (γ, M (∆ms , Hs )) ≤ ct (γ, M (ms , Hs )).
(c) the entry effect in (b) is magnified by demand volatility:

∂ ln cU
t (γ,M (∆ms ,Hs ))
∂γ

≤

∂ ln cU
t (γ,M (ms ,Hs ))
.
∂γ

The proof is simple given what is established in proposition 1, which corresponds to the special case where
ms = 1. Under multiple shocks we continue to assume that the a′ after a shock is independent of at but now
there is a constant probability ms ≤ 1 that it is drawn from different Hs . So, the entry rule is still defined
by (5) and the form of the value of exporting and waiting in (6) and (7) are unchanged. Therefore the entry
Ø
cutoff expression is still (10) but now the tail risk is derived using the distribution M =
ms Hs (a)
s∈S
and is a weighted average, ω̄ t in (14), of the underlying risks, ω s (at ), defined similarly to ω but now using
the respective Hs in (15).22
We illustrate key points of propositions 1 and 2 in Figure 8 assuming a is log normal (Appendix A.3
provides details on the parameterization). Panel (a) shows CDFs where the black line represents Hs and
s at
22 The proof of Proposition 1 shows that if the distribution of a is M (a) then ω (a ) − 1 = − 1
M (a) da and using the
t
at 0
Ø
Ø
s at

mixture definition of M we obtain ω (at ) − 1 = −
since ω s (at ) − 1 = − a1

t

s at
0

Hs (a) da and

Ø

s

s∈S

ms a1

t

ms = 1.

16

0

Hs (a) da. This is equivalent to ω (at ) =

s∈S

ms ω s (at )

it SSD Hs′ (red) , these correspond to the extreme cases where ms = 1 and ms = 0 respectively with any
other weight representing intermediate risk, e.g ms = 1/2 (dashed). We focus on mean preserving spreads of
a and normalized the distributions such that E (a) = 1. Panel (b) shows the impact of increasing volatility
from none to the maximum on the cutoff at any at , i.e. 100 × Ut = 100 × ln cU (at , γ = 1) /cD (at , γ = 0). At
every at > 0 we see the riskier market (red) has a larger reduction than the least risky, proposition 1, and
of any mixture of the two (dashed), proposition 2.23
3.3.2

Sources of Risk

Next we characterize demand tail risk in terms of its sources. From (2) we see that a reflects both the trade
σ−1
policy and an overall demand shifter in each industry: DV t = εV Yt (PV t )
(all variables other than the
structural parameters σ and ε below can vary by destination i so we omit that subscript). We separate out
the economic and policy components by rewriting a as:
aV t = εV

yt
.
ςV t

(16)

where
income effect, and ς V t =
1 εV2σdenotes the share of expenditure in industry V , yt = Yt /P̃t is a real
r
PVt
ε
τV t
is a policy effect. The aggregate price index for a country is P̃t = (PV t ) V , the Cobb-Douglas
PV t
P̃t
aggregator over the CES price indices of the differentiated industries, PV t .24 The policy component, ς V t ,
can be interpreted as a price substitution effect: when the relative price of an import decreases there is
substitution towards it from other varieties (at a rate σ > 1 if in the same industry and at a unit elasticity
across industries). Modeling the policy component as a price substitution effect implies the insights below
apply to any trade policies that reduce price wedges and thus induce substitution towards varieties from the
preferential partner. This is important because recent PTAs include various such barriers beyond tariffs.25
The results below apply for each differentiated industry so we omit the V subscript.
To derive the distribution of a′ we model the process for the underlying shocks xt = {yt , ς t }. With
probability 1 − γ neither is expected to change so x′ = xt and with probability γ · ms there is a new x′s with
time invariant joint density hs (y, ς). Using the standard formula for the distribution of a ratio we obtain
the CDF of at = ε yς tt conditional on a demand shock in state s:
Hs (at ) =

Ú

0

ς max

Ú

y=at ς/ε

hs (y, ς) dydς.

(17)

0

We place few restrictions on these densities to allow them to reflect either a purely statistical relation
between shocks determining yt and ς t or equilibrium effects between these variables. Thus the framework
can be applied to alternative models for the determination of policy, aggregate income, and prices.
23 Moreover, this example shows that the entry impact is largest at higher a, since there is more downside, and the differential
across markets is stronger around the mean, at = 1. This suggests that during a period where trade is considerably higher
than average, e.g. prior to 2008, then even if there is much volatility its effect will be similar across markets (as suggested by
the aggregate gravity). However, if conditions revert to the mean or slightly below, e.g. during the crisis, then that differential
can be important. In mapping the model to this event we focus on a change in γ around an initial set of conditions, so at
some initial ω, and thus the estimates will not reflect the particular effect just described. But it is useful in illustrating the
asymmetric effect of higher volatility on differential entry across markets under good conditions vs. average ones.
24 In the presence of a numeraire homogeneous good we have Σε = ε < 1.
V
25 Moreover, there is evidence that PTAs can also change protection against non-members (Limão, 2016). If it increases
protection against non-members and they are sufficiently large then PV t would be higher and this additional effect of PTAs
would be reflected as a lower ς V t .

17

An alternative is to place some additional structure on the model, derive how yt and ς t depend on
specific exogenous parameters such as increases in tariffs τ V t (which would increase ς t ) or labor endowment
(which would increase yt ) and then provide a specific stochastic process for them. In the appendix we do
so to illustrate how variation in risk in specific components and their interaction translates into changes in
demand risk.26
3.3.3

Conditional Policy Risk

To understand the role and interaction of multiple shocks we first consider a baseline with a single state, so
ms = 1, and a single source of risk. Suppose that income is permanently fixed at yT , so the probability of a
reduction in a is a special case of (17):
Hs (at |yT ) =

Ú

ς max

ς=εyT /at

hs (ς|yT ) dς = 1 − Hς (ς t |yT )

(18)

This is simply the probability of an increase in ς given yT , and thus countries or industries with a safer
conditional policy distribution, a Hς (ς t |yT ) that SSD Hς′ (ς t |yT ), have higher entry. If two uncertainty
states are possible then proposition 2 shows that a country with higher probability ms′ of the riskier policy
shock has lower entry.
A simple extension illustrates the interaction of policy with income. Consider two states, s and s′ , with
respective income fixed at yT and yT′ respectively. The policy is drawn from a distribution, Hς (ς t |y). If
yT > yT′ and Hς (ς t |y) is independent of income then demand is riskier in s′ since Hs stochastically dominates
Hs′ in the first and thus second order sense. To neutralize this mean effect let’s expand the set of underlying
shocks to xt = {yt , ς t , εt } and allow for the shocks in ε to occur simultaneously with income and be such
that they offset it, i.e. εy = ε′ y ′ . This implies there are aggregate income shocks without changes in the
differentiated industry expenditure. If Hς (ς t |y) is independent of income then demand is equally risk in s
and s′ and thus no differences in entry across countries even if they have different probabilities of shocks.
However, if the probability of decreasing protection is increasing in aggregate income then Hς (ς t |yT ) >
Hς (ς t |yT′ ) for each ς t and thus demand is less risky in s than s′ . As should be clear by now the same occurs
under the weaker condition that Hς (ς t |yT ) SSD Hς (ς t |yT′ ). In sum, if conditional policy risk is decreasing
in income then those states s′ characterized by lower aggregate income (but identical industry expenditure)
will have higher overall demand risk. Thus, according to proposition 2, there is lower export entry into
countries with higher probability of low income shocks and in this example the effect occurs only because of
higher policy risk under low income.
The simple case above can be further extended to illustrate an incentive for certain PTAs to move away
from states with higher policy risk when other shocks are present (more on whether and when that is optimal
is discussed below). In the example above that requires a decrease in ms′ , which is also the low income state,
but a similar insight applies if we constrain the PTA to leave the probability of low income unchanged. To
do so we simply aggregate the states described above and add another set with similar income distribution
26 More specifically, under a log normal distribution h (y, ς) we show that any increases in income or policy risk parameters
s
will (i) generate a riskier demand distribution, Hs (a), if their correlation coefficient η s is sufficiently close to zero and (ii) never
decrease the risk in Hs (a) for any η s . Part (i) only holds if the correlation is not too extreme because of the risk interaction.
If income and policy are highly positively correlated then policy becomes freer when income is low and thus higher policy risk
can help offset income risk. If the correlation is highly negative then higher policy risk can increase the mean of a and thus we
can’t rank its new uncertainty relative to the original. Moreover, if policy and income are negatively correlated there always
exists some increase in the risk of either that increases overall demand risk.

18

but different policy risk. Specifically, assume that with probability m we get either s, or s′ , and add a second
group of shocks, S and S ′ , with probability 1 − m. We restrict the income distributions to be the same
across the set of shocks: under both S and s (S ′ and s′ ) the income is yT (yT′ ) with equal probability p
(1 − p). Finally, the policy distribution is identical and equal to Hς under S or S ′ , and that is also the case
with probability p under s. But under s′ (with probability 1 − p) the policy distribution is Hς (ς t |yT′ ). So
if Hς (ς t |yT ) SSD Hς (ς t |yT′ ) there is higher average policy risk under s or s′ and an incentive to lower m
through a PTA.
The evidence in Bown and Crowley (2013a) suggests that it is plausible to assume firms believe that policy
risk is higher during low income periods. However, the exact conditional policy risk conditions above may not
hold for all countries and time periods. Therefore, instead of assuming those conditions or employing specific
distributions to determine whether income and policy risks are complementary, we derive entry predictions
for PTAs under the general distribution in (17).

3.4

Agreements, Endogenous Uncertainty and Trade

We derive the differential impacts of uncertainty shocks on PTAs in two steps. First, we identify the policy
parameters that they may change and map them to the model. Second, to determine the predicted direction
of the changes under a PTA we model government preferences that reflect two central objectives of trade
agreements: improved export market access and reduced risk (cf. Limão, 2016). We derive the impacts of
the agreement desired by such a government on specific policy parameters and consequently on exports. We
show there are direct effects upon implementation and that PTAs also affect the response of exporters to
future uncertainty shocks.
PTAs internalize the costs of certain policies on foreign exporters. Thus in our setting we say a government
has a PTA motive if its objective evaluated at non-PTA policies, denoted by GM , can be improved via
some change in the foreign policy parameters faced by its exporters, i.e. if GP T A > GM . Most PTA models
TA
are deterministic so governments need only choose some initial policy level, ς P
, which remains in place
t
indefinitely. However, if there are time-varying incentives for governments to set protection then we must
specify whether and how a PTA affects future policy.
This amounts to asking which parameters of the demand regime, rm , can be affected by PTAs and how
they impact the exporter government. We assume PTAs are unable to affect the income distributions, i.e. the
marginal densities hs (y), nor the arrival of any demand shock, γ. PTAs may be able to affect the probability,
or belief, that certain policy states occur. We capture this in a parsimonious way by allowing PTAs to affect
any belief parameter, ms , over any s that has different conditional policy distributions, hs (ς|y), but identical
income distributions, h (y). Finally, we assume that there are only two possible relevant uncertainty states
with identical income distributions, s′ with probability m, and s with probability 1 − m.27 Moreover, we
assume that the difference in hs (ς|y) implies that we can rank the distributions of a according to risk and
without loss of generality denote s as the state characterized by lower overall demand risk so Hs SSD Hs′ .
This can capture various differences in the policy distribution across the states, e.g. in one state the policy
may be highly responsive to income, or the policy distributions may be independent of income in both states
but hs (ς|y) may be riskier. The objective is to provide predictions without requiring specific assumptions
about the risk in hs (ς|y) in different states since its impact on overall risk will depend on the relationship
27 There

can be an arbitrary number of other shocks that draw from different income distributions but since we assume the
PTA is unable to affect their probability we set their probability to zero.

19

with income for which we have little direct evidence.28
In sum, under a PTA two parameters may change: beliefs about probability of shocks and the level of
) TA
*
TA
TA
the current policy ∆P
= mP T A − m, ∆P
= ςP
− ς t . The difference in the PTA and non-PTA loss
m
ς
t
terms is thus given by
TA
TA
+
ω̄ P
− ω̄ t = [ω s′ (at (ς t )) − ω s (at (ς t ))] ∆P
t
m
ûú
ý
ü
Insurance

Ø

# ! ! P T A ""
$
TA
mP
ω s at ς t
− ω s (at (ς t ))
s
s∈S
ü
ûú
ý

(19)

Market Access Risk

We decompose the PTA differential into an insurance and a market access risk effect. The first captures
changes in the probability of different export shocks that hold current policies and income distribution fixed.
TA
This insurance effect is positive if Hs′ is riskier and ∆P
< 0 since then the PTA reduces future market
m
risks; below we show this occurs if the government is export risk averse. The current market access risk term
TA
is negative if ∆P
< 0, i.e. if a PTA lowers current barriers because doing so improves current conditions
ς
and implies that when a future shock does occur then the proportional loss is larger, as we show in proposition
3. That risk is not eliminated except in a limit case where the policy is credibly and permanently fixed,
which may not be feasible or optimal in the presence of income shocks.
In the context of trade negotiations market access improvements correspond to changes in policies that
increase export sales (and thus profits). In our model foreign policy only affects exports via a so we write
the reduced form government objective as
G = G (at , M (a) , γ)

(20)

and say the government values market access and is export risk averse if (i) Gat > 0 and (ii)
G (at , M (a) , γ) ≥ G (at , M ′ (a) , γ) for all at whenever M SSD M ′ (with equality at γ = 0). The partial
effect of at on G in condition (i) holds in standard policy models without uncertainty where Gat |γ=0 > 0
typically reflects a government’s social or political weight given to a measure of aggregate export profits.
We assume this continues to hold under uncertainty but note that Gat may now be smaller since it reflects
improvements in current market access from current policy that are temporary and change with probability
γ. Condition (ii) is a natural definition of export risk aversion when a affects G only through the export
channel.29 Both conditions hold at any given γ since we assume the agreement does not affect it, but demand
volatility clearly affects the agreement since if γ = 0 permanently then there would be no motive for the
agreement to address risk. We assume that governments treat γ as a fixed parameter (as firms do) so the
agreement reflects the level of γ when signed.30 The reduced form objective in (20) is sufficient to establish
when an exporter government has a motive for a PTA; what the desired changes in policy and risk are and
how each affects entry.
28 We do not specify how an agreement should be designed to achieve this change in beliefs since we will not explore such
details in the empirical section. However, a number of dimensions seem potentially important, including whether it covers a
broad range of policies (so it is hard to substitute tariffs for non-tariff barriers for example), contains escape and contingent
protection clauses and how easy it is to renegotiate.
29 It could reflect income risk aversion—the underlying motive for endogenous uncertainty reducing agreements in Maggi and
Limão (2015).
30 We can also consider a more flexible agreement contingent on changes in future γ and a if contracting costs were sufficiently
low; we conjecture this would generate an additional insurance channel relative to the one we identify under a non-contingent
agreement. We do not require constraints on Gγ unless we perform comparative statics exercises with respect to the initial
conditions. In reasonable models we expect Gγ < 0 at high at , to prolong good times and reduce uncertainty but positive at
sufficiently low at , to exit bad times more rapidly.

20

Proposition 3: Agreements, endogenous uncertainty and entry impacts
If an exporting government values market access and is export risk averse then it has a motive for a PTA,
) T A P T A*
′
GP T A > GM , so ∆P
, ∆ς
Ó= 0 and
m

TA
(a) the reduction in export risk ([ω s′ (at ) − ω s (at )] ∆P
> 0) increases entry for given γ > 0 and
m
′
mitigates the impact of uncertainty shocks (γ > γ) due to an insurance effect.

TA
(b) the reduction in applied protection (∆P
< 0) increases entry for given γ ≥ 0 but magnifies the
ς
′
impact of uncertainty shocks (γ > γ) due to increased market access risk.

As a benchmark, if foreign tariffs were the only source of uncertainty then the exporter would have a
PTA motive to reduce them to their minimum and lower risk in a by shifting away from the riskier policy
distribution. In the presence of multiple sources of shocks the motives for PTAs are similar but the policy
distribution that minimizes demand risk must now account both for its direct effect in the absence of income
risk and the interaction of the risks, as discussed above; this will also be clearer in the decomposition below.
The proposition then establishes the entry impacts of the PTA. The effects upon implementation at a
given γ are obtained using the entry cutoff in (13), which is decreasing in ς t and export risk. The differential
effects of unanticipated uncertainty shocks for PTAs are obtained by evaluating the impact of γ on entry,
from proposition 2, at the lower tariff or risk implied by such a PTA.31 Proposition 3 highlights two opposing
effects. Under lower export risk the insurance effect implies a positive entry differential, since, as we show
in proposition 2, γ and risk are complements. But when the PTA also lowers current protection it increases
market access at risk, which magnifies the reduction in entry from an uncertainty shock.
Which of these opposing effects is likely to dominate? To determine this theoretically we would require a
more specific government objective and negotiation model to incorporate the costs of changing each policy to
) T A P T A*
, ∆ς
. However, we note that in periods when applied protection
derive the equilibrium levels of ∆P
m
PTA
is necessarily small and if at the same time there is a high probability
is already low for most countries ∆ς
TA
and the insurance effect would dominate. On the
of the riskier shock then there is a larger scope for ∆P
m
other hand, in markets where protection is high and PTAs can’t credibly change the belief about future
shocks the negative market access risk dominates. We will be able to estimate a net effect of uncertainty
shocks on entry for PTAs and if we find it is mitigated relative to non-PTAs then we can conclude that there
is an insurance effect and it dominates.
3.4.1

Decomposition, Interaction and Heterogeneity of Risks

Our objective in the estimation section is to go beyond the net entry effect of uncertainty shocks. First, we
aim to identify whether PTA policy and income risks are independent. Second, we want to determine if their
interaction increases the relative importance of the insurance effect. We model the additional impacts that
arise when income risk is added to an initial situation with only policy risk. The resulting decomposition is
employed to estimate the impact of joint shocks, which are rare and hard to measure, by using the interaction
of individual risks.
To decompose the risks we first define a measure of income uncertainty. Recall that the joint density
is hs (y, ς) and the PTA holds constant the marginal density of income across s. We denote that common
) P T A P T A*
31
This takes

∆m

, ∆ς

as given since we assume the agreement depends only on the initial γ.

21

1
2
′
′
income density by h (y, Σy ), where Σy indexes its riskiness such that h (y, Σy ) SSD h x, Σy if Σy > Σy .32
We can then write
∂ ω̄ (at , Σy ) -(21)
ω̄ t ≈ ω̄ (at , Σy = 0) +
· Σy
∂Σy
ûú
ý
ü
Σy =0
ûú
ý
ü
Policy Risk
Joint Risk

where we continue to treat the mixture weights for non-PTA as exogenous. The first term reflects only
Ø
average policy risk across the states, ω̄ (at , Σy = 0) =
ms ω ςs (ς t |yT ), where ω ςs (ς t ) is defined by (15)
s∈S
but using ς t and its conditional distribution directly. The second term captures the average change in the
loss term when income risk is added to a situation with policy risk and thus we term it joint risk.
In the special case without policy risk the joint term will simply capture income risk and we are able to
nest this in the estimation.33
Heterogeneous risk across countries
Treating Σy as a parameter we can write the loss differential in (19) as an approximation of policy and
interaction risk:
# TA
$# PTA
$
∂ ω̄ P
− ω̄ t -t
PTA
· Σy
(22)
ω̄ t
− ω̄ t ≈ ω̄ t
− ω̄ t |Σy =0 +
∂Σy
ûú
ý
ü
Σy =0
Policy Risk difference
ü
ûú
ý
Joint Risk difference

The policy risk difference is simply (19) evaluated in the limit where Σy = 0. Proposition 3 is still valid
in this limit case and implies that there is a negative market access risk and positive insurance one, which
respectively exacerbate and mitigate the impact of uncertainty shocks. Since we estimate the net effect of
policy risk on entry we will only be able to determine if either a market access risk is present for sure (if
# PTA
$
ω̄ t
− ω̄ t |Σy =0 is negative), or an insurance effect (if positive).34

The second term in (22) captures the marginal impact of income risk on the insurance and market access
TA
risk differentials. This difference in the joint risks informs us about their interdependence since ω̄ P
− ω̄ t
t
) P T A P T A*
differs only due to the policy components, ∆m , ∆ς
. Thus we say that PTA policy and income
∂ ω̄ P T A

∂ ω̄ t
t
= ∂Σ
and thus we can reject independence if we estimate a non-zero joint
risk are independent if ∂Σ
y
y
risk difference. Moreover, if that interaction term is positive then we can conclude that the insurance effect
is relatively more important (compared to market access risk) in the presence of income risk.

Heterogeneous risk across industries
There is also variation in risk across industries. Our goal is to identify whether there was an increase in
the probability of non-cooperation in trade policy (or a trade war) and thus we model and explore differential
32 In certain cases it is simple to map Σ to a single parameter, e.g. if y ∼ ln N (µ − αΣ2 /2, Σ2 ) and α = 1 then increases
y
y
y
y
in Σy imply a MPS of y and if α ≥ 1 then the new distribution is SSD by the original one.
33 In this case ω̄ |
y
y
t Σς =0 = ω (yt ) where ω (yt ) is defined by (15) but using y and its distribution directly, which is assumed
constant across states since the PTA does not affect it. Thus if in the estimation we use ω y (yt ) − 1 instead of Σy then we
capture the income risk fully if no policy risk were present. We can also use this measure in the presence of policy risk without
∂ω y (yt ,Σy )
∂ω y (yt ,Σy )
|Σy =0 Σy and
|Σy =0 < 0, the average interaction risk
changing any sign predictions because ω y (yt ) − 1 ≈
∂Σ
∂Σ
y

in (21) now becomes
34 Moreover,

∂ ω̄ (at ,Σy )
ω y (y )−1
|Σy =0 ∂ωy (y ,Σty )
,
∂Σy
t
|Σy =0
∂Σ

y

so it simply rescales the coefficient.

y

the insurance effect can only be achieved by a reduction in policy risk. If Σy = 0 then the distribution of a is
T A (Σ = 0)
given by (18) and as we showed it depends only on the conditional policy distribution, Hςs (ς t , |yT ). Therefore ∆P
y
m
decreases the probability of riskier policy.

22

industry risks in such a state. To capture this we now denote s as a cooperation state and s′ as the noncooperation or trade war state where the latter is characterized by higher policy risk at any given income,
′
Σsς|yT > Σsς|yT . Suppose there are two industries, V = HI, L, with respective probabilities of switching to s′
equal to mHI > mL , so at any common ς V t = ς t the HI industry has a riskier policy since the aggregate
income distribution is common to both. Similarly to the PTA we can decompose the overall risk differential
across industries faced in any given destination as follows.
HI
ω̄ L
= [ω s′ (at (ς L,t )) − ω s (at (ς L,t ))] ∆L
t − ω̄ t
m+

Ø

s∈S

mL
s [ω s (at (ς L,t )) − ω s (at (ς HI,t ))]

(23)

The first term is positive and reflects a lower probability of non-cooperation in industry L , ∆L
m ≡
HI
m −m
< 0, and the increased demand risk in the non-cooperation state, ω s′ < ω s . The second term
depends on probability of switching regimes and the expected losses relative to the cooperative policy level
and thus market access.
L

To identify high risk industries as defined above we rely on the theory and evidence of the determinants of
protection in non-cooperative settings. A well established motive for trade agreements such as the WTO is the
need to internalize terms-of-trade effects (Bagwell and Staiger, 1999). If some of the cost of a tariff is passed
through to foreign exporters then the country imposing it has import market power. Therefore, the incentive
to increase protection in response to aggregate will, all else equal, be more attractive in industries where the
importer has higher market power. Broda et al. (2008) find evidence that prior to WTO accession tariffs
are increasing in import market power. Evidence from WTO accession shows that it reduces precisely those
incentives for tariffs (Bagwell and Staiger, 2011) and countries are more likely to bind (place a maximum) on
such industries in the agreement (Beshkar et al., 2015). This indicates that a reduction in risk is more likely
for such industries than those for low market power relative to the non-cooperation state and so ∆L
m < 0.
We say there is full internalization of market power incentives during cooperation if both industries
draw the same policy during periods of cooperation, ς HI,t∈s = ς L,t∈s . However, WTO accession does not
necessarily eliminate all the incentives to exploit market power either because it does not cover all policies
(cf. Broda et al.,2008 evidence for the U.S.) or even in the ones it does there is imperfect removal of market
power incentives due to free riding during negotiations (Ludema and Mayda, 2013). This suggests there is
only partial internalization of market power incentives, which we define as ς HI,t∈s ≥ ς L,t∈s .35
Consider first the case where the agreement internalizes all market power incentives so the only source
for the differential in (23) is the first term. The differential for L is positive, i.e. there is an insurance
effect for low market power (MP), if and only if mL < mHI . If there is only partial internalization then
the second term in (23) is negative because potential losses for L are higher (at a given m) if it has lower
protection than HI. Then the overall differential is again positive only if mL < mHI . Therefore, applying
proposition 3(a) in this context the model predicts that uncertainty shocks have a differential positive effect
on industries with safer policy only if non-cooperation is possible (recall the maintained assumption is that
under the cooperation state both industries have similar distributions). A stricter test is whether there is
any differential effect across industries for the PTA subsample. If we find none then it would suggest that
the PTA eliminated the risk of non-cooperation from market power incentives (since only the first term in
(23) is present under a null hypothesis of full internalization in a PTA).36
35 All

statements hold any domestic political economy determinants constant across industries.
differential in (23) has a policy and joint risk component and the expression is similar to the one for PTAs in (22) but
applies to L vs. HI, so we omit it. If there were full internalization then the policy component would be positive, so if we find
36 The

23

Heterogeneous risk across countries and industries
We will test whether the market power incentives described are present in destination countries that are
WTO members but do not have a PTA. If that industry differential is present then it is also interesting to
test if it is stronger than under PTAs. Doing so will provide evidence on the probability of non-cooperation
and thus the insurance role of PTAs relative to WTO membership. The following simple example below
illustrates this prediction.
Suppose that in the current cooperation period, s, exporters face the same protection in a WTO or PTA
TA
PTA
destination, ς P
(possibly because
L,t∈s = ς L,t∈s , and the same probability of non-cooperation, mL = mL
there is no market power incentive for industry L). Assume also there is at least partial internalization under
the WTO and the same or more internalization under the PTA (since under the WTO there is potential
for negotiation externalities). Finally, take the limit case where for the PTA there is full internalization, so
TA
PTA
ς HI,t∈s ≥ ς P
HI,t∈s = ς L,t∈s (plausible since several PTAs feature duty free treatment across most industries).
For a common income level across two destinations we then have:
é
# L
$ è P T A,L
!
"
T A,HI
P T A,L
ω̄ t − ω̄ HI
− ω̄ t
− ω̄ P
= [ω s′ (at (ς L,t )) − ω s (at (ς L,t ))] ∆L
t
t
m − ∆m
Ø
+
mL
s [ω s (at (ς L,t )) − ω s (at (ς HI,t ))] .
s∈S

(24)

The overall differential is positive only if there is higher probability of non-cooperation in the WTO than
in the PTA. To see this note that ς HI,t∈s ≥ ς L,t∈s implies the term on the second line of the RHS is negative
and so we require the first term to be positive. This first term is the product of two negative differences:
(1) the difference between non-cooperation and cooperation, which is common for WTO and PTA since it
TA
L
P T A,L
TA
is evaluated at ς P
⇔ mH > mP
when
L,t∈s = ς L,t∈s and (2) the difference in probabilities: ∆m < ∆m
H
TA
mL = mP
.
L
This double difference will also be useful in (i) controlling for any other possible effects of HI vs. L in the
crisis unrelated to market power and (ii) ruling out the possibility that income is the only source of demand
risk and that differences in PTA and non-PTA in the crisis are driven by heterogeneous shocks to γ.

3.5

Adjustment Dynamics

Sunk costs generate adjustment dynamics and these are asymmetric depending on whether conditions improve or deteriorate. We model the entry and exit dynamics in order to derive and interpret the estimation
equation. The main objective is to relate net entry growth to the changes in the cutoffs. The number of
firms (or varieties) exported to a particular market in a given industry (both subscripts omitted) at any t is
given by
Nt = nFt + λht
(25)
where Ft ≡ F (cU
t ) is the fraction of the n firms in the home country with costs below the current cutoff. The
h
last term, λt ≥ 0, captures the number of legacy firms, those currently exporting but with cv > cU
t , which is
only possible if they entered under better conditions and remain since profits are positive and the sunk cost
U
is paid. Therefore, λt = 0 if cU
t ≥ max cT , or if enough time has passed since the last period when conditions
it to be negative this indicates partial internalization: ς HI,t∈s ≥ ς L,t∈s . Moreover, if the income interaction term is positive
then we can conclude that the insurance effect (the role of the agreement in curbing future market access risk) is relatively
more important (compared to market access risk) in the presence of income risk.

24

worsened; we denote the last period before t when that occurred as λ0t = 0. To model periods where λht > 0
as a function of observables we need to consider all possible histories of shocks. To maintain tractability
we can either restrict attention to a small discrete number of values of a or, as we do, focus on modeling
the most plausible and relevant histories for the empirical exercise. We consider three potential mutually
exclusive histories and define a period indicator function for each 1ht = 1 where h = {0, +, −} denotes an
expansion, recovery or decline of business conditions with associated legacy given by:

U
10t = 1 : cU
 0t
t ≥ max cT
+
h
U
U
β
n
[F
−
F
]
1
=
1
:
c
≥
max
c
0
t
λt =
t
t
T Ó=0
t−T
 β qt
−
U
U
β
n
[F
−
F
]
T
−1
T
1t = 1 : ct ≤ ct−1 ≤ ... < cU
T =1
0.

(26)

The first line captures periods where conditions are stable or expanding so there is no legacy, e.g. prior to
the crisis. The second line captures recovery periods with conditions better than at any point in the crisis
but still below the pre-crisis peak; it reflects the fraction of exporters between the peak and current cutoff
times their probability of survival over the last t periods, β t . The last line captures the decline at the outset
of a crisis such as the GTC and subsequent periods until a recovery starts. The legacy term in the latter case
reflects the fraction of exporters that survive and have costs below the current cutoff, e.g. a share β of the
n [Ft−1 − Ft ] exporters survive in the interval between the current and previous cutoff and we accumulate
these over all adjacent cutoffs.
Using (25), (26), and defining the cumulative growth, for any Z, relative to the previous expansion period
Zt
as Ẑt ≡ Z
− 1 , we have the following relationship between the growth in the number of exporters, N̂t , and
0
the growth in the probability of a low enough cost to enter exporting, F̂t , for each history.


 F̂
!t
"
1 − β t F̂t
N̂t =
1
2
!
"
q

 1 − β t F̂t + (1 − β) T =t−1 β t−T F̂T − F̂t
T =1

10t = 1
1+
t =1
1−
t =1

(27)

There are four relevant points for estimation. First, we must allow for differential coefficients in expansion
and other periods on the determinants of the cutoff changes. The elasticity of entry growth with respect
to F̂t is unity for expansion, which is higher than for recovery and crisis since the latter two reflect legacy.
!
"
Second, in the first crisis period we have N̂t = 1 − β t F̂t , an expression similar to the recovery, and that is
also the case if most of the shock occurs in that first period, so F̂T ≈ F̂t . Otherwise, we need to adjust that
growth upwards to account for recent cutoff
1 changes,
2 e.g. if the crisis lasts two periods we have that in the
!
"
2
second one N̂2 = 1 − β F̂2 + (1 − β) β F̂1 − F̂2 . Third, we can also use the results above to consider

+
differential growth between any two periods, e.g. N̂t+1
− N̂t− .37 Fourth, if we consider a constant elasticity
! U "k
distribution, such as Pareto, then F̂t = ĉt − 1 so we obtain a closed form solution for the elasticity of the
growth in exporters with respect to the change of the current cutoff relative to the previous expansion.

Figure 9 illustrates possible uncertainty paths and the resulting adjustment dynamics relative to an initial
period with γ 0 = 0 for a high and low risk market. The unanticipated increase to γ High
> 0 in the first
t
period generates the negative growth in Nt depicted in Figure 9(b) and it evolves as described by 1+
t in
High
(27). If the new γ
was permanent then this decline would continue as shown by the dashed line and
37 In

the appendix we extend (27) to incorporate growth in n. This augments the expression by a domestic firm growth
term, n̂t , that enters with a coefficient of one for each of the possible histories in (27) and an interaction of n̂t and F̂t . In the
estimation we consider log growth and first order approximations so we ignore that interaction and control for the growth in
domestic firms in any given period using a flexible set of fixed effects.

25

eventually asymptote until all firms with costs above c(γ High
) exit this market. Alternatively, if a part of
t
the uncertainty shock is reversed, as shown by the partial reversal to a lower γ Low
in period 2. This induces
t
some new entry as reflected in the upwards jump in panel (b). However, for any γ Low
> 0 the model predicts
t
Low
a gradual reduction in N until the only exporters are those with costs below c(γ t ). A similar qualitative
path applies to export growth.
In sum, the model predicts a gradual decline in N and exports if uncertainty increases in the initial
period of the crisis. This decline is larger for higher risk (black line) than lower risk markets. Moreover, the
negative and differential effects persist if uncertainty remains unchanged or is not fully reversed.

4

Estimation

We provide an estimation equation based on the model and a strategy to identify the impact of economic and
policy uncertainty on trade outcomes during the GTC and recovery. Next, we present our baseline estimates
for various margins of firm export participation; report several robustness exercises and quantify the main
channels highlighted by the model.

4.1

Approach

We first model the impact of uncertainty on the number of firms (or varieties) exporting to destination i in
an industry V , NiV t . If there are NV domestic producers in V then a fraction F (cU
iV t ) has marginal cost
below the cutoff and exports to i at t. In section 3.5 we show that sunk costs generate the possibility of
legacy firms so the total number of exporters in periods of crisis or recovery is NiV t ≥ NV F (cU
iV t ). Moreover,
we related the growth in exporters to that of cutoffs in equation (27), which we can express for any of the
relevant periods as:
2
" t"
!
!
qt−1 t−T 1
−
−
+
1
β
F̂
+
1
(1
−
β)
β
F̂
−
F̂
N̂t = 1 − 1+
T
t
t
t
t
t
T =1

(28)

−
In stationary periods or ones with an expansion the indicator variables are 1+
t = 1t = 0 and the expression
reduces to the growth in the probability of entry, F̂t . Rewriting using log growth approximations, so N̂t ≈
Nt
, and assuming, F (c) = (c/cV )k , where k > σ − 1, so F̂t ≈ k ln cc0t , we obtain
ln N
0

NiV t
ln
NiV 0

4
UiV t
cD
iV t
=
ln
+ ln D
+ ẽiV t
UiV 0
ciV 0
3
4
β
aiV t
k
h
γ · [ω̄ iV 0 − 1] + ln
+ ũiV t
= bt
σ−1 1−β t
aiV 0
bht k

3

(29)

In the first line ẽiV t represents a log growth approximation error plus any lagged cutoff differences during
a multi-period crisis.38 The last line uses the expression for the cutoff in (13) approximated around γ t = 0
and a pre-crisis level of the potential loss, ω̄ iV 0 , defined by (14).39 We can anticipate part of the identification
1 U 2
q
38 Thus

it includes the term 1−
t (1 − β)

t−1
T =1

β t−T k ln

ciV T
cU
iV t

, which is zero in the first crisis period (t = T ) and also if

U
the main shocks to the cutoffs during periods of decline occur at the start of the crisis such that cU
iV T ≈ ciV t until the recovery
starts. For these reasons we treat it as part of the error term in the baseline estimation.
UiV t
39 So ũ
h k
.
iV t = ẽiV t + bt σ−1 (eiV t − eiV 0 ) where the last term is the error from the first order approximation of ln U
iV 0

26

strategy here by noting that we explore a common demand volatility shock, γ t , with heterogeneous impacts
across countries or industries arising from different loss terms, ω̄ iV 0 < 0.
The magnitude of the coefficients on the uncertainty and business conditions depends on the history
!
!
" t"
−
coefficient bht ≡ 1 − 1+
∈ (0, 1], which is unity in expansion periods and is attenuated by a
t + 1t β
!
"
t
factor 1 − β otherwise. If we estimate a single time difference or focus on an episode where all periods
could plausibly represent expansions (cf. Handley and Limão, 2017a) then we can treat bht as constant. That
is not the case here so we need to model and structurally interpret the impacts of uncertainty across multiple
periods including ones of potential expansion (pre-crisis), decline (initial crisis), and recovery.
We focus on entry and exit outcomes of firms or varieties, since both have similar predictions as long as
sunk export costs are at the variety-destination level. We also examine the implications for industry exports,
which are qualitatively similar to those for the extensive margin.40

4.2

Measurement

Uncertainty Shocks and Risk Heterogeneity
We capture the shocks to γ t by allowing for regime switches, i.e. by allowing for the coefficients of the
impact of ω̄ iV 0 on entry (and exports) to be different over time, namely in the pre-crisis years vs. the initial
crisis and recovery periods.
To estimate the differential impacts of uncertainty shocks we approximate ω̄ iV 0 in (29), around a baseline
category, e.g. non-PTA country, and add the differential, e.g. for a PTA; these are respectively the first and
second terms in (30). More generally, we let Wi,V 0 = {0, 1} be a binary indicator for a PTA country or high
market power industry and write the risk as
;
<
;
<
è
è W
é
é
# W
$
∂ [ω̄ 0 −ω̄ 0 ]
∂ ω̄ 0
ω̄ iV 0 − 1 =
=

ω̄ 0 |Σy =0 +

∂Σy

· Σyi

+Wi,V 0

{wτ + wj · (ω yi0 − 1)}

ω̄ 0 − ω̄ 0

+

Σy =0

Σy =0

+Wi,V 0

∂Σy

· Σyi

+w̃iV 0

Σy =0

{∆wτ + ∆wj · (ω yi0 − 1)}

+wiV 0
(30)

The first line uses the approximation around no income risk and a common income using equations (21) and
(22). The second line first replaces Σyi with its associated tail risk measure using the following approximation:
∂ω y
ω yi0 − 1 ≈ ∂Σ0y |Σy =0 · Σy,i ; we discuss its measurement below.41 The second line also simplifies the notation
and relates some of the average effects we eventually estimate with their structural counterparts. The
approximation error is captured by wiV 0 . The policy risk for non-PTA countries in the absence of income
risk is denoted by wτ ≡ ω̄ 0 |Σy =0 ; in the baseline estimation this is an average over all industries. The
corresponding average policy risk differential is denoted by ∆wτ . The average change
- in overall risk for nony
∂ ω̄ 0 ∂ω 0 PTAs with income uncertainty is given by the second term where wj ≡ ∂Σ
/
. The corresponding
∂Σy y
Σy =0
∂ [ω̄ W
∂ω y
0 −ω̄ 0 ]
0 differential is given by ∆wj ≡
/
. In section 4.6 we test for differences in (30) across
∂Σy
∂Σy Σy =0

industry market power.

40 In this model uncertainty reduces export values only through the extensive margin, and thus the elasticity of export values
with respect to uncertainty is predicted to be lower than on the number of exporters. We can see this clearly in periods of
expansion since if we aggregate the firm sales given by (3) and difference them over time we obtain (29) except with a smaller
β
β
k
< σ−1
.
uncertainty coefficient, k−σ+1
σ−1 1−β
1−β
41 The approximation expression and interpretation is the same whether or not W
i,V 0 = 1 since as noted before we assume
the marginal distribution of income is independent of policy.

27

In section 3.4 we derived several implications, which we now relate to the parameters described above.
First, the model predicts a negative average effect of policy risk, so wτ < 0. Second, in the presence of
multiple sources of risk wj need not be positive but if we estimate that wj > 0 then income uncertainty
augments joint risk and otherwise it decreases it.42 The overall differential is predicted to be positive if the
insurance effect dominates, i.e. ∆wτ + ∆wj · (ω yi0 − 1) > 0. Moreover, a negative policy risk differential,
∆wτ < 0, provides evidence for market access risk, whereas evidence that ∆wj Ó= 0 implies a rejection of
policy and income risk independence; and finally if ∆wj < 0 then the insurance effect is relatively more
important (compared to market access risk) in the presence of income risk.
Income Risk Measurement
To model income risk we focus on aggregate GDP, measured in dollars. The model implied measure for
the conditional loss from the economic shock at any given policy level is the probability of a reduction in
GDP times the associated expected proportional change, ω yi0 − 1 = −Hy (Yi′ ) (1 − EY [Yi′ < Yi,0 ]/Yi,0 ), which
varies only across countries. Using an empirical model for GDP, we can calculate both of the components
for ω yi0 − 1 for any given country and period before the crisis. One concern with using this approach
is that the loss may be highly dependent on when exactly we measure it. Two countries may have an
identical value for this measure at some point prior to the crisis, but one may have a larger loss if the shock
was very large because of a fatter left tail. To account for the possibility that the 2008 crisis may have
increased the likelihood of extreme shocks we compute the conditional loss for a particularly bad shock—one
at least at the 5th percentile of the estimated change in GDP for each i—and compute the resulting loss
as riskYi = 1 − EY [Yi′ < Ŷi0.05 ]/Yi,T where T =2001Q4 (see appendix B.1 for details). Thus we measure
ω yi0 − 1 = −HY · riskYi . If the distribution at the time of the crisis was unchanged then HY would be 0.05,
but if such large shocks became more likely then it would be higher. Thus we simply assume HY remains
similar across countries and let it be absorbed in the coefficient to be estimated. Our measure, riskYi has
a rank correlation of 0.8 with the standard deviation of changes in ln GDP over time for each country — a
standard measure of income risk that is theoretically related.
Other Economic and Policy Shocks
Following the theory we assume constant
1
2 k, β and σ (both across U.S. industries and over the periods we
cD
aiV t
1
iV t
consider) such that ln cD = σ−1 ln aiV 0 . Moreover, the theory focuses on shocks to income and policy
iV 0
iV t
=
thus changes in aiV t = εiV ςyiVitt are driven by those components and using their definitions we have aaiV
0
1
2σ
τ iV t
Yit
43
. There were relatively small changes in tariffs faced by U.S. exporters in non-PTA markets
Yi0
τ iV 0
in 2002-2008 and previous research has shown they changed little over the financial crisis period (see e.g.
Bown and Crowley, 2013b). Therefore, in the baseline we model changes in applied protection as reflecting
a common shock τ iV,t = τ iV τ t and in the robustness checks we control for changes in non-tariff barriers. We
control directly for GDP growth. In sum, our baseline empirical model for business conditions is
ln

aiV t
Yit
= ln
+ at + ∆at · Wi,V 0
aiV 0
Yi0

(31)

which includes the income change and āt : any common shocks to policy (or other factors determining a)
2
1
y
! j"
∂ω
y
∂ ω̄
j
42
To see this note that sgn w

43 This

= − sgn

0

|
∂Σy Σy =0

since

0

|
∂Σy Σy =0

< 0. With no policy risk ω̄ 0 = ω 0 so w = 1.

assumes the industry CES price index PiV is constant over time. Below we discuss how to relax this in the estimation.

28

across all iV in the baseline group. Given the negligible changes in applied policies our baseline interpretation
for the impacts of PTAs or high market power industries will be related to uncertainty effects. However,
we recognize that those countries or industries may have had unobserved/unmeasured differential changes,
which are captured by ∆at and are also controlled for via the interaction of the indicator Wi,V 0 .
The estimation relaxes the following assumptions used in the theory related to the determination of cD .
First, the theory assumes that sunk costs (KiV ), industry expenditure shares (εiV ), the number of producers
and the industry price indices are iV specific but constant. The estimation controls for time variation in
any of these variables as long as they take the following form: xiV,t = xiV xt such that ∆ ln xiV,t = ∆ ln xt
(possibly augmented with an idiosyncratic component), so these are also reflected in at . Any additional PTAindustry differential in these variables is captured by ∆at . Similarly, the estimation controls for changes in
the number of U.S. producers: allowing both for common shocks across industries at any t, and differential
impacts according to the indicator Wi,V . We will also describe a more general specification that allows for
country and industry effects in changes to control for additional unobserved heterogeneity.

4.3
4.3.1

Empirical Specifications and Identification
Difference-in-differences

We first derive a difference-in-differences specification to provide an interpretation of the coefficients as differential impacts of the uncertainty shock on countries/industries with heterogeneous tail risk. We then propose a difference-of -differences strategy that addresses additional identification threats such as pre-existing
trends.
Replacing the uncertainty terms in (30) and the business conditions in (31) into (29) we obtain
ln

è
é
Yit
NiV t
∆j
= Γτt + Γjt · riskYi + Γ∆τ
+
Γ
·
risk
· Wi,V 0 + Γyt · ln
+ uiV t each t
Y
t
t
i
NiV 0
Yi0

(32)

2
1
β
k
τ
The policy effect in the absence of income risk is Γτt ≡ bht σ−1
1−β γ t w + āt —capturing the impact of the
common uncertainty shock, γ t , and any change in applied
policies, at , 2
on non-PTAs . The respective differen1
β
β
k
τ
j
∆τ
h k
tial for the “treated” group (PTA) is Γt ≡ bt σ−1 1−β γ t ∆w + ∆at . The term Γjt ≡ −bht σ−1
1−β HY γ t w
reflects the impact of income uncertainty on joint risk for the baseline group and the respective differential
is
β
k
HY γ t ∆wj .
(33)
Γ∆j
≡ −bht
t
σ−11−β
k
> 0. The error terms discussed after (29) and in the approxiFinally, the income effect is Γyt ≡ bht σ−1
mation to tail risk in (30) are reflected in uiV t .44

In terms of predictions, Γjt < 0 indicates an increase in uncertainty and evidence that income uncertainty
augments joint risk for non-PTAs. A finding that Γ∆j
differs from zero provides evidence for an uncertainty
t
∆j
shock and non-independent risks, and Γt > 0 indicates the insurance effect is relatively more important
(compared to market access risk) in the presence of income risk. The predictions for Γ∆τ
depend on whether
t
<0
unobserved differential policy changes, ∆at , are negligible or controlled for. If that is the case then Γ∆τ
t
indicates uncertainty and presence of market access risk for policy dominating the insurance. Moreover,
#
$
β
44
h k
Specifically, uiV t = ẽiV t + bt

σ−1

(eiV t − eiV 0 ) +

1−β

γ t · wiV 0 .

29

we can then add the differential terms to test the model predictions for PTA (and market power). The
differences-of-differences described below controls for possible unobserved ∆at .
∆j
To test how uncertainty shocks evolved over the crisis we compare the ratio of estimates, Γ∆j
t+s /Γt , from
using T = t as in (32) to those obtained using T = t + s, both relative to a common baseline. Across periods
∆j
of duration s that are expansions we have Γ∆j
= γ t+s /γ t (since bht = 1); this ratio changes if and
t+s /Γt
only if γ changes. In periods of decline or recovery, that is not necessarily the case.45 Nonetheless, we can
∆j
conclude that Γ∆j
∈ [0, 1] only occurs when γ t+s /γ t < 1, i.e. if uncertainty fell between t and t + s.
t+s /Γt

4.3.2

Difference-of-differences

The specification in (32) is in differences so it removes any unobserved time and destination-by-industry
determinants of the number of exporters. However, it does not address the possibility of pre-existing trends.
For example, there may be idiosyncratic growth in the number of U.S. firms, sunk costs, expenditure shares, or
other U.S. and destination market characteristics kept constant in the model. Thus we control for pre-existing
destination-by-industry growth trends, denoted by αiV by using a difference-of-differences approach. This
approach also controls for pre-existing trends in factors excluded from the model, e.g. increasing production
and financial integration due to reductions in information and transportation costs.46
Here are some specific concerns this approach addresses. First, if exporting growth to non-PTAs was
persistently lower then it could imply a negative policy risk effect, Γτt < 0, even if the crisis had no impact.
This possibility is clearly rejected by the stylized facts that show a sharp reversal from positive to negative
growth. But that reversal suggests that the true impact of the crisis on growth is larger than what might be
implied by Γτt in (32). More generally, we will not interpret Γτt as simply applied policy shocks since they
can capture any shocks common to all country-industry pairs iV in a given period, which we control for by
using time effects, αt . If any pre-existing growth trend exists but is common between PTA and non-PTA
as the average differential impact of the crisis on export
then we could still interpret the estimate of Γ∆τ
t
growth.
Second, a similar concern applies if the pre-existing trend is correlated with the interaction risk measure
in which case using (32) we could find Γjt < 0 even in the absence of uncertainty. This is less of a concern for
j
the differential coefficient Γ∆j
t . However, we also want an estimate for Γt and focusing on and interpreting
magnitudes of the differential would only be valid if the correlation between the trend and risk was similar
for PTA and non-PTA. More generally, if PTA partner selection depends at least in part on their permanent
growth potential then controlling for αiV will address this selection issue.
To implement this and interpret the coefficients we start with (32) and take annual differences for each
quarter-year observation at time t and denote these changes by ∆4 xt ≡ xt − xt−4 .
∆4 ln NiV t

<
;
è
é
Yit
j
∆j
y
τ
∆τ
+ uiV t
= ∆4 Γt + Γt · riskYi + Γt + Γt · riskYi · Wi,V 0 + Γt · ln
Yi0

+ αt + αiV . (34)

The left hand side of (34) is simply the annual growth in the outcome variable since we can use a common
∆j
Tt
h
h
model dynamics predicts Γ∆j
= bh
t+s γ t+s /bt γ t > 1 even if γ t+s = γ t because bt = 1 − β , which is increasing
t+s /Γt
in Tt : the number of periods relative to the baseline reflected in NiV 0 . The intuition is simple: when conditions worsen at t
some fraction of exporters with cost above the cutoff survive until t + s and only then exit and do not re-enter even if there
were no new shocks.
46 We focus on the role of α
iV in accounting for trends in the outcome rather than the control variables because the latter
can have time varying coefficients. We also show below that our results are robust to including industry-by-time effects, αV t .
45 The

30

baseline number of firms, NiV 0 , for all t which gets differenced out.47 The right-hand side contains the
differenced terms from (32), which are given in {}. To these terms we add country-industry fixed effects,
αiV , and time fixed effects, αt , where the latter control for any aggregate U.S. supply or global demand
shocks or seasonality.
The differenced coefficients are related to the structural counterparts as follows
∆4 Γxt ≡ Γxt+4 − Γxt , all t

(35)

and can vary across t because of contemporaneous shocks but also lagged ones in case of periods of decline
or recovery. We start with any t ∈ h = 0, i.e. expansion periods such that bh=0
= 1 and thus ∆4 Γ∆j
=
t
t
β
k
j
48
− σ−1 1−β HY ∆w × ∆4 γ t , with similar definitions applying for the remaining coefficients. Such periods
provide a useful baseline since they capture potential trends in variables such as uncertainty shocks, e.g. if
demand uncertainty is falling over the expansion period. The large increase in exporters in the pre-crisis
period indicates that on average it may be identified as one of expansion. Thus we interpret the coefficients
in that period in the way just described and use them as the baseline. Moreover, we are not interested in
their variation within the pre-crisis period so we focus on the average coefficients over all t before 2008Q4,
e.g.
β
k
HY ∆wj × ∆4 γ t∈p , p = 0,
Γ̄∆j
p ≡−
σ−11−β
with similar definitions applying for the remaining coefficients.
We allow for a regime switch when the crisis starts and for subsequent periods thus allowing bht to differ
across them. The average of the change in coefficients defined in (35) in each period is Γ̄xp and their difference
relative to the baseline period is Γ̄xp−0 are respectively defined as
Γ̄xp ≡ ∆4 Γxt∈p , p = {0, 1, 2, 3}

Γ̄xp−0

≡

Γ̄xp

−

Γ̄x0

(36)

, p = {1, 2, 3}.

The baseline pre-crisis period, p = 0, is longer and includes all t before Q408 whereas the remaining ones
each include 4 quarters, e.g. p = 1 spans Q408-Q309. Averaging over similar quarters improves precision
while still allowing variation in the coefficients to capture any decline (at least in p = 1) and possibly a
recovery and return to an expansion history in later periods as the evidence suggested in section 2.
We then stack the differenced equations in (34) and use indicator variables Qp for the periods. As we
discuss below, after we control for country–by-industry and time effects we can identify the uncertainty
47 Recall that in section 3.5 we show that after a decline or recovery the growth formula is valid relative to the last stationary
period, so we use a common NiV 0 for all t after the crisis starts. Moreover, we derived that under periods of expansion the
formula holds relative to any stationary state, so assuming that the pre-crisis (and possibly the end of the sample) are periods
of expansion we can choose the same baseline as used for the crisis.
! β τ
"
β
k
48 Specifically, if t ∈ 0 then ∆ Γj ≡ − k
H wj × ∆4 γ t ; ∆4 Γτt ≡ σ−1
w × ∆4 γ t + ∆4 āt and ∆4 Γ∆τ
≡
4 t
t
σ−1 1−β Y
1−β
k
σ−1

!

β
∆wτ
1−β

"

× ∆4 γ t + ∆4 (∆at ) . Note that in such periods this approach eliminates any unobserved trends in business
conditions if they are country-industry specific so ∆4 āt = ∆4 (∆at ) = 0. So the policy coefficients reflect only the relevant
model parameters.

31

effects during the crisis relative to the baseline, Γ̄xp−0 . Thus we write the estimation equation as
î
è
é
ï
∆j
∆4 ln NiV t = Γ̄τ0 + Γ̄j0 · riskYi + Γ̄∆τ
+
Γ̄
·
risk
·
W
Yi
i,V 0 + αt + αiV
0
0
è
é
ï
p=3
qî τ
∆j
+
Γ̄p−0 + Γ̄jp−0 · riskYi + Γ̄∆τ
p−0 + Γ̄p−0 · riskYi · Wi,V 0 · Qp

(37)

p=1

+

4
3
Yit
· Qp + ∆4 uiV t
∆4 Γyp · ln
Yi0
p=0
p=3
q

The relation to the model predictions can be further clarified by again considering Figure 9. The long
difference approach aimed to estimate the impact of γ on the cumulative ln Nt /N0 , shown by the circular
marker points representing each quarter for high risk markets (black) and low risk markets (green). The
average of those effects within a period is shown by the red squares (high risk) and red diamonds (low risk).
The 4-quarter difference measures how these change over time for non-PTA (after netting out any pre-trend).
The variation in risk across markets identifies the difference between those averages in any given period.
4.3.3

Identification and Predictions

The “treatment status” Wi,V 0 is determined prior to the crisis. For example, we define Wi,0 = 1 if the
country had a PTA in force with the U.S. at any point prior to the start of the crisis and exclude any
countries that switched status after that period to avoid confounding effects in that period. Some of the
PTAs we use came into force during the pre-crisis period and these switchers provide identification for Γ∆τ
0
(estimated
by
using
W
=
P
T
A
for
t
∈
p
=
0
in
the
first
line
of
(37)),
which
provides
additional
and Γ∆j
i,V 0
it
0
evidence about the model and in isolating some of the impacts of the crisis.49
Uncertainty and export dynamics predictions
We summarize the predictions we test using (37) and label them Pred. 1-6. Predictions 1 and 4 concern
the existence of uncertainty shocks and joint risk and do not require country variation or estimates of PTA
differentials. The other predictions are identified from interactions with PTA indicators.
Pred. 1: Existence of uncertainty shocks. If Γ̄jp−0 Ó= 0 then we reject a null hypothesis of no uncertainty
shocks, ∆4 γ t = 0, since it would imply ∆4 Γjt = 0 for all t.
Pred. 2: PTA policy and income risk independence. If Γ̄∆j
p−0 Ó= 0 then we reject a null hypothesis of
∆j
∆j
risk independence (∆wj = 0 all t ∈ p) since it implies Γ∆j
p = 0 = Γ0 . Similarly if Γ̄0 Ó= 0, then we
reject risk independence in the pre-crisis, ∆4 γ t∈0 Ó= 0.
! h "
∆4 bt γ t
Γ̄∆j
0
Pred. 3: Increased uncertainty during initial crisis period. If sgn ∆j = sgn ! h "t∈0 < 0 and
Γ̄p

∆4 bt γ t

t∈1

Γ̄∆j
p

Ó 0 then volatility shocks switched signs and the most plausible is for volatility to be decreasing
=
pre-crisis and increasing in the crisis. We can test similar predictions for subsequent periods.50

49 The importer market power definition is constant over the full sample period, so the baseline period coefficients in the first
line of (37) are not separately identified since we include αt and αiV fixed effects.
50 Note that the ratio eliminates the term ∆w j that is assumed common (or at least of same sign) across the periods.

32

3
1
2
!
"
Pred. 4: Income uncertainty and joint risk. Since sgn Γ̄jp=1−0 = − sgn ∆4 bht γ t t∈1 − ∆4 bht γ t

t∈0

4

if we find Γ̄jp=1−0 < 0 and evidence for increase in uncertainty (using Pred. 3) then this implies that
wj > 0, i.e. income uncertainty augments joint risk.

Pred. 5: PTA insurance effects in crisis. PTAs provide an insurance effect and it dominates any market
access risk if the overall differential impacts are positive, which requires ∆wτ + ∆wj · (ω yi0 − 1) > 0.
We test this by computing the following average effect over countries:
1
2
∆j
Ei Γ̄∆τ
p−0 + Γ̄p−0 · riskYi =

!
" ï#
$
β î ! h "
k
∆4 bt γ t t∈p − ∆4 bht γ t t∈0 ∆wτ + ∆wj · Ei (ω yi0 − 1)
σ−11−β

(38)

The RHS expression is obtained using the definitions for Γ∆j
in (33), and Γ∆τ
in the text, along with their
t
t
y
difference and average respectively in (35) and (36); and ω i0 − 1 = −HY · riskYi .51
We can also identify the effect gross of the pre-crisis differentials as
2
1
1
2
∆j
∆j
∆τ
Ei Γ̄∆τ
· riskYi =
p−0 + Γ̄0 + Γ̄p−0 + Γ̄0
Given evidence that sgn

Γ̄∆j
0
Γ̄∆j
p

$
β î ! h " ï#
k
∆4 bt γ t t∈p ∆wτ + ∆wj · Ei (ω yi0 − 1) (39)
σ−11−β

< 0 and sgn Γ̄jp=1−0 < 0 the term in {} is positive (increasing volatility) and

thus the sign of any significant expressions we compute using the LHS would reflect the sign of ∆wτ + ∆wj ·
Ei (ω yi0 − 1).

Pred. 6: Evolution and cumulative effects of uncertainty. The adjustment dynamics imply that we
may obtain significant impacts from the uncertainty variables after an increase in γ in the first crisis
period even if γ does not increase further in subsequent periods. Therefore we compute cumulative
effects by adding the expressions in (38) or (39) over periods. This will also inform us about whether
any initial effects are subsequently overturned. Even if the overall uncertainty effects are not reversed,
we are also interested in determining if they may have subsided after the first crisis period, which we
h
∆4 (bh
t γ t )t∈2 −∆4 (bt γ t )t∈0
∆j
< 1. Moreover, we can compare this to alternative
test by using Γ̄∆j
2−0 /Γ̄1−0 =
h
∆4 (bh
t γ t )t∈1 −∆4 (bt γ t )t∈0
values to test some of our identifying assumptions. First, if ∆4 bht āt∈p ≈ 0 then we should obtain
∆j
∆τ
Γ̄∆τ
= Γ̄∆j
2 /Γ̄1
2 /Γ̄1 . Second, if the change between those periods is due to γ, rather than the
differential effects ∆wτ and ∆wj that we assume are fixed, then we should also get similar values for
Γ̄j2−0 /Γ̄j1−0 . From Figure 9(b) we see that if γ is not reversed then there should be similar effects across
the three periods. If it is sufficiently reversed, then we should find the largest 4-quarter effect to be in
the first period.
Income predictions
2
1
it
with Γyp ln ∆4 ln Yit . This exact specification of the
We implement (37) by approximating ∆4 Γyp · ln YYi0
income term along with the restriction that Γyp = Γy would arise from this model if we removed sunk costs
51 This test assumes a negligible average unobserved growth differential in business conditions in PTAs. When exploring the
market power dimension we can relax this assumption by controlling for country-by-time effects. We assume that, conditional
on any country-specific growth trends, any unobserved growth differential in business conditions in PTAs in any quarter, ∆4 āt ,
is negligible when averaged3over all quarters in any given p, such4that ∆4 bh
t āt∈p ≈ 0. Otherwise there would be an additional

term in (38) equal to

k
σ−1

1

!

∆4 bh
t āt

"2

t∈p

1

!

− ∆4 bh
t āt

"2

.

t∈0

33

wj

(or if there were no exit adjustment dynamics). If we find it varies over time this provides evidence for sunk
costs and adjustment dynamics. By allowing Γyp to vary we hope to mitigate concerns with the alternative
specification that imposes Γy since in the latter case some of the variation in the uncertainty impacts in each
period could simply be picking up the omitted variation in Γyp .
Finally, note that if we reject a constant Γyp then our model predicts the coefficient will be positive but
we will not have an exact structural interpretation for it since it will capture current and lagged impacts. We
test if the uncertainty coefficients are robust to addressing any omitted income lagged terms in the robustness
section by controlling for country-time effects, which we can do in the context of the market power estimates.

4.4

Data

Firm-level Trade
Our primary source is the Longitudinal Foreign Trade Transactions Database (LFTTD). This links U.S.
import and exports transactions to the firms in the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), which covers
the universe of non-farm private sector employers in the U.S. Using these data, we construct measures of the
number of firms exporting to a particular country and at the product level by month. We define industries
at the 2 digit chapter level of the Harmonized System (HS). We define products at the HS-10 digit level
after concording the product codes for time consistency as described in Appendix B.2. For each industryby-destination we track the value of exports and entry and exit of firms down to the HS-10 digit level. We
measure entry, exit, and export growth for each quarter relative to the same quarter in the previous year.
Using these definitions, our main empirical specifications focus on the dynamics of the number of traded
firm-product varieties with any exports within a country×HS-2×quarter cell. We aggregate all exports (or
number of varieties) and measure their growth in logs or midpoint growth formulas.52 We define entry, exit
and continuer margins, aggregate each group, and then calculate total growth and its decomposition across
the margins using equation (1) for each country and industry.
Country Sample and PTA Definition
Our main empirical approach compares U.S. export growth to its PTA partners relative to those without
in 2003Q1 to 2011Q3. During this period, the U.S. implemented PTAs with 17 countries, but a number
of them are implemented after 2006 in the midst of the recession and trade collapse. We focus on seven
countries that had a PTA in place by 2006 or earlier and that had quarterly GDP data available from 2001 to
2011. Thus in our sample the PTAs used and their implementation dates are Israel (1985), Canada (1989),
Mexico (1994), Chile (2004), Australia (2005), Guatemala (2006), and Morocco (2006). The set includes
developed and developing countries and represents more than 40% of all U.S. exports. We exclude countries
from the analysis entirely if they switch into PTA membership from 2007 to 2011, e.g. Dominican Republic
(2007), Peru (2009), Costa Rica (2009), and others. Other countries lack sufficient quarterly GDP data,
these include PTA countries in our period, Jordan (2001) and Bahrain (2006), and also non-PTA countries,
but they make up a small share of U.S. exports. Colombia and South Korea are non-PTA countries in our
sample period since these agreements had not entered into force until after 2011. The full list of countries
appears in Appendix Table C3.
52 We use nominal trade values and foreign GDP growth in U.S. dollars. U.S. inflation is fairly constant over the 2003-2011
period and all of our regressions absorb time and country effects. Our results are robust in section 4.6 to country-quarter-year
effects that absorb all time-varying foreign shocks including prices.

34

Income Measures
We use quarterly GDP data from the IMF International Financial Statistics. All nominal GDP data
is converted into U.S. dollars, which therefore incorporates exchange rate variation in demand. We use
year-on-year quarterly GDP growth rates as control variable in the regression estimation. We also use the
data from 2001-2012 to estimate an AR(1) process in the quarterly year-on-year log changes. This data
restricts our sample to 67 countries, which still covers most U.S. export transaction value in the LFTTD.
We construct the income uncertainty measure as described in the measurement section. Recall it captures
the proportional loss in profits from a large negative shock: riskYi = 1 − EY [Yi′ < Ŷi0.05 ]/Yi,T where
T =2001Q4. We prefer this measure of income uncertainty given it has a structural interpretation but also
note that it is correlated with alternative ones. Our measure riskYi , has a rank correlation of 0.80 or above
with several alternative measures: standard error of the innovations in the estimated AR(1) model of income,
the standard deviation of log changes in GDP, and a measure of riskYi at T =2001Q4 from AR(1) estimates
in a different sample timeframe from 1990 to 2006.
The average growth in GDP in our sample is somewhat large, about 10 log points, which reflects three
factors. First, we are measuring aggregate, nominal GDP and not GDP per capita. Second, the period
leading up to the great recession was one of expansion: most countries in our sample are growing, on average,
from 2002 to 2008. Third, the U.S. dollar depreciated on a trade weighted basis by about 30% from 2002
to 2008, which is reflected in the U.S. dollar denominated GDP measures.
In sum, our regression sample includes 67 countries. Exports to these countries account for 88% of all
transactions by value that are matched to a firm in the LFTTD , in an average quarter. So the sample
selection only drops about 12% of the value of the firm-matched data due to missing GDP data, PTA
switching in the crisis and the requirement of a positive flow in a HS-2×time×country cell.53
High/Low Market Power Indicators
We construct market power indicators using the elasticity estimates for the U.S. from Broda et al. (2008).
The point estimates of these elasticity measures are imprecise and using them directly would introduce
substantial noise into our regressions. Instead, we take the median elasticity within an HS-2 industry over
the set of HS-4 digit estimates. We then rank the inverse of these median estimates from high to low and
assign the top two terciles to the High Market Power group and the bottom tercile to Low. In practice the
High category contains industries with a median elasticity less than 5.

4.5

PTA Estimates

We start by estimating the impact of economic risk, PTA status and their interaction on U.S. exporters. All
fixed bilateral destination-industry determinants are already differenced out, which controls for most standard
time-invariant gravity determinants (e.g. distance, border, language) even if they have heterogeneous effects
across industries. The destination-industry and time effects control for growth trends. All standard errors
account for arbitrary correlation within the clusters defined at the country×quarter-year periods.54
53 The regression sample corresponds to 70-75% of U.S. total exports since not all trade transactions can be matched to a firm
in the LFTTD or the exporter is not part of the non-farm employer universe, e.g. government entities, self-employed private
citizens, agriculture, etc.
54 We report country×quarter-year clusters because our uncertainty measures have no variation at higher disaggregation and
our panel is estimated at the country-industry-quarter-year level. Our results are robust to adjusting standard errors for two-way

35

The impact of income on each of the outcomes we consider is positive and significant for all periods. The
coefficient typically changes over time, which is consistent with the presence of adjustment dynamics,
possibly due to sunk costs.55
Γyp

4.5.1

Entry and Exit

Net entry of varieties
Column 1 of Table 3(a) provides the estimates for the log growth in varieties based on (37). The first three
rows represent the non-PTA risk coefficients, Γ̄jp−0 , for each of the three one-year periods starting in the
first crisis quarter: 2008Q4. All Γ̄jp−0 estimates are significantly different from zero so we reject the null
of no uncertainty shocks (Pred. 1). Since Γ̄jp−0 differ across periods we conclude that they reflect some
uncertainty shocks during the crisis period and not simply a common pre-period effect, Γ̄j0 . Those three
coefficients are negative indicating that, conditional on an increase in uncertainty relative to the baseline (as
evidenced below), income uncertainty augments joint risk (Pred. 4).
The fourth coefficient is Γ̄∆j
1−0 = 1.5 and since this differential risk effect for PTAs is significantly different
from zero in the first crisis period we reject a null hypothesis of risk independence (Pred. 2) and of no
uncertainty shocks. Moreover, Γ̄∆j
0 = −0.38, so we can reject risk independence in the pre-crisis as well as
∆4 γ t∈0 Ó= 0. Combining these effects we obtain Γ̄∆j
1 = 1.12 and the reversal of the uncertainty sign captured
by sgn

Γ̄∆j
0
Γ̄∆j
p

< 0 indicates uncertainty fell prior to the crisis and then increased starting in 2008Q4 (Pred. 3).

We also obtain significant policy differential effects, Γ̄∆τ
1−0 , which are negative suggesting the presence of
market access policy risk in the absence of income risk. To obtain the full risk effect of PTAs we combine
∆j
Γ̄∆τ
1−0 with the estimates of Γ̄1−0 and Ei (riskYi ) = 0.21 for PTAs to compute the LHS of (38). In Table
3(b) we show this effect is positive, 5.4 lp (Pred. 5), indicating that PTAs provided an insurance effect that
dominated any market access risk (given the evidence for increase in uncertainty in Pred. 3).56
In period 2 the signs of the PTA coefficients are the same as their counterparts in period 1, but their
relative magnitude is about 1/3. The corresponding third period coefficients are close to zero and insignificant. The combined second (or third) period PTA effect that correspond to (38) is zero in magnitude and
insignificant. So the cumulative effect for varieties by the end of the sample reflects the first period effect. We
∆j
∆j
∆j
also find Γ̄∆j
2−0 /Γ̄1−0 < 1 so uncertainty subsides after the first period (Pred. 6). Further, Γ̄2−0 /Γ̄1−0 = 0.32
and Γ̄j2−0 /Γ̄j1−0 = 0.45, the similar magnitudes are predicted by the model when the only relevant change
for those coefficients between those periods is due to γ.57
Gross entry and exit of varieties
The second column of Table 3(a) replaces the log growth dependent variable with the midpoint growth. The
results are nearly identical but we include them since they allow for an additive decomposition of net entry
clustering on the country-industry panel identifier and quarter-year time effects.
55 Those coefficients are smaller than in basic gravity estimates for aggregate trade in part because we explore time variation
over short periods and disaggregated data.
56 The effect remains positive (and is larger) if we either evaluate (38) at the non-PTA mean of risk , 13 lp, or if we include
Yi
the pre-crisis effects at the PTA mean, as shown in (39), 8.1 lp.
57 We also find that Γ̄∆τ /Γ̄∆τ = .39 and the similarity to the other ratios is also predicted by the model if ∆ bh ā
4 t t∈p ≈ 0
2−0
1−0
in these periods.

36

into gross entry (column 3) and exit (column 4). Increases in exit are measured as negative so the coefficients
in columns 3 and 4 sum to column 2.
The basic net entry predictions we derived apply to the gross margins in the following sense. When a
cost cutoff falls, the firms with cost above that threshold that exogenously exited that market do not return.
This is captured by a higher gross exit and a lower gross entry relative to a baseline where the cutoff had
remained unchanged.
For both margins, all Γ̄jp−0 estimates are negative, significantly different from zero and vary across
periods, all of which are similar to the net entry results. Moreover, Γ̄jp−0 for gross entry and exit are similar
∆τ
in magnitude within each p = 1, 2. The estimated Γ̄∆j
1−0 is positive and Γ̄1−0 is negative and significant for
both entry and exit, again similar to net entry. Computing the LHS of (38) we continue to find a positive
effect for either margin, as shown in Table 3(b).
Gross exit accounts for a larger share of the PTA differential net of the baseline period but both margins
have similar importance if we compute the PTA differential during the crisis period. This is due to a positive
gross entry margin PTA differential effect in the pre-crisis period.
4.5.2

Exports

The model and predictions focus on the impact of uncertainty on entry and exit and thus the outcomes of
non-continuing varieties. If the extensive margin is non-negligible, then the uncertainty effects will also be
present in total export growth in any given industry-country. Thus we test the specific predictions of the
model outlined in Predictions 1-6 using log export growth for all firms. Subsequently, we determine the
relative importance of the extensive margin channel.
The export growth estimates in column 1 of Table 4(a) are consistent with the net entry results from
Table 3 and yield similar implications for the central predictions in Predictions 1-6. The discussion refers to
the signs of the uncertainty parameters since their exact magnitude according to the model is different for
entry vs. exports.
In column 1 of Table 4(a) we find that all non-PTA estimates for the income risk coefficient are negative
and differ across periods. These correspond to Γ̄jp−0 in the entry derivation and thus indicate the presence
of uncertainty shocks. The effect is strongest in the first period and significant at 1% for all but the last one.
∆τ
The PTA coefficients have the same signs as those in Table 3 in p = 1, 2 (corresponding to Γ̄∆j
p−0 and Γ̄p−0
58
). For p = 3 these coefficients are insignificant, similarly to Table 3.
The impact of risk on PTA declines
∆j
∆j
by the second period, Γ̄2−0 /Γ̄1−0 = 0.41, a ratio similar to net entry suggesting that both are capturing a
similar reversal in uncertainty.
The PTA differential captured by the LHS of (38) at the mean PTA risk level is reported in column 1 of
Table 4(b); it is positive and significant in the first crisis period and insignificant for the remaining periods.
The cumulative effect at the end of the three years is positive and equal to 5 lp for growth in both average
exports and in the number of varieties.
Export margins
The export growth in a given industry reflects the weighted sum of growth rates of continuing and
58 We

continue to find a reversal of the sign of the uncertainty effect of PTAs relative to the pre-crisis period.

37

non-continuing firms. So, the impact of uncertainty on exports described so far can also reflect impacts
on continuing firms, particularly if their share dominates. To test if uncertainty is working through the
extensive margin mechanism highlighted by the model we decompose export growth.
We use the midpoint growth rate measure from equation (1) introduced in section 2.2 re-indexed to a
country-industry-time cell:
X̂iV t ≡

q
XiV t − XiV t−4
m
= m Im sm
iV t X̂iV t
[XiV t + XiV t−4 ]/2

(40)

where XiV t is total exports at the iV t level. As with aggregate exports, we can decompose country-industry
aggregate exports into margins m ∈ IN T, EXT . The intensive margin (INT) includes varieites with non-zero
exports in both periods and the extensive (EXT) includes the contribution of all entry and exit of varieties.
We use the log growth sample for comparability, so all iV t observations have positive total exports at
t and t − 4. The two growth measures are highly correlated and consequently we obtain similar results in
Table 4(a) column 2 (midpoint) and in column 1 in terms of sign and significance.59
m
We decompose the growth rate using each sm
iV t X̂iV t in (40) as the dependent variable, so the coefficients
in columns 3 and 4 add up to those in column 2. The estimates for the extensive margin in column 4 are
consistent with the net entry results from Table 3 and yield similar implications for the central predictions in
Pred. 1-6.60 Computing the PTA differential uncertainty effect in the LHS of (38) we find positive significant
effects, of 6.6 for exports of non-continuers for p = 1. That effect becomes insignificant for the two remaining
periods and considerably smaller. The cumulative differential is 4.5 so it remains positive at the end of the
three years and mainly reflects the first period effect.

The intensive margin estimates in the third column show small and insignificant uncertainty effects in
the first crisis period for both non-PTA and PTAs. This is consistent with the model focus on the extensive
margin.61 The overall PTA differential effect using the expression on the LHS of (38) is insignificantly
different from zero for all periods and close to zero. Therefore the corresponding effect for overall export
midpoint growth in column 2 in the first crisis period mainly reflects the extensive margin. For the remaining
periods that overall differential is much smaller and statistically insignificant. We can further decompose
the extensive margin into its additive entry and exit components. The PTA differential is only significant
for exit, which is also the largest and has a cumulative impact of 7.7 by the end of the period.
In sum, these differential impacts of uncertainty on PTAs are consistent with the gravity estimates in
section 2.1 and extend them to show the role of uncertainty through the extensive margin. Figure 10
59 The magnitude of the midpoint coefficients is typically lower because this measure is bounded between 2 and -2 and so its
standard deviation is lower by at least 1/3.
60 The most directly comparable results are those using midpoint growth (column 2 of Table 3(a)) but these are similar to
those using log growth. The discussion refers to parameters to simplify the exposition but we note that their exact structural
interpretation, as derived before, applies to a ln growth equation for entry and exit, however the sign predictions are similar
and those are the ones we focus on. In column 4 of Table 4(a) we find that all non-PTA estimates for the income coefficient
are negative and differ across periods. These correspond to Γ̄jp−0 in the entry derivation and thus indicate the presence of
uncertainty shocks. The effect is strongest in the first period and significant for all but the last one. The significant PTA
∆τ
coefficients have the same signs as those in Table 3 (corresponding to Γ̄∆j
p−0 and Γ̄p−0 in p = 1, 2) whereas for p = 3 these
coefficients are insignificant, similarly to Table 3. We continue to find a reversal of the sign of the uncertainty effect of PTAs
relative to the pre-crisis period. The impact of risk on non-PTA declines by the second period, Γ̄j2−0 /Γ̄j1−0 = .55, by a similar
∆j
amount to the PTA differential impact, Γ̄∆j
2−0 /Γ̄1−0 = .52, this is what we expect if the only relevant change for those coefficients
between those periods is due to γ and uncertainty subsides after the first period.
61 After the first period we find negative significant coefficients for non-PTA. This may indicate some additional channel of
m , or simply that X̂ m < 0 for all markets but in riskier ones the extensive
uncertainty on the intensive margin growth rate, X̂iV
t
iV t
share decreased and thus it mechanically increases the intensive one.

38

summarizes these points by comparing the marginal effects before the crisis with their average in the three
remaining periods—analogously to Figure 3(b). The left panel shows the midpoint PTA differential did not
significantly vary with economic risk prior to the crisis (solid line) and nor did any of its margins. The
right panel shows the interaction became positive on average in the remaining periods and that this was due
to the change in the extensive margin response (dashed line). The slope for the continuing firms’ exports
(dash-dot) shows no significant change over time. Moreover, the PTA differential at the mean risk is positive
in both periods but significantly larger during the crisis. In the quantification section we examine how the
midpoint growth results can be aggregated.
4.5.3

Robustness and Alternative Explanations

We perform several robustness checks for the results in Tables 3 and 4. The differential results across export
margins already indicate that our estimates do not simply capture country-time varying factors that affect
both margins similarly. In what follows, we focus the description on net entry but the qualitative conclusions
for the extensive margin of exports are similar.
• Firms and varieties: Certain firms export multiple products to any given destination-industry, iV .
This raises the question if Table 3 simply reflects product churning by firms or entry and exit behavior
from market iV . In Table 5 we find this is not the case by aggregating firm exports to that market
level and re-estimating entry and exit. The sign, magnitude and significance are very similar to Table
3. Thus while the robustness tests below apply to firm-product varieties, we obtain similar results if
we instead use firm-industry dynamics.
• Alternative measure of economic uncertainty: The measure we use for the magnitude of the
potential income shock is motivated by the model. It is highly positively correlated with other measures
of economic uncertainty that have been proposed such as the standard deviation of ln GDP, which we
estimate as part of the AR(1) process. The results in Table 3 are robust to using this alternative
measure (Table 6).
• Changes in trade barriers: We previously discussed there were no substantial changes in tariffs for
most markets in this period. We can test the robustness of the results in Table 3 to certain tariff and
non-tariff barriers as follows.
iV t
as depending on
– The baseline estimation allows for common shocks to tariffs by modelling aaiV
0
τ iV t
τV t
τ iV t
τt
=
.
We
can
also
allow
for
those
shocks
to
be
industry
specific,
=
τ iV 0
τ0
τ iV 0
τ V 0 . Column 2
of Table 7 shows the results are robust to this by controlling for industry-by-quarter-year effects.
Thus the PTA effects are not driven by differential movements in protection (or other factors) in
specific industries that the U.S. may be more likely to export to those markets.

– We can also explicitly control for temporary trade barriers (TTBs) and control for changes over
time. These TTBs are available from the World Bank Global Anti-Dumping Database (Bown,
2016) at the destination-HS6-quarter-year level. Our main purpose is to control for variation over
time in alternative forms of protection and, since these are very diverse, we do so using a coverage
ratio. For each iV t we compute the fraction of its HS6 products covered by any TTB (the results
are similar if we use a trade weighted coverage ratio). We allow for the measure to have different
coefficients in each period. The results shown in Table 7, column 4 are very similar to the baseline.
39

• Industry heterogeneity during the crisis: A potential source of endogeneity is omitted industry
characteristics. If U.S. exports to PTAs are focused on particular industries that had relatively more
net entry over the full sample period then this is fully accounted for by the country-industry effects,
αiV . But if some of those industries behaved differently in the crisis then this can bias the estimates.
In addition to the policy changes discussed above, the results are also robust to controlling for the
following industry characteristics:
– Inventories: As suggested by Alessandria et al. (2010) inventories played a role in explaining the
downturn in the GTC. If certain industries are more likely/able to manage changes in demand
by varying inventories (e.g. if goods are more durable or demand more volatile so they have
previously invested in inventory management) then they may respond differently to the crisis.
For example, firms in inventory-intensive industries may respond rapidly to the downturn by
accumulating inventories and then de-accumulating, thus helping to explain a quick recovery.
We construct measures of inventories in each industry and allow it to have heterogeneous effects
during the crisis. In Table 7, column 3 we find the baseline results are robust to such controls.
Details of inventory measures are in Appendix B.2.
– Durables: Eaton et al. (2016) and Levchenko et al. (2010) provide evidence that trade in
durables was more strongly affected during the GTC. We classify industries with high share of
trade in durables (top tercile) and re-estimate the baseline. In column 5 of Table 7 we control
for differential net entry during the crisis by interacting that durability indicator with the crisis
periods. The baseline is robust to this. In columns 6 and 7 we re-estimate separately for each
sample. The results for either sample are qualitatively similar to the baseline.62 The first crisis
period differential for the PTA is stronger for durables, 7.7 vs. 4.6. But the durable difference is
less pronounced for the extensive margin of exports (7.7 vs. 6.3, tables available on request). So
the results are not driven by differences in durables export composition to PTA markets. Details
of the durables classification are in Appendix B.2.
– Alternative mechanisms and unobserved heterogeneity: One threat to identification could
be that weakening credit conditions in constrained industries are responsible for some of the collapse or that stronger input-output linkages within PTAs promote more stable trade relationships. We already absorb country-industry effects that control for the time invariant component
of these factors. Moreover, while we do not attempt to disentangle this mechanism, deeper trade
integration and input-output linkages that result from PTAs may result from the security and predictability of the PTA rules and trade barriers. Subsequent trade growth and more robust trade
relationships may reinforce policy commitments and reduce policy uncertainty, as we described
in section 2.1.1. Finally, the baseline results are robust to any differential unobserved shocks by
industry in the crisis, as we show in Table 7 column 2 where we include industry-by-quarter-year
effects, αV t .
• Timing: We restrict the coefficients to be identical for all quarter-years until the start of the financial
crisis. We test if the results are robust to this timing assumption by allowing the coefficients to also
differ in 2007Q4-2008Q3. In columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table C4 we obtain similar results for the
period coefficients common to the baseline. There is already a negative impact of risk for non-PTA
62 We

also find a larger increase in the GDP elasticity for durables in first crisis period.

40

entry in 2007Q4-2008Q3, perhaps because it includes the first 10 months of the recession, but no
overall differential for the PTA coefficients. Moreover, any entry effect related to these variables was
negligible for export values where we find no significant difference in the PTA or non-PTA coefficients
in 2007Q4-2008Q3 (columns 3 and 4).

• Relation to news index of TPU: Additional motivation for the regime switching approach to
uncertainty and timing we employ is given in the newspaper-based index of TPU in Figure 11. This is
the trade policy equivalent of the increasingly used Baker et al. (2016) Economic Policy Uncertainty
news index. It is constructed by taking the number of articles in the main U.S. newspapers that contain
the words “trade policy” OR “international trade” and determining which fraction of them also contain
the words “uncertainty” OR “uncertain”. We describe the construction in Appendix C. The series is
normalized to 100 at its own time-series mean. There are three important points related to the timing
in our estimation strategy. First, n the pre-crisis period the index is declining on average and its mean
is 84%, below that of the full sample. Second, there is a clear increase around the months of the crisis
and trade collapse denoted by light red shading. The mean over the crisis months is 127 and we cannot
reject that a structural break occurs in 2008Q4. Third, that large increase is partially reversed and
the index remains below its peak crisis level for most of the remaining two periods in our sample.63
We find this index to be informative and consistent with the interpretation of our findings of increased
uncertainty in the first crisis period followed by a partial reversal.64

4.6

Market Power Estimates

We estimate heterogeneous uncertainty effects across industries and find additional evidence that they are
consistent with the trade policy mechanism. We first test whether the PTA differential is stronger for the
subsample of high import market power industries where we expect a riskier trade policy for non-PTA
countries, even though nearly all are WTO members. Second, we take differences of the PTA differential
across high and low market power industries to quantify the differentials in (24) and find evidence consistent
with a higher probability of non-cooperation in the WTO than in PTAs.
4.6.1

Entry and Exit

In Table 8(a) we estimate net entry as in Table 3 but split the sample into low (left panel) and high market
power (right). We continue to control for country-industry effects and now the quarter-year effects in each
sample control for any heterogeneous growth rates across these two industry groups.
For both samples the signs of the significant uncertainty coefficients match those in the baseline and
Predictions 1-4. Non-PTA destinations had a reduction in entry from uncertainty in both high and low
market power industries (Pred. 1 and 4). The PTA coefficients, Γ̄∆j
1−0 , are positive and significant in the first
period of the crisis, suggesting that policy and income uncertainty were not independent in either sample
63 The uptick in the last few months of 2011 may be partially related to the expiration of punitive tariffs on Chinese tires or
the upcoming passage of PTAs with Korea and Colombia in 2012.
64 We do not use this index in the estimation for three reasons: (1) it only provides aggregate time series variation absorbed by
our time fixed effects; (2) while we could identify interactions it with another country or industry exposure measure interpreting
a U.S.-based news measure as exogenous foreign uncertainty shocks is tenuous, and; (3) our goal is to provide a structural
interpretation of parameters and quantify the effects of economic and policy uncertainty, which we cannot do that with reduced
form, aggregate measures of TPU.

41

(Pred. 2) and increases initially (Pred. 3). Taken together, these results indicate that the pooled PTA
results did not simply reflect an industry specific shock but a broader one, which is consistent with the
changes in gamma we emphasize.
The estimates in Table 8(b) show larger overall PTA differentials for high market power industries. In
the first crisis period the differential is 6.2 lp for high whereas it is only 3.5 for low. This indicates a
higher probability of non-cooperation in WTO members where protection would potentially be higher. Both
indicate an insurance effect dominates in the first period, as we found in the pooled sample (Pred. 5). In
the second period the PTA differential falls substantially for both industry groups (and becomes statistically
insignificant), indicating a partial reversal of the initial uncertainty. The high market power differential is
never fully reversed so the cumulative effect by the end of the third period is 8.1 lp, whereas for low it is -2
lp. Both entry and exit contribute in the first period to the PTA differential in high and exit is stronger.
4.6.2

Exports

In Table 9(a) we re-examine exports as in Table 4(a) but splitting the industries. Predictions 1, 2 and
4 continue to hold for both high and low market power subsamples. There is evidence of an increase in
Γ̄∆j
0
= −0.69, Pred. 3), but not for low. The associated overall PTA
uncertainty in the first period for high ( ∆j
Γ̄p
differentials in Table 9(b) are positive and significant in the first period for high but insignificant for the
low sample. For the subsequent periods the differential for high is negligible and for low it is negative and
statistically insignificant.
4.6.3

Evidence of Country, Industry, and Firm Heterogeneity

By contrasting the PTA differential magnitudes across market power samples and firm types we find additional evidence for the interaction mechanism and for robustness to potential omitted factors. The left panel
in Figure 12 shows the export midpoint growth differentials for each MP sample and period from Table 9(b).
For the first period it is 8.1 and significant for high and -1 for low; their difference has two implications. First,
the overall export PTA differential is driven by high potential tariff industries thus supporting the model
mechanism. Second, this difference of 9 percent between high and low removes country-by-time impacts
common across industries indicating the robustness of the baseline estimates to that source of unobserved
heterogeneity.
These patterns in total exports are driven by variety entry and exit as predicted by the model. This is
clearly shown by the decomposition in Figure 12: the total export coefficients (left panel) follow the pattern
of those for the extensive margin (right panel). The middle panel shows small PTA differentials for the
continuing firms for both high and low MP industries, which is consistent with the small continuing variety
effects in the baseline. The difference between high and low market power extensive margin coefficients
in the first period is 7.7; it is quantitatively close to the baseline overall estimate of 6.6, which indicates
that the latter are robust to differencing out country-by-time impacts even if specific to firm export entry
decisions. There are two other important points about this high-low differential in the extensive margin.
First, it remains positive (albeit smaller) and so the cumulative effect is also robust.65 Second, the positive
differential is consistent with the model prediction in (24) that, in industries with riskier trade policies, there
is a higher probability of non-cooperation for non-PTAs than PTAs.
65 We

return to these differentials and quantify their cumulative effect on export growth in section 4.7.

42

Thus the baseline aggregate PTA export differential is driven by variety entry and exit—consistent with
the option value mechanism—and mostly in high MP industries, consistent with the TPU-income source of
uncertainty. The results indicate the U.S. exporters expected a higher probability of a trade war in high MP
industries in non-PTAs than PTAs.

4.7

Quantification and Aggregation

To quantify the role of uncertainty we calculate the counterfactual growth for non-PTA destinations if they
had been treated as PTAs relative to a no-crisis scenario. We also examine how much the partial uncertainty
reversal contributed to the recovery. We examine average effects for net entry and exports and then aggregate
these effects and provide the permanent income equivalent of this PTA treatment.
4.7.1

Average Effects

Baseline
To simplify notation we denote the average over all quarters in a given period p by ∆4 ln NiV p . From (37) we
see that under a counterfactual where the average non-PTA country is treated as a PTA but keeps constant
all the variables, denoted zi , (risk, the original income and constant growth trend) then the differential effect
∆j
is captured by Γ̄∆τ
p and Γ̄p . We rewrite this differential to isolate the counterfactual growth rate of interest
on the LHS as follows:
$
#
$ #
$
#
∆j
E ∆4 ln NiV p |Wi = 1, zi = E ∆4 ln NiV p | Wi = 0, zi + Γ̄∆τ
p + Γ̄p · E (riskYi |Wi = 0)

∀p

(41)

We assume a no-crisis counterfactual where the average growth equals its pre-crisis average. To obtain the
average effects relative to this counterfactual we use (41) for any p > 0 and subtract its value when p = 0.
We denote this difference by a p − 0 subscript so ∆4 ln NiV p−0 ≡ ∆4 ln NiV p − ∆4 ln NiV 0 and obtain:
E

#!

"
$
#!
"
$
∆4 ln NiV p−0 | Wi = 1, zi = E ∆4 ln NiV p−0 | Wi = 0, zi
è
é
∆j
+ Γ̄∆τ
p−0 + Γ̄p−0 · E (riskYi | Wi = 0)

∀p.

(42)

This counterfactual eliminates any permanent PTA differentials unrelated to the crisis and non-PTA growth
trends. Moreover, it has a simple interpretation as a log difference of levels. To see this take the first
term on the RHS and note that by definition ln NiV t = ln NiV t−4 + ∆4 ln NiV t ; and in any t ∈ p = 1 the
′
counterfactual where the growth was at pre-crisis average would be ln NiV
t = ln NiV t−4 + ∆4 ln NiV 0 , so
′
their difference is ln NiV t /NiV t = ∆4 ln NiV t − ∆4 ln NiV 0 and we can then take expectations. We compute
this relative number for p = 2, 3 by simply adding growth rates to cumulate them. The left-hand side has a
similar interpretation but reflects the PTA treatment in the crisis (net of the pre-crisis effect).

The solid line in Figure 13(a) represents the first term on the RHS of (42). For p = 1 net entry was 15
lp below the no-crisis counterfactual. The dashed line adds the term in the second line of (42) and it offsets
13 lp, or most of the observed decline.66 The cumulative effect in the remaining periods remains flat as the
growth returns to the pre-crisis level. By the final period a non-PTA would have had almost no average net
entry decline if it had been treated as a PTA.
66 This

corresponds to the differential for Table 3(b) in the estimation section evaluated at the non-PTA mean risk.

43

We do similar exercises using exports. In Figure 14(a) we plot the average, observed cumulative growth
across margins (solid line). The extensive margin growth has an average reduction of almost 20 points in
p = 1 for the non-PTA countries relative to a no-crisis counterfactual; this effect then tapers off. The PTA
treatment on the extensive margin uses coefficients from Table 4, column 4 and offsets 13 points of that
decline in p = 1 and an additional 2 points in period p = 2. The interaction of policy and income effects
explain a considerable portion of the average extensive margin growth, which helps explain the reduction in
exports that persisted into 2011. The PTA differential is small and insignificant for continuing firms (middle
panel). The overall average effect is simply the sum of the respective data and differential effects in the last
two figures.
Market Power
To highlight differences across industries and export margins by market power, we compute the PTA treatment exercise for high vs. low market power in Figure 14(b). The mechanics of this exercise are the same
as Figure 14(a) described above, but we use the coefficients from Table 9(a) to break out the counterfactual
effects by industry group. In section 4.6 we estimated a larger PTA differential in industries where market
power is high. This counterfactual shows the effect across export growth margins and industries for non-PTA
countries.
We plot the overall effect (short dash) for reference and focus on the difference between high and low.
First, the high market power industry PTA treatment (dot-dash) is above the total overall effect and the low
market power differential (long dashed) is below it. This suggests most of the overall total effect of PTAs is
driven by high market power industries. Second, the difference between high and low, reflected in the shaded
region, is positive and driven by the extensive margin (right panel). This difference of differentials is persistent
for overall exports and the extensive margin, but not the intensive margin. So the counterfactual PTA
treatment is not arising from unobserved country-time shocks to industries or countries. The heterogeneity
we find is robust across these dimensions and consistent with the predictions of the model.
4.7.2

Aggregate Effects

We compute the aggregate impacts implied by the average export effects; addressing the possibility that
riskier destinations may also have lower initial exports. Recall the growth formula in (40) shows that in a
!
" IN T
EXT
X̂iV t where sEXT
represents
+ 1 − sEXT
given industry-destination-time we have X̂iV t = sEXT
iV t
iV t
iV t X̂iV t
the midpoint share for the extensive margin in that iV t flow. We can use the same property to aggregate
further to any particular group of countries I, e.g. non-PTA:
X̂I,t ≡

è
Ø
!
" IN T é
XI,t − XI,t−4
EXT
EXT
=
siV t sEXT
X̂iV t
iV t X̂iV t + 1 − siV t
[XI,t + XI,t−4 ]/2
i∈I,V

where siV t is now the share of country i in all exports of V t to group I: siV t = q

XiV t +XiV t−4
.
[XiV t +XiV t−4 ]

We

i∈I,V

plot this growth rate decomposition by PTA status in Figure 7 of section 2. We define the mean over the
quarters in period p by X̂I,p and its deviation from the pre-crisis average by X̂I,p−0 . To obtain the aggregate
version of the PTA treatment effect described by (42) we use X̂I,p−0 as the first term and replace the second
q
one with its export weighted average. Since i∈I,V siV t = 1 this amounts to multiplying the interaction
q
coefficient, Γ̄∆j
p−0 , by
i∈I,V (siV t riskYi |Wi = 0) instead of using its simple average. To focus on the effects
44

due to changes in coefficients we use a constant share, siV , the average over the sample for each country and
find the resulting weighted risk is 0.22. This is lower than the sample mean risk for non-PTA, which reflects
the lower levels of exports to riskier countries.
The continuous line in Figure 15(a) represents X̂I,p−0 and shows a 32 point decline for p = 1 in aggregate
exports to non-PTA countries relative to a counterfactual with pre-crisis growth. The long dashed line adds
the aggregated PTA treatment using the extensive margin coefficients in Table 4 (column 4). This offsets
8 points of the aggregate decline to non-PTA in p = 1. By 2011 a small part of the decline in X̂I,p−0 had
been reversed, but it was still over 24 points below a no-crisis counterfactual. The PTA treatment became
smaller but was not reversed so the cumulative effect was still considerable, over 6 points. The dashed red
line also adds the small (and insignificant) intensive margin effect, so the overall PTA treatment differential
is due to the extensive margin, as highlighted by the model’s mechanism.
4.7.3

Partial uncertainty reversal contribution to recovery

To determine if there was a partial reversal of the initial uncertainty shock and how much it contributed to
the recovery we employ the following counterfactual. What would exports have been relative to no-crisis if
the uncertainty parameters remained at their initial crisis level? For the number of firms this translates to
E

è!

é
"
#!
"
$
∆4 ln NiV p−0 | Γ̄jp−0 = Γ̄j1−0 , zi = E ∆4 ln NiV p−0 | Wi = 0, zi
1
2
+ Γ̄j1−0 − Γ̄jp−0 · E (riskYi | Wi = 0) .

(43)

This counterfactual is represented by the dotted line in Figure 13(b). For the first year (p = 1 corresponding
to Q408) this simply reflects the data since by construction the second term is zero. But in the remaining
periods Γ̄j1−0 < Γ̄jp−0 (from Table 3 column 1) so if the initial uncertainty had remained then net entry
would have been an additional 6.6 lp below the no-crisis scenario in the final period. We consider this the
contribution of the partial reversal of uncertainty to average net entry recovery.
In Figure 15(b) we include a similar counterfactual for aggregate exports using the extensive margin
(coefficients in Table 4(a) column 4). The dotted line shows there would be no recovery relative to the nocrisis counterfactual. The difference between the continuous and dotted lines represents the contribution of
the partial reversal of uncertainty to aggregate exports to non-PTAs, which is 8.8 points by the last period.
In sum, if uncertainty had remained at initial levels then exports to non-PTAs would have been reduced
by over 33 points. The partial reversal that occurred implied that reduction was only about 25.
4.7.4

Income equivalents of PTA treatment

Using the baseline estimates we quantify the aggregate income change required in non-PTA destinations to
match the PTA differential treatment in Table 10. We do so by equating the predicted differentials in (38)
CF
to the estimated income coefficient times a counterfactual average income change ∆\
ln Yp for each period:
Γyp · ∆\
ln Yp

CF

1
2
∆j
=Ei Γ̄∆τ
p−0 + Γ̄p−0 · riskYi ,

(44)

where we use the trade weighted mean risk Yi = 0.22. For example, the net entry differential using midpoint
CF
growth in period 1 is 6.4. We divide this by Γy1 = 0.429 to obtain ∆\
ln Y1 = 15 lp — the required income
45

change in period 1 that is equivalent to the differential.
We focus on the dynamics of aggregate exports discussed in Figure 15 where we plot the counterfactual
non-PTA export growth under a PTA. In Figure 15(a), the initial differential impact in the period 1 of the
crisis is 10 points. In the absence of the PTA treatment, foreign income would have to grow by 11 lp. The
required income growth for the extensive margin component is 15 lp, the same equivalent found for net
entry. These initial period effects are large, but they are offset in periods 2 and 3 when the uncertainty
effect on exports is partially reversed and the income coefficients Γyp attenuate somewhat. Cumulating these
we obtain the total income equivalent to the PTA treatment differentials over those 3 years: 5.6 lp for total
export growth and 8.6 lp for the extensive margin.
In sum, the combined effect on U.S. exports of economic and trade policy uncertainty via the extensive
margin was equivalent to a reduction in non-PTA income of 15 lp in the first crisis year and a 3-year equivalent
of 8.6 lp by the end of 2011. These are larger than the actual foreign income changes in these periods.

5

Conclusion

We examine the interaction of economic and policy sources of demand uncertainty, their impact on firm
export dynamics and the role of trade agreements in mitigating them. We develop a model and derive the
conditions for when the interaction of risks can amplify the response of firms and trade flows to higher
demand volatility and how PTAs can mitigate it.
We provide a novel set of stylized facts for U.S. export dynamics that contributes to understanding the
GTC and recovery. We use the theoretical model to guide the estimation and construction of measures that
capture economic and policy risk and their interaction. There is net exit of varieties and lower exports by
U.S. firms during the GTC caused by higher uncertainty, particularly in riskier markets, i.e. non-PTA export
destinations, industries with potentially higher protectionism in a trade war, or both. These effects peaked
in the first year of the crisis and were only partially reversed in the following two years. The cumulative
effect is significant even three years after the start of the crisis. By 2011Q4 average net exit for non-PTA
destinations was 15 lp below the no-crisis path. Most of this effect would be eliminated if those countries
had a PTA. Applying this counterfactual to average exports we find similar results for the extensive margin.
This implies that aggregate U.S. exports to non-PTA destinations would have been 6.5% higher under a
PTA—equivalent to an 8% GDP increase in those destinations.
These findings highlight the insurance value of PTAs during economic crisis—a benefit that can’t ignored
in the evaluation of whether to exit (or enter) these agreements.67

67 Future research should examine additional agreements and mechanisms such as whether PTAs deepen input-output linkages
and reduce the risk of protectionism further as in Blanchard et al. (2016).

46

References
Alessandria, George, Joseph Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2010. “The Great Trade Collapse of 2008–09:
An Inventory Adjustment?” IMF Economic Review 58 (2):254–294.
Amador, Manuel and Kyle Bagwell. 2013. “The Theory of Optimal Delegation With an Application to Tariff
Caps.” Econometrica 81 (4):1541–1599.
Amiti, Mary and David E. Weinstein. 2011. “Exports and Financial Shocks.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 126 (4):1841–1877.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W Staiger. 1990. “A Theory of Managed Trade.” American Economic Review
80 (4):779–795.
———. 1999. “An Economic Theory of GATT.” American Economic Review 89 (1):215–248.
———. 2003. “Protection and the Business Cycle.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy
3 (1):1–45.
———. 2011. “What Do Trade Negotiators Negotiate About? Empirical Evidence from the World Trade
Organization.” American Economic Review 101 (4):1238–1273.
Baier, Scott L. and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2007. “Do free trade agreements actually increase members’
international trade?” Journal of International Economics 71 (1):72–95.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4):1593–1636.
Barattieri, Alessandro, Matteo Cacciatore, and Fabio Ghironi. 2017. “Protectionsim and the Business Cycle.”
Working paper, University of Washington.
Behrens, Kristian, Gregory Corcos, and Giordano Mion. 2013. “Trade Crisis? What Trade Crisis?” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2):702–709.
Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2011. “Vertical linkages and the collapse of global trade.”
The American Economic Review 101 (3):308–312.
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 98 (1):85–106.
Beshkar, Mostafa, Eric W. Bond, and Youngwoo Rho. 2015. “Tariff binding and overhang: Theory and
evidence.” Journal of International Economics 97 (1):1–13.
Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz. 2012. “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety, and
Business Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy 120 (2):304–345.
Blanchard, Emily J., Chad P. Bown, and Robert C. Johnson. 2016. “Global Supply Chains and Trade
Policy.” NBER Working Papers 21883, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bloom, Nicholas. 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.” Econometrica 77 (3):623–685.
———. 2014. “Fluctuations in Uncertainty.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (2):153–176.
Bloom, Nick, Stephen Bond, and John Van Reenen. 2007. “Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics.” Review
of Economic Studies 74 (2):391–415.
Bown, Chad P. 2016.
“Global Antidumping Database.”
http://econ.worldbank.org/ttbd/gad/.

Tech. rep., The World Bank.

URL

Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2013a. “Import protection, business cycles, and exchange rates:
Evidence from the Great Recession.” Journal of International Economics 90 (1):50–64.
47

———. 2013b. “Self-Enforcing Trade Agreements: Evidence from Time-Varying Trade Policy.” American
Economic Review 103 (2):1071–1090.
Bricongne, Jean-Charles, Lionel Fontagne, Guillaume Gaulier, Daria Taglioni, and Vincent Vicard. 2012.
“Firms and the global crisis: French exports in the turmoil.” Journal of International Economics
87 (1):134–146.
Broda, Christian, Nuno Limão, and David E. Weinstein. 2008. “Optimal Tariffs and Market Power: The
Evidence.” American Economic Review 98 (5):2032–65.
Carballo, Jeronimo. 2015. “Global Sourcing Under Uncertainty.” Essays in Trade and Uncertainty, PhD
diss. University of Maryland .
Chor, Davin and Kalina Manova. 2012. “Off the cliff and back? Credit conditions and international trade
during the global financial crisis.” Journal of International Economics 87 (1):117–133.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko. 2012. “Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate
Fluctuations in Granular Economies.” Journal of Political Economy 120 (6):1083–1132.
Dixit, Avinash. 1989. “Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty.” Journal of political Economy 97 (3):620–
638.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. 2016. “Trade and the Global Recession.”
American Economic Review 106 (11):3401–3438.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas A. Irwin. 2010. “The Slide to Protectionism in the Great Depression: Who
Succumbed and Why?” The Journal of Economic History 70 (04):871–897.
Eichengreen, Barry J. 1981. “A dynamic model of tariffs, output and employment under flexible exchange
rates.” Journal of International Economics 11 (3):341–359.
Engel, Charles and Jian Wang. 2011. “International trade in durable goods: Understanding volatility,
cyclicality, and elasticities.” Journal of International Economics 83 (1):37 – 52.
Eppinger, Peter S., Nicole Meythaler, Marc-Manuel Sindlinger, and Marcel Smolka. 2017. “The great trade
collapse and the Spanish export miracle: Firm-level evidence from the crisis.” The World Economy .
Farhi, Emmanuel, Gita Gopinath, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2014. “Fiscal Devaluations.” Review of Economic
Studies 81 (2):725–760.
Fillat, José L. and Stefania Garetto. 2015. “Risk, Returns, and Multinational Production.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 130 (4):2027–2073.
Foletti, Liliana, Marco Fugazza, Alessandro Nicita, and Marcelo Olarreaga. 2011. “Smoke in the (tariff)
water.” The World Economy 34 (2):248–264.
Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz. 2005. “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3):865–915.
Handley, Kyle. 2014. “Exporting under trade policy uncertainty: Theory and evidence.” Journal of International Economics 94 (1):50–66.
Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limão. 2015. “Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Firm
Evidence.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (4).
———. 2017a. “Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for China and the United
States.” American Economic Review 107 (9):2731–83.
———. 2017b. “Trade under T.R.U.M.P. policies.” In Economics and policy in the Age of Trump, edited by
Chad P. Bown, chap. 13. London,U.K.: CEPR, 141–152.

48

Hoekman, Bernard M. and Michel M. Kostecki. 2009. The Political Economy of the World Trading System.
No. 9780199553778 in OUP Catalogue. Oxford University Press.
Kee, Hiau Looi, Cristina Neagu, and Alessandro Nicita. 2013. “Is protectionism on the rise? Assessing
national trade policies during the crisis of 2008.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (1):342–346.
Kehoe, Timothy J. and Kim J. Ruhl. 2013. “How Important Is the New Goods Margin in International
Trade?” Journal of Political Economy 121 (2):358–392.
Levchenko, Andrei A, Logan T Lewis, and Linda L Tesar. 2010. “The collapse of international trade during
the 2008–09 crisis: in search of the smoking gun.” IMF Economic review 58 (2):214–253.
Levy, Haim. 1973. “Stochastic Dominance Among Log-Normal Prospects.” International Economic Review
14 (3):601–14.
Limão, Nuno. 2016. “Preferential Trade Agreements.” In Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol. 1B, edited
by Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger. North-Holland, 279 – 367.
Limão, Nuno and Giovanni Maggi. 2015. “Uncertainty and Trade Agreements.” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics 7 (4):1–42.
Ludema, Rodney D. and Anna Maria Mayda. 2013. “Do terms-of-trade effects matter for trade agreements?
Theory and evidence from WTO Countries.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (4):1837–1893.
Madsen, Jakob B. 2001. “Trade barriers and the collapse of world trade during the Great Depression.”
Southern Economic Journal :848–868.
Martins, Joaquim Oliveira and Sónia Araújo. 2009. “The Great Synchronisation: Tracking the Trade Collapse
with High-frequency Data.” In The Great Trade Collapse: Causes, Consequences and Prospects, edited by
R.E. Baldwin. CEPR, 101.
Nicita, Alejandro, Marcelo Olarreaga, and Peri Silva. forth. “Cooperation in WTO’s Tariff Waters.” Journal
of Political Economy .
Novy, Denis and Alan M. Taylor. 2014. “Trade and Uncertainty.” NBER Working Papers 19941, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Ossa, Ralph. 2014. “Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data.” American Economic Review 104 (12):4104–
4146.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi. 2013. “Political uncertainty and risk premia.” Journal of Financial
Economics 110 (3):520–545.
Perroni, Carlo and John Whalley. 2000. “The new regionalism: trade liberalization or insurance?” Canadian
Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d’économique 33 (1):1–24.
Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2009. “A Concordance Between Ten-Digit U.S. Harmonized System
Codes and SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries.” Working Paper 15548, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Roberts, Mark J and James R Tybout. 1997. “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical Model of
Entry with Sunk Costs.” American Economic Review 87 (4):545–64.
Rodrik, Dani. 1991. “Policy uncertainty and private investment in developing countries.” Journal of Development Economics 36 (2):229–242.
World Bank. 2004. “World Development Report 2005 : A Better Investment Climate for Everyone.” Work
Bank .

49

Figures

0

20

40

60

80

100

Figure 1: Export Growth to PTA and non-PTA destinations, 2002-2011

2003q4

2004q4

2005q4

2006q4

2007q4

Non-PTA

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

PTA

Local polynomials of real bilateral quarterly export growth relative to 2002 (US GDP deflator)

Notes: Cumulative log growth relative to same quarter in 2002. PTA and non-PTA
subsample correspond to list in Table A2. Source: Constructed from Census Foreign
Trade Data as described in the Data Appendix.

50

Figure 2: Evolution of U.S. PTA export shares, 2003-2011

.37

.39

.41

.43

.45

(a) Share toward PTA countries

2003q4

2004q4

2005q4

2006q4

2007q4

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

.45
.43
.41
.39
.37

.35

.37

.39

.41

.43

(b) Shares for high vs. low market power industries

2003q4

2004q4

2005q4

2006q4

2007q4

High Market Power (left)

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

Low Market Power (right)

Notes: PTA group includes Australia, Chile, Guatemala, Israel, Morocco, and NAFTA.
The group held fixed for entire sample so share changes not induced by timing of
implementation. Other PTA countries excluded from denominator in the share
calculation. See Table A2 for list of countries. Source: Constructed from Census
Foreign Trade Data accessed via the USITC Dataweb.

51

Figure 3: Interaction of Economic Uncertainty and Trade Policy and U.S. Aggregate Export
Dynamics

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

(a) Export Growth Residuals by PTA status: 2002-2011

2003q4

2004q4

2005q4

2006q4

2007q4

non-PTA:

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

PTA:

Baseline Controls
+Risk Interactions

Baseline Controls
+ Risk Interactions

(b) PTA Export Growth Differential vs. GDP risk: Pre
and post-crisis

0

25

50

75

Crisis (2008q4-2011q4)

-25

Marginal Effect on U.S. Export Growth (100×ln)

Pre-Crisis (2002q1-2008q3)

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

St. Dev. Change in GDP (100×∆ ln)

Notes: (a) local polynomial mean plotted through residuals from regressions in columns
2 and 6 of Appendix Table C1. (b) marginal effects of PTA membership on export
growth relative the income risk during the pre-crisis period (left) and crisis period
(right). For both (a) and (b), PTA and non-PTA subsamples correspond to list in Table
A2. Source: Constructed from Census Foreign Trade Data and IMF International
Financial Statistics data as described in Appendix C.

52

Firms
Firm-Destination
Firm-Dest-Prod

.9

.95

1

1.05

1.1

Figure 4: U.S. Firm and Variety Dynamics 2006-2011Q3

2007q4

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

Notes: Constructed from Census LFTTD by quarter for the universe of all trade
transactions matched to firms. Products are defined at HS-10 digit level, concorded for
time consistency.

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Figure 5: Annual Export Growth Decomposition 2006-2011Q3

2007q4

2008q4

2009q4

Intensive Margin

2010q4

2011q4

Extensive Margin

Notes: Constructed from Census LFTTD by quarter using regression sample data.
Intensive and Extensive components sum to total export growth. Extensive margin
computed over firm-country-product varieties.

53

Figure 6: Cumulative Decompositions by Export Margin, 2008Q4-2011Q3

-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

(a) Aggregate variety net entry growth

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

Net Entry
Exit

2011q4

Entry

0

5

(b) Aggregate export growth

-5

Entry Margin
-45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10

Exit Margin

Intensive Margin

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

Notes: Constructed from Census LFTTD by quarter using regression sample data.
Varieties defined by a firm-country-product triplet. (a) Entry and Exit components sum
to net entry growth of varieties. Pre-trend computed from 2003Q1-2008Q3. Exit
contribution in 2011 is positive relative to trend. (b) Entry and exit margins some to
export growth contribution to extensive margin computed over firm-country-product
varieties. Entry, exit and intensive margin component sum to aggregate export growth.

54

Figure 7: Export growth decomposition for non-PTA (left) vs. PTA (right)
(a) Annual export growth decomposition, 2006-2011Q3
PTA

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

non-PTA

2007q4

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

Intensive Margin

2007q4

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

Extensive Margin

(b) Cumulative export growth decomposition, 2008Q4-2011Q3.

PTA

-45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5

0

5

non-PTA

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

Exports (Int.+Ext.)

2008q4

Intensive

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

Extensive

Notes: Constructed from Census LFTTD by quarter using regression sample data.
Intensive and Extensive components sum to total export growth. Extensive margin
computed over firm-country-product that enter or exit relative to same quarter in
previous year. (a) Pre-crisis mean computed from 2003 to 2008Q3 by PTA and
non-PTA groups.(b) Pre-trend computed from 2003Q1-2008Q3 by PTA and non-PTA
groups.

55

Figure 8: Increasing Risk in Business Conditions and Entry Cutoff
(a) Increasing Risk in Business Conditions, M (ms , a)


Low Risk (black) -

M (a)

KAA
A

AHigh Risk (red)








Mixed Distribution (dashed)







Economic Conditions (a)
(b) Entry reduction from volatility (∆γ = 1) and current
conditions, at , under low vs. high risks

Economic Conditions (at )








 Low Risk (black)

100 × ln U

-10

-20



High Risk (red)

-30

Notes: Low risk Hs (black, ms = 1) and high risk Hs′ (red, ms = 0) distributions of
economic conditions where Hs SSD Hs′ . Intermediate mixed distribution ms = 0.5. All
distributions normalized so that E(a) = 1 and increases in risk are a mean preserving
spread. Panel (b) shows the change in log points for the entry cutoff in terms of the
affect on the uncertainty factor ln U . See main text for equations and details.

56

Figure 9: Uncertainty Shocks and Adjustment of Varieties in High vs. Low Risk Markets.
(a) Unanticipated uncertainty (γ) shock paths
1.0

AK
A
0.8


γ t Remains High 

A
A
A γ t jumps then falls

γ t 0.6

C
C

0.4

C

C
C
CW

0.2

0.0
0

1

2

3

Period
(b) Cumulative Variety growth, ln(Nt /N0 ), in High vs. Low
Risk markets

Period
0

1

2

3

100 × ln(Nt /N0 )

Low Risk Path

-10

High Risk Path

-20

High if γ t not reduced→
-30
Notes: (a) The solid line with blue circles depicts a 4 quarter increase in uncertainty γ
that is reduced in subsequent quarters but does not return to zero. The dashed line is
the time path if γ remained high. (b) High income risk time path denoted in solid black
and low income risk with green. Circles indicate each quarterly time point. The average
for each period is given by red squares (high risk) and red diamonds (low risk). The
gray dashed time path for high risk models when γ remains high after the first period.
See main text for equations and details.

57

Figure 10: PTA Export Growth Differential vs. Income Uncertainty — Pre and post-crisis
decomposition
Crisis (2008q4-2011q4)

-5

0

5

10

15

20

25

Pre-Crisis(2002q1-2008q3)

11

16

21

26

31 11

16

21

26

31

100×Income Uncertainty
Exports (Int.+Ext.)

Extensive Margin

Intensive Margin

Notes: Computed using coefficients in Table 4, columns 2-4. Income uncertainty
measure centered on the PTA mean ± one standard deviation.

0

50

100

150

200

250

Figure 11: News-based index of Trade Policy Uncertainty

2003q4

2004q4

2005q4

Monthly Index

2006q4

2007q4

2008q4

Mean(Pre-Crisis)

2009q4

2010q4

2011q4

Mean(Crisis)

Notes: Index of newspaper mentions of words “uncertainty” OR “uncertain” is the set
of articles about international trade or trade policy. Light red shading indicates the first
quarter of the financial crisis. Blue line is a lowess smoothed average over monthly data.
Series is normalized to 100 at mean over the entire period. Pre-crisis mean (dashed line)
is 84. Post-crisis mean (dash-dot line) is 127. Construction methodology follows Baker,
Bloom and Davis (2016) and is described in the Appendix.

58

Figure 12: PTA Export Growth Differential Heterogeneity Across Industries and Firms

10

Extensive

10

Intensive

10

Total

High

5

5

5

High

Low

High

Low

High

0

High

Low

0

0

High

High

Low

High
Low

High
Low
Low

2008q4-2009q3

2009q4-2010q3

2010q4-2011q3

-5

Low

-5

-5

Low

2008q4-2009q3

2009q4-2010q3

2010q4-2011q3

2008q4-2009q3

2009q4-2010q3

2010q4-2011q3

Notes: Point estimates and ones standard error bar from high and low market power industry PTA differentials
computed in Table 9(b).

Figure 13: Counterfactual non-PTA Average Variety Growth (100 × ln)
(b) No recovery of uncertainty after
2008Q4
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20

-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

(a) Treat non-PTA as if PTA

2003q1-2008q3

2008q4-2009q3

data(mean)

2009q4-2010q3

2010q4-2011q3

2003q1-2008q3

PTA treatment

2008q4-2009q3

No Unc.

2009q4-2010q3

2010q4-2011q3

Fix Unc. at 2008Q4-2009Q3 Effect

Notes: Computed at the mean of the non-PTA uncertainty measure of 0.26 using coefficients in Table 3. (a) See text
for expressions for PTA treatment. (b) Fixed uncertainty counterfactual (dotted lines) computed by replacing
estimated income uncertainty effects in 2009Q4-2011Q3 by estimated effect in 2008Q4-2009Q3 as if there was no
reduction.

59

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25

-30

-35

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25

-30

2003q1-2008q3

2003q1-2008q3

2008q4-2009q3

2009q4-2010q3

Data(mean)

2010q4-2011q3

2003q1-2008q3

Data(mean)

2008q4-2009q3

2010q4-2011q3

PTA treatment

2009q4-2010q3

Intensive Margin

2003q1-2008q3

2003q1-2008q3

PTA treatment

2010q4-2011q3

2009q4-2010q3

PTA treatment Low MP

2008q4-2009q3

Intensive Margin

2003q1-2008q3

PTA treatment High MP

2010q4-2011q3

(b) Cumulative Effects by Margin for High and Low Market Power

2009q4-2010q3

Exports (Int.+Ext.)

2008q4-2009q3

Exports (Int.+Ext.)

(a) Cumulative Effects by Margin

2009q4-2010q3

2009q4-2010q3

High-Low Diff.

2008q4-2009q3

Extensive Margin

2008q4-2009q3

Extensive Margin

Figure 14: Counterfactual non-PTA Average Export Growth if Treated as PTA

2010q4-2011q3

2010q4-2011q3

Notes: All effects computed at the mean of the non-PTA uncertainty measure of 0.26. See text for expressions used to compute counterfactual differences. Panel
(a) uses coefficients in Table 4(a). See text for expressions. See text for expressions for PTA treatment. Panel (b) uses coefficients from the high and low market
power industry samples in Tables 8(a) and 9(a).

-35

60

Figure 15: Counterfactual non-PTA Aggregate Export Growth

0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35

-35

-30

-25

-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

(b) No recovery of unc. after 2008Q4 —
Extensive Margin Component

5

(a) Treat non-PTA as if PTA

2003q1-2008q3

data(mean)

2008q4-2009q3

2009q4-2010q3

PTA treatment (Int.+Ext.)

2010q4-2011q3

2003q1-2008q3

PTA treatment (Ext.)

2008q4-2009q3

data (mean)

2009q4-2010q3

2010q4-2011q3

Fix Unc. at 2008Q4-2009Q3 Effect

Notes: Computed at the weighted aggregate mean of the non-PTA uncertainty measure of 0.22 using coefficients in
Table 4. (a) See text for expressions for PTA treatment. (b) Fixed uncertainty counterfactual (dotted lines)
computed by replacing estimated income uncertainty effects in 2009Q4-2011Q3 by estimated effect in
2008Q4-2009Q3 as if there was no reduction. We graph the extensive margin component of total exports.

61

Tables
Table 1: Aggregate Export Growth and Variety Extensive Margin Contribution-- Yearly Averages
Aggregate Export Extensive Margin
Extensive Margin Growth Share
Period
Mean
Min.
Max.
Growth
Growth
2003q1-2008q3

9.6

3.6

0.36

0.17

0.58

2008q4-2009q3

-22.4

-6.3

0.25

0.14

0.33

2009q4-2010q3

13.4

3.3

0.24

0.21

0.29

2010q4-2011q3

16.5

5.9

0.36

0.34

0.38

Notes: Computed over the regression sample. Aggregate mid point growth means and extensive margin contribution
by period. Mid point growth measure described in text where variety is defined at the firm-country-hs10 product

Table 2: Summary Statistics for country-quarter-HS2 industry regressions (2003-2011)
PTA
Non-PTA
Full Sample
Uncertainty
0.258
0.210
0.252
[0.100]
[0.0499]
[0.0970]
Market Power2
0.69
0.66
0.69
[0.473]
[0.463]
[0.462]
Growth in Variety Net entry3
0.0479
0.052
0.0484
[0.426]
[0.310]
[0.414]
Entry Contribution
0.702
0.66
0.697
[0.298]
[0.231]
[0.291]
Exit Contribution
-0.654
-0.608
-0.649
[0.291]
[0.219]
[0.284]
0.0448
0.0471
0.045
Growth in Firms Net entry3
[0.410]
[0.301]
[0.399]
Firm Entry Contribution
0.632
0.58
0.626
[0.302]
[0.234]
[0.295]
Firm Exit Contribution
-0.587
-0.533
-0.581
[0.294]
[0.223]
[0.287]
Growth in Exports (ln)
0.0945
0.105
0.0958
[1.061]
[0.760]
[1.029]
Growth in Exports (midpoint)
0.0804
0.0943
0.0821
[0.762]
[0.572]
[0.742]
Extensive Margin Variety Contribution
0.0486
0.0518
0.049
[0.687]
[0.506]
[0.668]
Intensive Margin Contribution
0.0319
0.0425
0.0331
[0.318]
[0.253]
[0.311]
PTA
0
1
0.119
NA
NA
[0.323]
Growth in GDP (ln)
0.106
0.097
0.105
[0.141]
[0.124]
[0.139]
Observations (rounded)
140,000
20,000
160,000
Notes: Sample means and standard deviations (in brackets). (1) Uncertainty estimates from AR(1) countryspecific regressions. See details in main text. (2) Market power constructed from Broda, Limão and
Weinstein (2008). (3) Quarterly year-to-year midpoint growth rate where "Growth" denotes the overall
growth rate in a country-HS2-quarter cell, "Entry" correspond to the new firms or varieties (firm*product)
flows while "Exit" corresponds to those that disapear.
1

62

Table 3(a): U.S. Export Varieties Entry and Exit (2003-2011)
Net entry
Decomposition into:
ǻln
midpoint growth
Entry
Exit
Non-PTA
Uncertainty*Q408
Uncertainty*Q409
Uncertainty*Q410

-0.314***
[0.0704]
-0.143***
[0.0546]
-0.231***
[0.0506]

-0.276***
[0.0648]
-0.129**
[0.0504]
-0.215***
[0.0465]

-0.164***
[0.0353]
-0.0714**
[0.0317]
-0.129***
[0.0315]

-0.113***
[0.0380]
-0.0579**
[0.0264]
-0.0857***
[0.0263]

1.499***
[0.276]
-0.261***
[0.0587]
0.478*
[0.251]
-0.105*
[0.0566]
-0.0977
[0.173]
0.0201
[0.0396]
-0.383*
[0.203]
0.107**
[0.0468]

1.379***
[0.264]
-0.239***
[0.0563]
0.453*
[0.237]
-0.0998*
[0.0535]
-0.0972
[0.164]
0.0202
[0.0379]
-0.365*
[0.191]
0.101**
[0.0439]

0.723***
[0.158]
-0.142***
[0.0341]
0.445***
[0.131]
-0.108***
[0.0282]
0.0527
[0.105]
-0.0261
[0.0241]
-0.134
[0.120]
0.0549**
[0.0268]

0.656***
[0.145]
-0.0970***
[0.0320]
0.00780
[0.131]
0.00846
[0.0310]
-0.150
[0.0949]
0.0464**
[0.0217]
-0.231**
[0.111]
0.0460*
[0.0252]

0.219***
[0.0306]
0.458***
[0.0623]
0.320***
[0.0427]
0.308***
[0.0587]
160,000
0.049
Yes
Yes

0.207***
[0.0284]
0.429***
[0.0563]
0.304***
[0.0397]
0.295***
[0.0542]
160,000
0.051
Yes
Yes

0.0864***
[0.0184]
0.182***
[0.0311]
0.128***
[0.0251]
0.114***
[0.0313]
160,000
0.260
Yes
Yes

0.121***
[0.0141]
0.247***
[0.0309]
0.176***
[0.0212]
0.181***
[0.0352]
160,000
0.240
Yes
Yes

PTA
PTA*Uncertainty*Q408
PTA*Q408
PTA*Uncertainty*Q409
PTA*Q409
PTA*Uncertainty*Q410
PTA*Q410
PTA*Uncertainty
PTA
Income Changes
Change in GDP*Pre-Crisis
Change in GDP*Q408
Change in GDP*Q409
Change in GDP*Q410

Observations
R-squared
Quarter-Year FE
Country*HS2 FE
Notes:
Aggregation level: country-HS2-quarter of varieties defined at the firm-country-hs10 level. Dependent variable in column 1
(2) is the ln (midpoint) growth in the number of varieties exported in a country-HS2-quarter. In columns 3 and 4 we use the
midpoint growth for entering or exiting varieties in a similar cell. We use uncertainty estimates from AR(1) countryspecific regressions. See details in text. Robust standard errors clustered at the destination country by time period level
(pre-crisis period and the year long periods with start date denoted by the Q4## indicators). *,**,*** Sig. different from 0
at 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

Table 3(b): PTA vs. Non-PTA Variety Entry Growth Differentials
Net entry
Decomposition into:
ǻln
midpoint growth
Entry
Exit
2008q4-2009q3

0.054
0.05
0.01
[0.013]
[0.015]
[0.009]
2009q4-2010q3
-0.004
-0.005
-0.015
[0.012]
[0.011]
[0.009]
2010q4-2011q3
0.000
0.000
-0.015
[0.009]
[0.012]
[0.006]
Notes: Calculated from Table 3 coefficients for PTA in each period Q4yy at PTA mean risk.

ǻ

63

0.041
[0.009]
0.01
[0.006]
0.015
[0.007]

Table 4(a): U.S. Export Growth and Extensive vs. Intensive Contributions (2003-2011)
Export Growth
Decomposition into:
ǻln
midpoint growth
Intensive
Extensive
Non-PTA
Uncertainty*Q408
Uncertainty*Q409
Uncertainty*Q410

-0.487***
[0.144]
-0.381***
[0.117]
-0.183
[0.111]

-0.272**
[0.106]
-0.301***
[0.0877]
-0.119
[0.0772]

0.0444
[0.0438]
-0.124***
[0.0368]
-0.0626**
[0.0283]

-0.316***
[0.0901]
-0.176**
[0.0722]
-0.0560
[0.0707]

1.845***
[0.527]
-0.306**
[0.120]
0.765
[0.501]
-0.177
[0.118]
0.340
[0.348]
-0.0830
[0.0796]
-0.387
[0.400]
0.133
[0.0858]

1.093**
[0.428]
-0.180*
[0.0987]
0.522
[0.364]
-0.116
[0.0852]
0.258
[0.265]
-0.0662
[0.0614]
-0.288
[0.296]
0.104*
[0.0616]

-0.173
[0.178]
0.0204
[0.0390]
-0.136
[0.132]
0.0348
[0.0272]
0.244**
[0.110]
-0.0550**
[0.0231]
-0.0587
[0.124]
0.0262
[0.0224]

1.267***
[0.385]
-0.200**
[0.0856]
0.658**
[0.319]
-0.151**
[0.0742]
0.0141
[0.234]
-0.0112
[0.0544]
-0.230
[0.242]
0.0780
[0.0535]

0.333***
[0.0621]
0.881***
[0.113]
0.473***
[0.0916]
0.300**
[0.133]
160,000
0.049
Yes
ǻ Yes

0.272***
[0.0462]
0.646***
[0.0789]
0.400***
[0.0719]
0.267***
[0.0901]
160,000
0.056
Yes
Yes

0.0537***
[0.0155]
0.132***
[0.0357]
0.100***
[0.0303]
0.0983***
[0.0333]
160,000
0.063
Yes
Yes

0.218***
[0.0387]
0.513***
[0.0752]
0.300***
[0.0577]
0.168**
[0.0841]
160,000
0.043
Yes
Yes

PTA
PTA*Uncertainty*Q408
PTA*Q408
PTA*Uncertainty*Q409
PTA*Q409
PTA*Uncertainty*Q410
PTA*Q410
PTA*Uncertainty
PTA
Income Changes
Change in GDP*Pre-Crisis
Change in GDP*Q408
Change in GDP*Q409
Change in GDP*Q410

Observations
R-squared
Quarter-Year FE
Country*HS2 FE
Notes
Aggregation level: country-HS2-quarter of varieties defined at the firm-country-hs10 level. Dependent variable in column 1
(2) is the ln (midpoint) growth of export value in a country-HS2-quarter. In columns 3 and 4 we decompose midpoint
growth into continuing and entering or exiting varieties in a similar cell. We use uncertainty estimates from AR(1) countryspecific regressions. See details in text. Robust standard errors clustered at the destination country by time period level
(pre-crisis period and the year long periods with start date denoted by the Q4## indicators). *,**,*** Sig. different from 0
at 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

Table 4(b): PTA vs. Non-PTA Export Growth Differentials
Export Growth
Decomposition into:
ǻln
midpoint growth
Intensive
Extensive
2008q4-2009q3

0.082
0.05
-0.016
[0.026]
[0.02]
[0.013]
2009q4-2010q3
-0.017
-0.006
0.006
[0.024]
[0.018]
[0.008]
2010q4-2011q3
-0.012
-0.012
-0.004
[0.018]
[0.02]
[0.01]
Notes: Calculated from Table 4 coefficients for PTA in each period Q4yy at PTA mean risk.

64

0.066
[0.022]
-0.013
[0.019]
-0.008
[0.012]

Table 5: U.S. Export Firm-Industry Entry and Exit (2003-2011)
Net entry
Decomposition into:
ǻln
midpoint growth
Entry
Exit
Non-PTA
Uncertainty*Q408
Uncertainty*Q409
Uncertainty*Q410

-0.289***
[0.0652]
-0.117**
[0.0514]
-0.202***
[0.0459]

-0.259***
[0.0605]
-0.107**
[0.0477]
-0.190***
[0.0421]

-0.138***
[0.0339]
-0.0561*
[0.0340]
-0.126***
[0.0315]

-0.121***
[0.0385]
-0.0509*
[0.0283]
-0.0642**
[0.0269]

1.421***
[0.271]
-0.249***
[0.0571]
0.463*
[0.247]
-0.0964*
[0.0569]
-0.114
[0.157]
0.0268
[0.0365]
-0.339*
[0.197]
0.0937**
[0.0463]

1.310***
[0.261]
-0.228***
[0.0549]
0.420*
[0.231]
-0.0869
[0.0532]
-0.102
[0.148]
0.0237
[0.0343]
-0.314*
[0.185]
0.0870**
[0.0434]

0.652***
[0.156]
-0.133***
[0.0334]
0.412***
[0.131]
-0.105***
[0.0287]
0.0898
[0.0940]
-0.0404*
[0.0217]
-0.0702
[0.109]
0.0405
[0.0250]

0.658***
[0.145]
-0.0948***
[0.0317]
0.00763
[0.130]
0.0184
[0.0311]
-0.191*
[0.0997]
0.0641***
[0.0235]
-0.244**
[0.120]
0.0465*
[0.0278]

0.214***
[0.0272]
0.422***
[0.0565]
0.304***
[0.0410]
0.281***
[0.0527]
160,000
0.027
Yes
Yes

0.203***
[0.0254]
0.396***
[0.0514]
0.289***
[0.0383]
0.270***
[0.0485]
160,000
0.029
Yes
Yes

0.0787***
[0.0177]
0.177***
[0.0292]
0.109***
[0.0250]
0.138***
[0.0300]
160,000
0.135
Yes
Yes

0.124***
[0.0134]
0.218***
[0.0292]
0.180***
[0.0217]
0.132***
[0.0335]
160,000
0.122
Yes
Yes

PTA
PTA*Uncertainty*Q408
PTA*Q408
PTA*Uncertainty*Q409
PTA*Q409
PTA*Uncertainty*Q410
PTA*Q410
PTA*Uncertainty
PTA
Income Changes
Change in GDP*Pre-Crisis
Change in GDP*Q408
Change in GDP*Q409
Change in GDP*Q410

Observations
R-squared
Quarter-Year FE
Country*HS2 FE
Notes:
Aggregation level: country-HS2-quarter. Dependent variable in column 1 is log growth and col. (2) midpoint growth in
the number of U.S. firms exporting in a country-HS2-quarter. Columns 3 and 4 use the midpoint growth for entering or
exiting firms in a similar cell. We use uncertainty estimates from AR(1) country-specific regressions. See details in text.
Robust standard errors clustered at the destination country by time period level (pre-crisis period and the year long
periods with start date denoted by the Q4## indicators). *,**,*** Sig. different from 0 at 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

65

Table 6: U.S. Export Varieties Entry and Exit (2003-2011)
Robustness to alternative income uncertainty measure (St.Dev. ȴln GDP)
Net entry
Decomposition into:
ǻln
midpoint growth
Entry
Exit
Non-PTA
Uncertainty*Q408
Uncertainty*Q409
Uncertainty*Q410

-0.853***
[0.249]
-0.624***
[0.230]
-0.650***
[0.217]

-0.778***
[0.232]
-0.594***
[0.214]
-0.602***
[0.198]

-0.453***
[0.129]
-0.292**
[0.122]
-0.341***
[0.131]

-0.325**
[0.126]
-0.301**
[0.120]
-0.261**
[0.105]

3.424***
[0.723]
-0.175***
[0.0504]
0.928
[0.646]
-0.0682
[0.0469]
-0.0935
[0.541]
0.0135
[0.0405]
-0.417
[0.523]
0.0574
[0.0412]

3.170***
[0.682]
-0.162***
[0.0476]
0.871
[0.615]
-0.0650
[0.0447]
-0.0724
[0.511]
0.0118
[0.0384]
-0.416
[0.495]
0.0551
[0.0391]

1.621***
[0.350]
-0.0981***
[0.0250]
1.098***
[0.336]
-0.0900***
[0.0243]
0.291
[0.299]
-0.0307
[0.0225]
-0.137
[0.300]
0.0362
[0.0232]

1.549***
[0.435]
-0.0634**
[0.0313]
-0.227
[0.328]
0.0249
[0.0244]
-0.364
[0.274]
0.0425**
[0.0207]
-0.278
[0.271]
0.0189
[0.0212]

0.235***
[0.0309]
0.473***
[0.0623]
0.337***
[0.0444]
0.279***
[0.0604]
160,000
0.049
Yes
Yes

0.221***
[0.0286]
0.439***
[0.0564]
0.322***
[0.0412]
0.266***
[0.0557]
160,000
0.051
0
0

0.0957***
[0.0185]
0.188***
[0.0315]
0.133***
[0.0260]
0.0954***
[0.0319]
160,000
0.259
Yes
Yes

0.125***
[0.0141]
0.251***
[0.0302]
0.188***
[0.0223]
0.171***
[0.0359]
160,000
0.240
Yes
Yes

PTA
PTA*Uncertainty*Q408
PTA*Q408
PTA*Uncertainty*Q409
PTA*Q409
PTA*Uncertainty*Q410
PTA*Q410
PTA*Uncertainty
PTA
Income Changes
Change in GDP*Pre-Crisis
Change in GDP*Q408
Change in GDP*Q409
Change in GDP*Q410

Observations
R-squared
Quarter-Year FE
Country*HS2 FE
Notes:
Aggregation level: country-HS2-quarter of varieties defined at the firm-country-HS10 level. Dependent variable in
column 1 is log growth and col. 2 the midpoint growth in the number of varieties exported in a country-HS2quarter. Columns 3 and 4 use the midpoint growth for entering or exiting firms in a similar cell. Income
unceertainty measured as the standard deviation of ln GDP estimated using an AR(1) estimate for each country.
Robust standard errors clustered at the destination country by time period level (pre-crisis period and the year long
periods with start date denoted by the Q4## indicators). *,**,*** Sig. different from 0 at 10%, 5% and 1%
respectively

66

Table 7: U.S. Export Varieties Net Entry (2003-2011) - Robustness to Additional Industry Controls
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Temp. Barrier
Inventory
Durables
Low Dur. Share High Dur. Share
Baseline
Ind*QY FE
Controls
Controls
Non-PTA
Uncertainty*Q408
Uncertainty*Q409
Uncertainty*Q410

-0.314***
[0.0704]
-0.143***
[0.0546]
-0.231***
[0.0506]

-0.283***
[0.0703]
-0.142***
[0.0541]
-0.214***
[0.0511]

-0.314***
[0.0712]
-0.148***
[0.0549]
-0.241***
[0.0506]

-0.312***
[0.0704]
-0.143***
[0.0546]
-0.233***
[0.0505]

-0.312***
[0.0710]
-0.147***
[0.0562]
-0.227***
[0.0510]

-0.281***
[0.0818]
-0.138**
[0.0682]
-0.233***
[0.0643]

-0.385***
[0.0936]
-0.169**
[0.0749]
-0.206***
[0.0753]

1.499***
[0.276]
-0.261***
[0.0587]
0.478*
[0.251]
-0.105*
[0.0566]
-0.0977
[0.173]
0.0201
[0.0396]
-0.383*
[0.203]
0.107**
[0.0587]

1.432***
[0.276]
-0.251***
[0.0587]
0.482**
[0.243]
-0.105*
[0.0544]
-0.102
[0.171]
0.0214
[0.0394]
-0.392*
[0.202]
0.108**
[0.0590]

1.456***
[0.279]
-0.250***
[0.0589]
0.450*
[0.253]
-0.0997*
[0.0565]
-0.0568
[0.180]
0.00877
[0.0411]
-0.355*
[0.203]
0.107**
[0.0588]

1.489***
[0.276]
-0.260***
[0.0588]
0.480*
[0.251]
-0.105*
[0.0565]
-0.114
[0.173]
0.0225
[0.0396]
-0.386*
[0.203]
0.108**
[0.0588]

1.533***
[0.279]
-0.267***
[0.0593]
0.460*
[0.250]
-0.102*
[0.0564]
-0.108
[0.173]
0.0219
[0.0397]
-0.385*
[0.204]
0.107**
[0.0593]

1.377***
[0.272]
-0.243***
[0.0571]
0.245
[0.269]
-0.0557
[0.0598]
-0.218
[0.228]
0.0356
[0.0516]
-0.170
[0.239]
0.0596
[0.0719]

1.894***
[0.412]
-0.321***
[0.0929]
0.981**
[0.396]
-0.213**
[0.0945]
0.175
[0.307]
-0.0141
[0.0731]
-0.911***
[0.312]
0.222***
[0.0888]

0.0254**
[0.0108]
0.0211**
[0.0108]
0.0210*
[0.0109]
0.0109
[0.0103]
160,000
0.050
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0734
[0.109]
0.312
[0.210]
-0.120
[0.244]
0.426**
[0.212]
160,000
0.049
Yes
Yes
No

-

PTA
PTA*Uncertainty*Q408
PTA*Q408
PTA*Uncertainty*Q409
PTA*Q409
PTA*Uncertainty*Q410
PTA*Q410
PTA*Uncertainty
PTA
Control Period Interactions
Control*Pre-Crisis
Control*Q408
Control*Q409
Control*Q410

-0.0719***
[0.00903]
-0.0288***
[0.00813]
-0.0191**
[0.00758]
160,000
0.049
Yes
Yes
No

Observations
160,000
160,000
110,000
50,000
R-squared
0.049
0.082
0.042
0.074
Quarter-Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*HS2 FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Quarter-Year*HS2 FE
No
Yes
No
No
Notes:
Aggregation level: country-HS2-quarter of varieties defined at the firm-country-HS10 level. Dependent variable is the log growth in the number of varieties
exported in a country-HS2-quarter. We use uncertainty estimates from AR(1) country-specific regressions. See details in text. Robust standard errors clustered at
the destination country by time period level (pre-crisis period and the year long periods with start date denoted by the Q4## indicators). *,**,*** Sig. different from
0 at 10%, 5% and 1% respectively. GDP*Period Interactions included, but supressed from output.

67

Table 8(a): U.S. Export Varieties Entry and Exit by Import Market Power Sample (2003-2011)
Low Market Power Industries
High Market Power Industries
Net entry
Net entry
midpoint
Decomposition into:
midpoint
Decomposition into:
ǻln
Entry
Exit
ǻln
Entry
Exit
growth
growth
Non-PTA
Uncertainty*Q408
Uncertainty*Q409
Uncertainty*Q410

-0.256**
[0.100]
-0.147
[0.0950]
-0.332***
[0.0819]

-0.227**
[0.0930]
-0.135
[0.0888]
-0.314***
[0.0755]

-0.133**
[0.0594]
-0.0901
[0.0592]
-0.213***
[0.0548]

-0.0938*
[0.0550]
-0.0445
[0.0525]
-0.102**
[0.0476]

-0.330***
[0.0813]
-0.131**
[0.0627]
-0.177***
[0.0612]

-0.290***
[0.0743]
-0.118**
[0.0579]
-0.162***
[0.0563]

-0.171***
[0.0401]
-0.0619*
[0.0356]
-0.0887***
[0.0341]

-0.118***
[0.0428]
-0.0564*
[0.0317]
-0.0737**
[0.0337]

2.104***
[0.377]
-0.407***
[0.0822]
0.249
[0.329]
-0.0702
[0.0671]
0.242
[0.298]
-0.0878
[0.0655]
-0.190
[0.334]
0.0745
[0.0759]

1.940***
[0.349]
-0.374***
[0.0750]
0.269
[0.314]
-0.0727
[0.0642]
0.228
[0.276]
-0.0838
[0.0606]
-0.188
[0.309]
0.0721
[0.0699]

1.118***
[0.251]
-0.237***
[0.0559]
0.334*
[0.198]
-0.0904**
[0.0397]
0.0556
[0.194]
-0.0488
[0.0441]
-0.0193
[0.189]
0.0362
[0.0426]

0.822***
[0.215]
-0.136***
[0.0490]
-0.0647
[0.182]
0.0177
[0.0409]
0.173
[0.156]
-0.0350
[0.0343]
-0.169
[0.183]
0.0359
[0.0422]

1.159***
[0.335]
-0.182**
[0.0745]
0.584*
[0.300]
-0.121*
[0.0706]
-0.266
[0.202]
0.0732
[0.0468]
-0.476**
[0.234]
0.122**
[0.0538]

1.063***
[0.319]
-0.165**
[0.0711]
0.538*
[0.283]
-0.113*
[0.0664]
-0.258
[0.192]
0.0713
[0.0445]
-0.450**
[0.219]
0.114**
[0.0505]

0.509***
[0.170]
-0.0915**
[0.0377]
0.496***
[0.146]
-0.116***
[0.0334]
0.0493
[0.116]
-0.0148
[0.0267]
-0.191
[0.143]
0.0632*
[0.0324]

0.554***
[0.170]
-0.0739*
[0.0382]
0.0415
[0.155]
0.00373
[0.0371]
-0.307***
[0.115]
0.0861***
[0.0268]
-0.259**
[0.126]
0.0507*
[0.0272]

0.145***
[0.0406]
0.338***
[0.0733]
0.314***
[0.0678]
0.137
[0.0952]
50,000
0.044
Yes
Yes

0.141***
[0.0376]
0.314***
[0.0673]
0.299***
[0.0632]
0.139
[0.0876]
50,000
0.046
Yes
Yes

0.0530**
[0.0252]
0.142***
[0.0412]
0.158***
[0.0408]
0.100
[0.0650]
50,000
0.222
Yes
Yes

0.0881***
[0.0228]
0.172***
[0.0412]
0.140***
[0.0373]
0.0394
[0.0541]
50,000
0.220
Yes
Yes

0.252***
[0.0364]
0.510***
[0.0727]
0.318***
[0.0517]
0.378***
[0.0745]
110,000
0.052
Yes
Yes

0.237***
[0.0337]
0.478***
[0.0656]
0.302***
[0.0478]
0.358***
[0.0687]
110,000
0.055
Yes
Yes

0.101***
[0.0202]
0.200***
[0.0366]
0.114***
[0.0294]
0.119***
[0.0365]
110,000
0.264
Yes
Yes

0.136***
[0.0174]
0.278***
[0.0351]
0.189***
[0.0257]
0.239***
[0.0429]
110,000
0.244
Yes
Yes

PTA
PTA*Uncertainty*Q408
PTA*Q408
PTA*Uncertainty*Q409
PTA*Q409
PTA*Uncertainty*Q410
PTA*Q410
PTA*Uncertainty
PTA
Income Changes
Change in GDP*Pre-Crisis
Change in GDP*Q408
Change in GDP*Q409
Change in GDP*Q410
Observations
R-squared
Quarter-Year FE
Country*HS2 FE

Notes:
Country-HS2-quarter of varieties defined at the firm-country-hs10 level. For each panel, the dependent variable in column 1 is log growth and col. 2 the midpoint growth in
the number of varieties exported in a country-HS2-quarter. Columns 3 and 4 use the midpoint growth for entering or exiting firms in a similar cell. We use uncertainty
estimates from AR(1) country-specific regressions. See details in text. Robust standard errors clustered at the destination country by time period level (pre-crisis period and
the year long periods with start date denoted by the Q4## indicators). *,**,*** Sig. different from 0 at 10%, 5% and 1% respectively. Market power indicator is the top 2
terciles of the inverse of the elasticity estimated in Broda, Limão and Weinstein (2008).

SEE PAGE 70 FOR TABLE 8(b)

68

Table 9(a): U.S. Export Growth and Extensive vs. Intensive Contributions by Import Market Power Sample (2003-2011)
Low Market Power Industries
High Market Power Industries
midpoint
Decomposition into:
midpoint
Decomposition into:
ǻln
ǻln
growth
Intensive
Extensive
growth
Intensive
Extensive
Non-PTA
Uncertainty*Q408
Uncertainty*Q409
Uncertainty*Q410

-0.539**
[0.225]
-0.339*
[0.187]
-0.533***
[0.188]

-0.331**
[0.150]
-0.314**
[0.134]
-0.330***
[0.124]

-0.0325
[0.0599]
-0.228***
[0.0755]
-0.120**
[0.0527]

-0.298**
[0.136]
-0.0860
[0.112]
-0.210*
[0.118]

-0.472***
[0.155]
-0.374***
[0.131]
-0.0149
[0.137]

-0.248**
[0.116]
-0.278***
[0.0969]
-0.0135
[0.0963]

0.0759
[0.0477]
-0.0775**
[0.0366]
-0.0375
[0.0347]

-0.324***
[0.0997]
-0.200**
[0.0837]
0.0240
[0.0883]

2.600***
[0.920]
-0.520**
[0.205]
-0.0359
[0.805]
-0.0389
[0.183]
1.413**
[0.600]
-0.344**
[0.137]
0.00951
[0.757]
0.0934
[0.168]

1.605**
[0.698]
-0.347**
[0.152]
-0.211
[0.546]
0.0265
[0.123]
1.002**
[0.399]
-0.240***
[0.0912]
0.0940
[0.539]
0.0476
[0.119]

-0.208
[0.268]
0.0192
[0.0575]
0.0251
[0.219]
-0.00734
[0.0474]
0.273
[0.201]
-0.0537
[0.0464]
-0.0979
[0.206]
0.0424
[0.0374]

1.814***
[0.628]
-0.366***
[0.137]
-0.237
[0.451]
0.0338
[0.100]
0.728*
[0.403]
-0.187**
[0.0944]
0.192
[0.463]
0.00520
[0.105]

1.430**
[0.557]
-0.189
[0.121]
1.162**
[0.504]
-0.246**
[0.118]
-0.177
[0.410]
0.0436
[0.0919]
-0.569
[0.472]
0.149
[0.0978]

0.802*
[0.445]
-0.0878
[0.0997]
0.887**
[0.375]
-0.187**
[0.0877]
-0.102
[0.320]
0.0186
[0.0729]
-0.468
[0.347]
0.129*
[0.0696]

-0.163
[0.185]
0.0226
[0.0404]
-0.212
[0.140]
0.0548*
[0.0280]
0.228*
[0.134]
-0.0552*
[0.0283]
-0.0346
[0.131]
0.0170
[0.0248]

0.965**
[0.391]
-0.110
[0.0864]
1.099***
[0.372]
-0.242***
[0.0853]
-0.330
[0.325]
0.0737
[0.0736]
-0.433
[0.302]
0.113*
[0.0636]

0.156*
[0.0943]
0.681***
[0.166]
0.206
[0.141]
-0.0452
[0.238]
50,000
0.056
Yes
Yes

0.137**
[0.0662]
0.447***
[0.112]
0.219**
[0.102]
-0.0208
[0.148]
50,000
0.064
Yes
Yes

0.0418*
[0.0245]
0.0378
[0.0558]
0.0780
[0.0493]
0.0878
[0.0705]
50,000
0.066
Yes
Yes

0.0948*
[0.0571]
0.410***
[0.0990]
0.141
[0.0867]
-0.109
[0.142]
50,000
0.048
Yes
Yes

0.417***
[0.0694]
0.961***
[0.131]
0.580***
[0.106]
0.438***
[0.146]
110,000
0.047
Yes
Yes

0.336***
[0.0521]
0.727***
[0.0946]
0.473***
[0.0812]
0.382***
[0.108]
110,000
0.054
Yes
Yes

0.0606***
[0.0179]
0.173***
[0.0353]
0.110***
[0.0321]
0.104***
[0.0377]
110,000
0.063
Yes
Yes

0.276***
[0.0443]
0.554***
[0.0899]
0.363***
[0.0680]
0.278***
[0.103]
110,000
0.042
Yes
Yes

PTA
PTA*Uncertainty*Q408
PTA*Q408
PTA*Uncertainty*Q409
PTA*Q409
PTA*Uncertainty*Q410
PTA*Q410
PTA*Uncertainty
PTA
Income Changes
Change in GDP*Pre-Crisis
Change in GDP*Q408
Change in GDP*Q409
Change in GDP*Q410

Observations
R-squared
Quarter-Year FE
Country*HS2 FE
Notes
Aggregation level: country-HS2-quarter of varieties defined at the firm-country-HS10 level. For each panel, the dependent variable in column 1 is log growth and col. 2 the
midpoint growth in the value of exports in a country-HS2-quarter. In columns 3 and 4 we decompose midpoint growth into continuing and entering or exiting varieties in a
similar cell. We use uncertainty estimates from AR(1) country-specific regressions. See details in text. Robust standard errors clustered at the destination country by time
period level (pre-crisis period and the year long periods with start date denoted by the Q4## indicators). *,**,*** Sig. different from 0 at 10%, 5% and 1% respectively. Marke
power indicator is the top 2 terciles of the inverse of the elasticity estimated in Broda, Limão and Weinstein (2008).

SEE PAGE 70 FOR TABLE 9(b)

69

Table 8(b): PTA vs. Non-PTA Variety Entry Growth Differentials by Market Power
Low Market Power Industries
High Market Power Industries
Decomposition into:
Decomposition into:
Net entry midpoint
Net entry midpoint
growth
growth
ǻln
Entry
Exit
ǻln
Entry
Exit
2008q4-2009q3

0.035
0.033
-0.003
0.036
0.062
0.058
[0.019]
[0.021]
[0.014]
[0.012]
[0.019]
[0.015]
2009q4-2010q3
-0.018
-0.016
-0.02
0.004
0.002
0.0
[0.017]
[0.021]
[0.013]
[0.009]
[0.014]
[0.014]
2010q4-2011q3
-0.037
-0.036
-0.037
0.001
0.017
0.017
[0.016]
[0.015]
[0.01]
[0.011]
[0.011]
[0.01]
Notes: Calculated from Table (a) coefficients for PTA in each period Q4yy at PTA mean risk.

0.015
[0.008]
-0.012
[0.01]
-0.004
[0.006]

0.042
[0.008]
0.012
[0.009]
0.022
[0.008]

Table 9(b): PTA vs. Non-PTA Export Growth Differentials by Market Power
Low Market Power Industries
High Market Power Industries
midpoint
midpoint
Decomposition into:
Decomposition into:
ǻln
ǻln
Intensive Extensive
Intensive Extensive
growth
growth
2008q4-2009q3

0.026
-0.01
-0.025
0.015
0.112
0.081
[0.046]
[0.044]
[0.016]
[0.033]
[0.039]
[0.022]
2009q4-2010q3
-0.046
-0.018
-0.002
-0.016
-0.002
-0.001
[0.039]
[0.039]
[0.017]
[0.023]
[0.025]
[0.019]
2010q4-2011q3
-0.047
-0.03
0.004
-0.034
0.006
-0.003
[0.033]
[0.034]
[0.012]
[0.021]
[0.022]
[0.017]
Notes: Calculated from Table (a) coefficients for PTA in each period Q4yy at PTA mean risk.

-0.012
[0.013]
0.01
[0.008]
-0.007
[0.01]

0.092
[0.025]
-0.011
[0.018]
0.004
[0.022]

Table 10: Aggregate Counterfactual: PTA Treatment and Permanent Income Equivalents
Export Margin
Total

Extensive

Predicted Growth
6.0
7.9
Income Equiv.
9.4
15.3
Predicted Growth
5.0
6.5
2008Q4-2011Q3
Income Equiv.
5.6
8.6
Notes: Predicted midpoint growth calculated from Table 4 coefficients using non-PTA weighted
mean risk of 0.22. Income equivalent is the 100xǻln growth in importer income required to offset
the uncertainty effect in any period using the permanent income elasticities for the respective period
in Table 4. See the text for the formula.
2008Q4-2009Q3

70

A

Appendix: Theory

A.1

Cutoff: single uncertainty state

To derive the cutoff in eq. (10) we first combine (7) and (8) to obtain
5
6
βγ(1 − H(ā))
Eπ (a′ ≥ ā, c, r)
βγ
Eπ(a, c)
+
−K
Πw (c, r) =
1 − β + βγ(1 − H(ā))
1 − β + βγ
1 − β 1 − β + βγ
then replace (6) in the entry indifference equation (5) and rearrange to obtain (9)
K
! "1−σ
at cD
t
1−β
3 U 4σ−1
ct
cD
t
cU
t
cD
t

=
=
=
=

! ′
"
U
βγ Eπ(a′ , cU
βγ (1 − H(at )) π(at , cU
π(at , cU
t ) − Eπ a ≥ at , ct
t )
t )
+
+
1 − β(1 − γ) 1 − β 1 − β(1 − γ)
1−β
1 − β(1 − γ)
! U "1−σ
! U "1−σ
!
"
! "1−σ
1−σ
at ct
E(a′ ) βγ (1 − H(at )) at cU
− cU
E (a′ ≥ at )
βγ ct
t
t
+
+
1 − β(1 − γ) 1 − β 1 − β(1 − γ)
1−β
1 − β(1 − γ)
3
4
1−β
βγ
E(a′ ) + (1 − H(at )) [at − E (a′ ≥ at )]
+
1 − β(1 − γ) 1 − β(1 − γ)
at
1
5
6 σ−1
βγ [ω(at ) − 1]
1+
≡ Ut
1 − β(1 − γ)
π(a ,cD )

t t
and the
where the second line uses the equilibrium cutoff under no uncertainty, defined by K = 1−β
definition of the profit function. The third re-arranges and the fourth uses the definition of ω in (11) (after
recognizing that E(a′ ) − (1 − H(at )) E (a′ ≥ at ) = H(at )E(a′ ≤ at )).

A.1.1

Proof of Proposition 1

We separate the proof into each of the components of the demand regime: r = {γ, H} as follows.
′
U
(a) For given H, a riskier demand regime (γ ′ > γ) reduces entry: cU
t (γ ) ≤ ct (γ).

Using (10) and the definition of U we obtain:
∂ ln cU
t
∂γ

=
=

3
4
1 ∂
βγ [ω (at ) − 1]
ln 1 +
σ − 1 ∂γ
1 − β (1 − γ)
β (1 − β)
ω(at ) − 1
1
≤0
σ − 1 1 − β(1 − γ) 1 − β (1 − γω(at ))

(45)

′

≤at )
≤ 0, which
Recall that β ∈ (0, 1) and ω ≥ 0 so the inequality follows iff ω(at ) − 1 = −H(at ) at −E(a
at
′
U
′
U
is true since the CDF H(at ) ≤ 1 and E(a ≤ at ) ≤ at (by definition). Moreover, ct (γ ) < ct (γ) for all
at > amin since then ω(at ) < 1.
′
U
(b) For given γ > 0, a riskier demand regime (H SSD H ′ ) reduces entry: cU
t (H ) ≤ ct (H)

From (10) we see that H affects entry only through ω and the latter only affects entry if γ > 0. Thus
there is (weakly) less entry under r′ than an alternative regime r with the same γ but a H that SSD H ′ iff

71

ω ≥ ω ′ . To see that is the case we first rewrite ω as

Ú
H(at ) at
ω(at ) = 1 − H(at ) +
ah (a|a ≤ at ) da
at
Ú at 0
1
adH (a)
= 1 − H(at ) +
at 0
3
4
Ú at
1
a
= 1 − H(at ) +
[aH (a)]0 t −
H (a) da
at
0
Ú
1 at
H (a) da
= 1−
at 0

where the first line uses definition of ω and of the conditional mean and the second uses h (a|a ≤ at ) =
h (a) /H (at ) and dH (a) = h (a) da. The third line uses integration by parts and the fourth simplifies. We
can do the same for ω ′ and subtract from ω to obtain
5Ú at
6
Ú at
1
′
′
H (a) da −
H (a) da ≥ 0
ω−ω =
at 0
0
If H SSD H ′ then the inequality in [] follows for all at with strict inequality for at least some at . The
′
U
weak inequality in cU
t (H ) ≤ ct (H) allows for the possibility that the distributions overlap at low at or if
at = amax and H is a mean preserving compression of H ′ .

A.1.2

Proof: Proposition 3

PTA motive and policy parameter changes under market access and export risk averse objective
We first show that the government objective in (20) implies a PTA motive for lower current protection
and reduced export risk. By definition the exporter government has a PTA motive if there is some change
) T A P T A*
′
in ∆P
, ∆m
s.t. GP T A > GM . We modeled a government that values market access and is export
ς
risk averse as one where (i) Gat > 0 and (ii) G (at , M (a) , γ) ≥ G (at , M ′ (a) , γ) for all at whenever M SSD
TA
M ′ (with equality at γ = 0). Thus there is a ∆P
< 0 that increases its objective since
ς
∂at
εy
dG (at , M (a) , γ)
= Gat
= −Gat 2 < 0
dς
∂ς
ς
where the first equality uses the fact that current policy affects G only through current business conditions
and the chain rule; the second uses the definition of a in (16). The inequality follows from Gat > 0.
In proposition 1 we show M SSD M ′ is equivalent to ω (at ) ≥ ω ′ (at ) for all at , a similar condition holds
TA
for the mixture case used in proposition 2. So the risk averse government benefits from a ∆P
= mP T A −m
m
such that
!
"
mP T A ω s′ (at ) + 1 − mP T A ω s (at ) ≥ mω s′ (at ) + (1 − m) ω s (at )
TA
[ω s′ (at ) − ω s (at )] ∆P
m

(46)

≥ 0

PTA entry effects
To derive the entry effects of PTAs we use the cutoff in (13).
TA
Entry impacts of ∆P
. The cutoff is increasing in ω̄ (proposition 2b) and thus higher under a PTA
m
characterized by an insurance effect since as shown above it is characterized by ω̄ P T A > ω̄ if γ > 0. The

72

effect is given by

TA
∂ ln cU
[ω s′ (at ) − ω s (at )] ∆P
βγ
t
m
TA
∆P
=
>0
m
∂m
σ−1
1 − β (1 − γ ω̄ (at ))

(47)

where the inequality is due to (46), ω̄ ∈ (0, 1) and σ > 1.

A.2

Adjustment dynamics

Derivation of (27) Using (25), (26) we see N̂t0 = F̂t directly and derive N̂t+ as follows
= nFt + β t n [F0 − Ft ]
5
6
Ft
Ft
Nt
−1 =
− 1 + βt 1 −
N0
F0
F0
!
"
t
+
N̂t = 1 − β F̂t
Nt

For crisis we first rewrite Nt− using λ−
t = β [Nt−1 − nFt ] so the fraction of exporters β that survived
from the previous period that have costs below the current cutoff, Nt−1 − nFt and then iterate backwards
to show that
èq
é
t
t−T
t
Nt− = (1 − β)
β
nF
T + β nF0
T =1
5
6
qt
Nt−
t−T FT
− 1 = (1 − β)
+ βt − 1
T =1 β
N0
F0
J
5
3
46 I
qt
q
FT
Nt−
t−T
t
t−T
− 1 = (1 − β)
− 1 + β − 1 + (1 − β)
β
T =1 β
N0
F0
T =1,...t
1
2
qt−1
N̂t− = (1 − β) F̂t + T =1 β t−T F̂T
1
22
1
qt−1
qT =t−1
N̂t− = (1 − β) F̂t + T =1 β t−T F̂t − T =1 β t−T F̂t − F̂T
1
2
!
"
qT =t−1
N̂t− = 1 − β t F̂t + (1 − β) T =1 β t−T F̂T − F̂t
where the third line uses the formula for a geometric sum so the last term is {0} .

Growth in domestic firms
The number of exporters is obtained by modifying (25) and the legacy terms in (26) and combining them
to obtain
I
10t = 1
nt Ft
t
nt Ft + β n0 [F0 − Ft ]
Nt =
1+
t =1
nt Ft + β [Nt−1 − nt−1 Ft ] 1−
t =1
In accounting for legacy we adjust for the number of firms present in the period when the shock occurred.
Note that we used λ−
t = β [Nt−1 − nFt ] as explained in the derivation above. The growth rate relative to
N0 = n0 F0 is then

1
2

F̂
+
n̂
1
+
F̂

t
t
t

 !
1
2
10t = 1
"
t
N̂t =
1 − β F̂t + n̂t 1 + F̂t
1+
t =1

1
2

q
q
1−

t−1
t
t−T
t−T
t =1

(1 − β) F̂t + T =1 β
F̂T + n̂t + T =1 β
F̂T (n̂T − β n̂T −1 )

Comparing to (27) we see there is an additional first order effect term, n̂t , common to all histories. The
73

interaction term n̂t F̂t is common to expansion and recovery. The interaction term for the crisis accounts for
the fact that the potential number of firms changes along with the cutoff.

74

A.3

Log-normal shocks

We construct Figure 8 by assuming a follows a log normal H (µ, Σ). If the arithmetic mean of a is normalized
!
"
to unity then exp µ + Σ2 /2 = 1 ⇔ µ = −Σ2 /2 such that if Σ′ > Σ then a′ ˜H (µ′ , Σ′ ) is a mean preserving
spread of a. More generally, if µ = −αΣ2 /2 and α ≥ 1 then H SSD H ′ (cf. Levy, 1973). The graphs focus
on the special MPS case so α = 1. The mixture distribution is M = mH + (1 − m) H ′ . Figure 8(b) uses U
and ω̄ derived in proposition 2. The specific expressions for the Figure 8(a) and (b) are respectively:
M
ln U

(1 − A′ )
(1 − A)
+ (1 − m)
2 3
2 3
3Ú at 3
4 444
βγ
1
1−A
1 − A′
1
m
ln 1 +
−
+ (1 − m)
da
σ−1
1 − β(1 − γ)
at
2
2
0

= m
=

! √ "
! √ "
where A ≡ erf(− (ln a − µ) / Σ 2 ); A′ ≡ erf(− (ln a − µ′ ) / Σ′ 2 ) and erf denotes the error function
for the normal distribution.
Parameters: Σ = 1/8, Σ′ = 2/3, γ = 1, σ = 3, β = 0.765.

A.4

Economic and Policy Risk Interaction: Implications for Demand Uncertainty and Agreements under log normal shocks

We assumed exogenous distributions, H (a), and now show:
1. How it depends on the parameters of the joint density of two fundamental shocks x if a =
2. When increases in risk in either x increases risk in a

r

x

3. Conditions to map x to exogenous economic parameters.
The results below apply for each country-industry iV but we drop those subscripts and rewrite business
conditions as:
at = Dt × ft
where Dt = εYt Ptσ−1 is the demand shifter common to domestic and foreign firms and ft ≡ τ −σ
measures
t
the “freeness” of trade and equals the relative demand of foreign to domestic varieties for any given producer
price.
The distribution we model below is general enough to accommodate different relationships between the
underlying shocks through different parameters. But if we wanted to map each distribution to specific
variables then f would be mapped to an ad valorem tariff distribution for any given σ. The distribution of
D reflects income spent on an industry and industry price index shocks. Under additional assumptions the
distribution of D would be equal to the aggregate income distribution up to some industry level constant
constant εP σ−1 .68
Assumption 1: Joint log normal shocks.
x = {D, f } are drawn from a bivariate log normal with correlation η and mean and standard deviation of
each ln x denoted by (µx , Σx ).
68 This requires a fixed ε, as we assume and a fixed price index. The latter holds if the mass of domestic firms in each i is
fixed and there are no fixed domestic costs of entry in that market, so PiV t , is independent of Yt , and if the exporter is small
so PiV t is independent of τ iV t .

75

Distribution of a under A1
x ∼ ln N (µx , Σx )
x = {D, f }
a ∼ ln N (µ, Σ)
µ = µD + µf ; Σ2 = Σ2D + Σ2f + 2ηΣf ΣD

(48)

The log normal ensures non-negative values for each x, and thus for a; allows for heavy tails and provides
a parametric ranking of distributions according to SSD.
SSD ranking for any log normal (Levy, 1973):
Under A1, Hs (a) SSD Hs′ (a) iff (1) Σ ≤ Σ′ ; (2) µ ≥ µ′ ; and (3) µ + Σ2 /2 ≥ µ′ + Σ′2 /2 with either (1)
and/or (2) strict.
Conditions (1) and (2) are required to rank normal distributions, e.g. ln a, but ordering distributions of
a also requires (3) to ensure Es (a) ≥ Es′ (a). Since each x is also log normal we can apply the same ranking
conditions to (µx , Σx ).
Figure A1 shows the ranking over (µ, Σ). The red curve represents the combinations of parameters such
!
"
that (3) holds with equality, in particular an iso-arithmetic mean Es (a) = exp µ + Σ2 /2 = 1. This was
the value used in Figure 8 and the vertical line denotes the value of Σ used for Hs . So the box at the
intersection represents Hs from Figure 8 and any Hs′ along the iso-mean with Σ′ > Σ represents a MPS,
e.g. the diamond marks Hs′ plotted in Figure 8. More generally, the depicted Hs SSD any Hs′ in the area
below the iso-mean curve and Σ ≤ Σ′ . Any distribution in the area above the iso-mean with a parameter
lower than Σ will SSD Hs . The remaining ones cannot be ordered. Only those along the vertical line can be
ranked relative to Hs in the FOSD sense.
Figure A1: Risk Ranking of H(a) and relation to Economic and Policy Risk

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

!

1

"

Notes: Red curve is the iso-arithmetic mean such that Es (a) = exp µ + Σ2 /2 = 1.
The box marks Hs (a) and the diamond marks Hs′ (a) from Figure 8. Hs (a) SSD any
distributions in the region shaded in light red, i.e. the set of distributions s′ with higher
variance and mean that is equal to or lower than under Hs (a)). Any distributions in the
region shaded in light blue SSD Hs (a).

76

The following proposition examines the impact of risk shocks to x on demand uncertainty, i.e. on whether
H (µx , Σx ) SSD H (µ′x , Σ′x )

Proposition 4: Impact of Economic and Policy Risk Shocks on Demand Uncertainty
r
If a = x and x is bivariate log normal with correlation η and parameters (µx , Σx ) then

(a) Any increase in risk of either x (i) increases demand uncertainty for any η ∈ [η, η] and (ii) never
decreases demand uncertainty for any η.

(b) If η ≥ 0 then there always exists some increase in the risk of either x that increases demand uncertainty.

To provide some intuition and implications consider first the case with uncorrelated shocks—included in the
interval in (a) part(i) since η < 0 < η. An increase in the risk in x must satisfy conditions (1-3) applied
!
"
!
"
!
"
to µx , Σ2x and when η = 0 we see in (48) that µ, Σ2 are linear in µx , Σ2x so the SSD conditions for a
!
"
are also satisfied. When the initial µx , Σ2x generate the Hs shown in Figure A1 and η = 0 then there is
an AMPS of either x that implies the Hs′ represented by the diamond and any other distribution of x that
is riskier than the original and has similar Σ′x will imply a distribution of a on the vertical line below that
point.
Consider the case when all destinations have the same marginal income density, as our model assumes,
and thus the same marginal distribution of D. If those shocks are uncorrelated with f then a non-PTA
destination with riskier f has higher overall demand uncertainty. If η < 0 then the increase in Σ is lower
than the increase in Σf . But if the correlation is sufficiently close to zero (or the other shock is not too
variable) then the direct effect described under η = 0 dominates and uncertainty increases. If η < η < 0
then Σ′ < Σ since policy shocks tend to at least partially offset the income shocks but the mean of a is also
lower so we can’t rank them.
The existing evidence suggests that it is more plausible that η > 0. In this case the increase in Σ is
magnified so condition (1) is still satisfied but if η > η then a may have a higher arithmetic mean so (3) may
fail. This mean effect arises in the presence of multiplicative shocks. Indeed if we considered the previous
AMPS of f under η > 0 then the implied Hs′ would be above the diamond and cannot therefore be ranked
relative to Hs but we can establish that it does not decrease uncertainty (part ii). Moreover, for the same
increase in Σf there is always some increase in the uncertainty of f (with a low enough f ) that implies a
riskier a (part (b)).
This proposition highlights two new roles of policy risk increases in the presence of other shocks that are
multiplicative: an insurance effect when η < η < 0 and a mean effect when η > η.
What are the implications of proposition 4 for the type of policy agreements that may emerge between
different countries when they can only change policy uncertainty via the distribution of f (as opposed to
changing any mixing weights m)? When the government is export risk averse, as we define in the text, then
it would only accept an agreement that reduces foreign demand uncertainty, which rules out any agreements
that increase policy uncertainty (proposition 4(a)-ii). Moreover, if η > 0, then the agreement must actually
reduce policy uncertainty (proved below).

77

A.4.1

Proof: proposition 4

We denote increases in uncertainty in1x by ∆Σx ≡ 2Σ′x − Σx ≥ 0, ∆µx ≡ µ′x − µx ≤ 0 (with either or
2
2
both strict) and δ x ≡ µ′x + (Σ′x ) /2 − µx + (Σx ) /2 ≤ 0, where the latter is the percent decrease in the
arithmetic mean of x , we denote the average of the scale parameters by Σ̄x ≡ (Σ′x + Σx ) /2.
Consider x = f without loss of generality.
(a) Under A1 Hs (a) SSD Hs′ (a) iff conditions (1)-(3) hold:
Σ̄

(1) Scale parameter condition: satisfied iff η ≥ − ΣDf ≡ η
2

≤ (Σ′ )

Σ2

′
≤ Σ2D + Σ′2
f + 2ηΣf ΣD
!
"
≤ 2ηΣD Σ′f − Σf
1
2
Σf + Σ′f /2
≥ −
ΣD

Σ2D + Σ2f + 2ηΣf ΣD
!
"!
"
Σf − Σ′f Σf + Σ′f
η
(2) Location parameter condition: satisfied all η
µ ≥ µ′
µf + µD

(3) Mean condition: satisfied iff η ≤

≥ µ′f + µ′D ⇔ ∆µx ≤ 0

−δ f 1
∆Σf ΣD

≡η
2

2

µ + (Σ) /2 ≥ µ′ + (Σ′ ) /2
! 2
"
!
"
′
µf + Σf + 2ηΣf ΣD /2 ≥ µ′f + Σ′2
f + 2ηΣf ΣD /2
−ηΣD ∆Σf

≥ δf

The second line in each of the conditions above uses the definitions of Σ and/or µ and the fact that
ΣD , µD and η are fixed.
−Σ

−δ

To see the second part of (a), we need only show that for η ∈
/ ( ΣDf , ∆Σff Σ1D ] the uncertainty of a can
never decrease. Since (2) holds for all η a decrease in the uncertainty of a could only occur if µ = µ′ , i.e. if
∆µf = 0 and in that case the scale and mean condition cannot simultaneously hold unless Σ = Σ′ , which is
impossible since an increase in uncertainty in f requires ∆Σf < 0 if ∆µf = 0.
In the text we also claim that if η ≥ 0 then a decrease in demand uncertainty for given economic
uncertainty implies a reduction in policy uncertainty. This is shown using the conditions above by noting
that η ≥ 0 and Σ ≤ Σ′ ⇒ Σf ≤ Σ′f and this along with the mean condition for a imply that the mean
1
2
condition for the policy holds: δ f ≤ ηΣD Σf − Σ′f ≤ 0.

78

(b) From part (a) we see that if η ≥ 0 then conditions (1) and (2) hold. Condition (3) holds for all η iff
−δ f 1
∆Σf ΣD
δf
∆µf

≥ 1
≤
≤

−ΣD ∆Σf
!!
"
"
2
− Σ′2
f − Σf /2 + ΣD ∆Σf

Since µf ∈ R we can always find a µ′f s.t. ∆µf satisfies this condition.QED

79

B

Appendix: Data

B.1

Income Risk Measure

To construct our measure of income risk, we assume that the log of GDP (ln Yi,t ) for country i follows an
AR(1) process in differences with a Gaussian distributed error term:
∆4 ln Yi,t+1 = ai + ρi ∆4 ln Yi,t + ǫi,t+1
We estimate the parameters for each i using quarterly frequency data for entire period from 2001 to 2012.
We compute the uncertainty measure as the share of GDP that a country will lose in the next period if a
bad shock arrives unci,T = 1 − EY [Yi′ < Ŷi0.05 ]/Yi,T . We implement this empirically as
1
2
ǫ̂i,0.05
−σ
âǫ,i
exp(âi + ρ̂i ∆4 ln Yi,T + ǫ̂i,0.05 + 0.5â
σ 2ǫ,i ) Φ â
σ ǫ,i
×
for each i
(49)
unci,T = 1 −
Yi,T
0.05

using T as the fourth quarter of 2001 and Φ(·) is the CDF of a standard Normal distribution. Then a shock
to growth rates at the 5th percentile of the income distribution is ǫ̂i,0.05 = Φ−1 (0.05) × σ
âǫ,i The resulting
income uncertainty measure is the expected profit loss from a bad income shock to GDP in the fourth quarter
of 2001. This approach highlights the role of severe shocks, such as the GTC. We use GDP levels in 2001
to construct the measure because it pre-dates our regression sample. Moreover, we hold this measure fixed
over time for each country. The rank correlation of unci,T and the σ̂ ǫ,i estimate from the AR(1) is 0.82.

B.2

Data Sources and Definitions

Aggregate Trade Flows: See Appendix, section C.1
Firm and Firm-Product Exports
• Firm: A firm is a single or multi-unit enterprise as defined in the Business Register (Standard
Statistical Establishment List). Trade flows not matched to a firm are dropped.
• Firm-Product Variety: We concord 10 digit Schedule B export commodity codes (6 digit Harmonized
System + 4 digit statistical classification) using the method of Pierce and Schott (2009). This ensures
that entry, exit, and churning of varieties is not the result of spurious re-classification of commodities
across statistical codes. We then define varieties within each destination and industry by the
firm-product pair.
• Entry: A firm or firm-product variety that is traded at time t but was non-traded at time t − 4.
• Exit: A firm or firm-product variety that is non-traded at time t but was traded at time t − 4.
• Continuers: A firm or firm-product variety that is traded at both time t and t − 4.
Change in GDP (ln): Change in lnGDP from t to the same quarter in t − 4
PTAit (binary): Indicator for PTA membership. Source: website of U.S. Trade Representative for
implementation dates. We use the seven countries that had a PTA in place by 2006 or earlier and quarterly

80

GDP data. These countries and their implementation dates are: Israel (1985), Canada (1989), Mexico
(1994), Chile (2004), Australia (2005), Guatemala (2006), and Morocco (2006).
Q4YY (binary): Indicator equal to unity for 4 quarter period between in 4th quarter(Q) of year YY
∈ {08, 09, 10}
Income Risk: Measure of income risk as defined in equation (49)
Temporary Trade Barrier (TTB) Coverage Ratio: Source: World Bank Global Anti-Dumping
Database (Bown, 2016) available at http://econ.worldbank.org/ttbd/gad/. This database contains
measures of TTBs by destination-HS6-quarter-year level. Definition: We include all measures in place but
not revoked before 2003 or measures implemented any time from 2003 to 2011. We compute the coverage
ratio as the fraction of its HS6 products within a destination-HS-2 digit industry covered by any TTB,
which includes anti-dumping duties, countervailing duties, and special safeguards.
Inventory Levels (ln): Source: NBER-CES Manufacturing Productivity Database. Definition: We
concord NAICS industry codes to HS 2-digit industry codes using the concordance to NAICS 2007 from
Pierce and Schott (2009). We then compute mean inventory levels within an HS-2. In the robustness
checks we include the log of this measure interacted with time period dummies. In unreported results we
also use mean inventories weighted by total value of shipments for each industry in an HS-2.
High Durables Share (binary): We classify goods into durables and non-durables trade following the
SITC-based classification in Engel and Wang (2011). We concord SITC into the HS and then compute the
share of durables exports by destination and HS 2-digit industry in 2001 and 2002 using the LFTTD
matched data. We discretize this pre-sample share into High Durables (top tercile of shares) and Low
Durables (bottom two terciles).
High/Low Market Power Industry Groups: We describe construction in section 4.4. Low MP HS-2
Chapters are: 02, 04, 07, 08, 10-12, 15-22, 24-29, 31, 47, 48, 51-55, 72, 79, 80. High MP HS-2 Chapters are:
01, 03, 05, 06, 09, 13, 14, 23, 30, 32-46, 49, 50, 56-71, 73-76, 78, 81-97.

B.3

Trade Policy Uncertainty News Index

To obtain the data for Figure 11 we search for articles that contain the words “trade policy” OR “international
trade” in the Chicago Tribune, Boston Globe, LA Times, New York Times, Washington Post, and USA
Today. We save a count of these articles by newspaper and month. Then within these articles we search for
the words “uncertainty" OR “uncertain". For each newspaper and month we construct the share of articles
about international trade or trade policy that also mention uncertainty. We then normalize each newspaper
series to have unit standard deviation over the time interval we observe it. We take the mean by month over
all newspapers and normalize the series to its time series mean. In Figure 11 we plot a lowess smoothed line
over the monthly time series. Other moving average or local polynomial smoothing produce a very similar
qualitative conclusion.

81

C
C.1

Appendix: Estimation
Aggregate Bilateral Gravity Regressions

This appendix describes the methodology and data used for the evidence in section 2.1. The data on “U.S.
Trade in Goods by Country” is available at: https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/index.html.
We combine it with quarterly IMF International Financial Statistics on foreign GDP converted to U.S. dollars, foreign GDP deflators, the U.S. industrial production index, and U.S. GDP deflator.69 We focus on the
group of countries subsequently used in our firm-level regression for comparability.
We compute the log difference between U.S. real exports to i at time t ∈ [2003, 2011] relative to the same
quarter in 2002, ∆t,2002 ln Xit . The general difference-in-difference (D-i-D) specification is
∆t,2002 ln Xit = βCRISISt × P T Ait + a1 CRISISt + a2 P T Ait + Z′it · ac + Qt + εit ,

(50)

where CRISISt is a binary variable equal to unity from 2008Q4 to 2011 and P T Ait is a binary indicator
for whether country i has a PTA with the U.S. at time t. Their interaction identifies the D-i-D estimate
of differential growth for PTA export destinations after the crisis, β. The vector Zit includes standard
determinants used in the aggregate empirical gravity literature: the destination U.S. dollar denominated
GDP growth as measure of foreign demand, the change in the U.S. index of industrial production as a measure
of supply shocks, and changes in the importer and exporter GDP deflators.70 We control for seasonality
using dummies for quarters, Qt . Time invariant country characteristics, e.g. distance, are differenced out.
Table C1 reports the estimates using different sets of fixed effects and control variables. The baseline Di-D estimate in column 1 includes only a common time trend in Zit . We estimate a negative and significant
decline for non-PTAs of 38 lp during the crisis relative to the time trend, the PTA differential is β̂ =11
lp. When we also include the standard gravity controls in Zit , the time trend becomes insignificant, but
β remains similar; we omit this specification from the table but it is available on request. In column 2 we
re-run this gravity equation after restricting β = 0 and examine the behavior of the corresponding residuals
in Figure 3(a), which as described in the text shows that even after controlling for foreign demand growth
and prices there is a sizable positive PTA differential in the crisis.
The estimates with the standard gravity controls are β̂ = 10 in column 4 and β̂ =7.4 in column 5
(respectively without and with country-by-quarter effects).
We explore whether this PTA differential is related to uncertainty by constructing a reduced-form measure
of realized demand risk (GDP SDi ): the standard deviation of real, annual log GDP growth in each country
from 2000-2012. We include this measure in (50) and its interactions with CRISIS, P T A and P T A ×
CRISIS and estimate
∆t,2002 ln Xit = βCRISISt × P T Ait + a1 CRISISt + a2 P T Ait + Z′it ac + Qt + εit
+ b1 GDP SDi + b2 GDP SDi × CRISISt + b3 GDP SDi × P T Ait
+ β HET GDP SDi × CRISISt × P T Ait

(51)

69 We use non-seasonally adjusted data whenever it is available, but 22% of the sample has either seasonally adjusted GDP
or deflator data, which is one reason we include indicators for quarters in all regressions and in the robustness include country
by quarter interactions.
70 All nominal variables are deflated by the U.S. GDP deflator. About 3% of the sample uses annual foreign GDP deflators
because quarterly counterparts are not available. All results are robust to dropping the foreign GDP deflators.

82

For ease of comparison across specifications we demean GDP SDi within the sample so that in columns
6 and 7 the estimate of β is the D-i-D estimate at GDP SDi = 9.5 lp. We obtain a similar β̂ = 12
lp. Our measure of economic uncertainty may capture a number of other country characteristics, e.g.
institutions, fiscal and monetary policy regimes, and others. In this application we are most interested in
its interaction with the crisis indicator, which is negative (b̂2 < 0), and the heterogeneity in the D-i-D effect
estimated through the interaction with CRISISt × P T Ait , which is clearly positive (β̂ HET > 0). To address
unobserved heterogeneity in countries correlated with GDP SDi we use country×quarter effects in column
7, which increases the precision of b̂2 and β̂ HET without changing the signs and interpretation of any other
coefficients.71
As described in the main text, we plot a local polynomial through the residuals of the estimates in column
6 in Figure 3(a).
The marginal effect of PTA membership relative to non-PTA prior to the crisis plotted in the left panel of
Figure 3(b) is â2 + b̂3 GDP SDi and for the remaining periods on the right panel we add b̂2 + β̂ HET GDP SDi .
The bands around each represent 95% confidence intervals.
71 These results are robust to including lags of GDP growth rates, U.S. GDP instead of U.S. industrial production, and/or
omitting the foreign GDP deflators (which increases the set of countries slightly).

83

84

0.704***
[0.0533]
1.190**
[0.541]
0.362***
[0.0613]
0.229
[0.514]

0.0337
[0.0824]
0.121***
[0.0308]
-

-

0.660***
[0.0557]
1.225***
[0.318]
0.296***
[0.0797]
0.435
[0.339]

0.0325
[0.0479]
0.281***
[0.0631]
Ͳ

-

0.701***
[0.0532]
1.188**
[0.541]
0.365***
[0.0612]
0.256
[0.513]

0.655***
[0.0557]
1.222***
[0.317]
0.304***
[0.0799]
0.456
[0.339]

(7)

0.0393
[0.205]
-0.511
[0.333]
-0.0545
[0.868]
1.854
[1.473]
0.33
Yes
No

0.703***
[0.0567]
1.188**
[0.541]
0.378***
[0.0630]
0.222
[0.518]

0.123
[0.0757]
0.022
[0.0828]
0.0798**
[0.0378]
-

-0.357*
[0.209]
-1.436
[1.212]
2.930***
[0.761]
0.78
No
Yes

-

0.654***
[0.0563]
1.224***
[0.317]
0.325***
[0.0844]
0.419
[0.346]

0.117***
[0.0330]
0.0227
[0.0483]
0.227***
[0.0673]
-

+ Risk Interactions

(6)

R-squared
0.156
0.04
0.78
0.33
0.78
Quarter Effects
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Country × Quarter
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Notes:
There are 2,328 observations in all specifications. Figure 3(a) uses the residuals from column 2 for baseline local polynomials plotted with solid lines. Residuals from column 6 used
for local polynomials plotted with dashed lines. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Volatility is demeaned within the sample so that the coefficient
on Crisis × PTA in row 1 is scaled into the marginal effect at the mean. For each year and quarter, exports are deflated by U.S. GDP deflator computed and the change in natural logs
is computed relative to the same quarter in 2002.

Crisis × PTA × Risk

PTA × Risk

Crisis × Risk

Risk (St. Dev. of Foreign GDP growth)

Heterogeneity in Importer Demand Risk
(Demeaned Interaction)

Change in U.S. Prices (deflator)

Changes in Importer Prices (deflator)

Change in U.S. Production Index

Change in Importer GDP (USD)

Time Trend

PTA (= 1 if PTA member, 0 else)

Crisis (= 1 if 2008Q4 to 2011, 0 else)

0.113
[0.0719]
-0.383***
[0.0430]
-0.0408
[0.0341]
0.134***
[0.00728]

Crisis × PTA (D-i-D at means)

0.0735**
[0.0292]
0.023
[0.0483]
0.247***
[0.0617]
-

+ Crisis × PTA
0.100
[0.0659]
0.021
[0.0827]
0.0790**
[0.0322]
-

Gravity Controls

D-i-D
Omit Crisis × PTA

Baseline

Main Controls and Interactions

Table C1: Difference in Difference Estimates -- Change in Aggregate U.S. Exports (ln) 2003-2011 relative to 2002
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Dep. Variable: Change in Exports (ln)

Table C2: Summary Statistics – Aggregate Bilateral Gravity Regressions
Variable
Mean
St. Dev.
ǻExports (ln)
45.24
56.29
PTA (binary)
0.09
0.29
Crisis (binary)
0.36
0.48
ǻForeign GDP (ln)
52.25
32.73
ǻIndustrial Prod. Index (ln)
4.81
4.86
ǻUS GDP Deflator (ln)
11.91
5.68
ǻForeign GDP Deflator (ln)
25.05
26.59
St. Dev Foreign GDP Growth (ln)
9.50
5.15
Notes: 2,238 observations for each. All growth measures are cumulative growth relative to same
quarter in 2002. Growth measures are in log points (100×ln). All nominal values are in U.S.
dollars deflated by U.S. GDP deflator.

Table C3: List of non-PTA and PTA countries in regression sample
Non-PTA Countries
PTA Countries
Argentina
Kazakhstan*
Australia (2005)
Armenia, Republic of
Korea, Republic of
Canada (1989)
Austria
Kyrgyz Republic
Chile (2004)
Azerbaijan, Republic of*
Latvia
Guatemala (2006)
Belarus*
Lithuania
Israel (1985)
Belgium
Luxembourg
Mexico (1994)
Bolivia
Macao
Morocco (2006)
Botswana
Malaysia
Brazil
Malta
Bulgaria
Mauritius
Colombia
Moldova
Croatia
Netherlands
Cyprus
New Zealand
Czech Republic
Norway
Denmark
Philippines
Ecuador
Poland
Estonia
Portugal
Finland
Romania
France
Russian Federation*
Georgia
Serbia, Republic of*
Germany
Slovak Republic
Greece
Slovenia
Hong Kong
South Africa
Hungary
Spain
Iceland
Sweden
Indonesia
Switzerland
Ireland
Thailand
Italy
Turkey
Jamaica
Ukraine†
Japan
United Kingdom
Notes: * Not WTO/GATT member during sample period. †Joins WTO in 2008.

85

Table C4: Entry and Export Growth--Robustness to Timing of Recession and Crisis
Net entry
Export Growth
midpoint
midpoint
ǻln
ǻln
growth
growth
Non-PTA
Uncertainty*Q407
Uncertainty*Q408
Uncertainty*Q409
Uncertainty*Q410

-0.172***
[0.0585]
-0.345***
[0.0717]
-0.174***
[0.0563]
-0.263***
[0.0526]

-0.159***
[0.0536]
-0.305***
[0.0660]
-0.158***
[0.0520]
-0.244***
[0.0483]

0.0963
[0.108]
-0.463***
[0.146]
-0.359***
[0.120]
-0.162
[0.115]

0.0772
[0.0780]
-0.253**
[0.108]
-0.283***
[0.0900]
-0.102
[0.0803]

0.559**
[0.262]
-0.120**
[0.0581]
1.631***
[0.277]
-0.290***
[0.0591]
0.607**
[0.252]
-0.133**
[0.0568]
0.0319
[0.178]
-0.00810
[0.0408]
-0.499**
[0.206]
0.131***
[0.0472]
160,000
0.049
Yes
Yes

0.551**
[0.245]
-0.118**
[0.0539]
1.510***
[0.266]
-0.268***
[0.0567]
0.582**
[0.239]
-0.128**
[0.0538]
0.0321
[0.170]
-0.00801
[0.0392]
-0.482**
[0.193]
0.126***
[0.0445]
160,000
0.052
Yes
Yes

0.0302
[0.500]
0.0341
[0.111]
1.831***
[0.532]
-0.294**
[0.121]
0.748
[0.499]
-0.165
[0.117]
0.320
[0.356]
-0.0706
[0.0813]
-0.414
[0.407]
0.132
[0.0880]
160,000
0.049
Yes
Yes

0.138
[0.372]
-0.00451
[0.0819]
1.119***
[0.434]
-0.180*
[0.1000]
0.544
[0.368]
-0.116
[0.0860]
0.279
[0.278]
-0.0658
[0.0644]
-0.350
[0.307]
0.114*
[0.0648]
160,000
0.056
Yes
Yes

PTA
PTA*Uncertainty*Q407
PTA*Q407
PTA*Uncertainty*Q408
PTA*Q408
PTA*Uncertainty*Q409
PTA*Q409
PTA*Uncertainty*Q410
PTA*Q410
PTA*Uncertainty
PTA

Observations
R-squared
Quarter-Year FE
Country*HS2 FE
Notes:
Aggregation level: country-HS2-quarter of varieties defined at the firm-country-HS10 level. Dependent variable in
column 1 is log growth and col. 2 the midpoint growth in the number of varieties exported in a country-HS2quarter. For columns 3 and 4 it is the respective export values. We use uncertainty estimates from AR(1) countryspecific regressions. See details in text. Robust standard errors clustered at the destination country by time period
level (pre-crisis period and the year long periods with start date denoted by the Q4## indicators). *,**,*** Sig.
different from 0 at 10%, 5% and 1% respectively. GDP growth by time period controls suppressed from output.

86

