NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PEOPLE MANAGEMENT SKILLS, EMPLOYEE ATTRITION, AND MANAGER REWARDS:
AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
Mitchell Hoffman
Steven Tadelis
Working Paper 24360
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24360

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018, Revised April 2020

We thank Camilo Acosta-Mejia, Daphne Baldassari, Jordi Blanes i Vidal, Nick Bloom, Wouter
Dessein, Guido Friebel, Maria Guadalupe, Matthias Heinz, Pat Kline, Eddie Lazear, Bentley
MacLeod, Andrea Prat, Kathryn Shaw, Orie Shelef, Chris Stanton, Chad Syverson, Nick Zubanov,
and many conference/seminar participants for helpful comments. We are grateful to the
anonymous firm for providing access to proprietary data and to several managers from the firm for
their insightful comments. One of the authors has performed paid work for the firm on topics
unrelated to HR and the workforce. The paper was reviewed to ensure that confidential or
proprietary information is not revealed. Hoffman acknowledges financial support from the
Connaught New Researcher Award and the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of
Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Mitchell Hoffman and Steven Tadelis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

People Management Skills, Employee Attrition, and Manager Rewards: An Empirical Analysis
Mitchell Hoffman and Steven Tadelis
NBER Working Paper No. 24360
February 2018, Revised April 2020
JEL No. D23,J24,J33,L23,M50
ABSTRACT
How much do a manager’s interpersonal skills with subordinates, which we call people
management skills, affect employee outcomes? Are managers rewarded for having such skills?
Using personnel data from a large, high-tech firm, we show that survey-measured people
management skills have a strong negative relation to employee turnover. A causal interpretation
is reinforced by research designs exploiting new workers joining the firm and manager moves.
However, people management skills do not consistently improve most observed non-attrition
outcomes. Better people managers themselves receive higher subjective performance ratings,
higher promotion rates, and larger salary increases.

Mitchell Hoffman
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
mitchell.hoffman@rotman.utoronto.ca
Steven Tadelis
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
stadelis@haas.berkeley.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24360

1

Introduction

It is broadly accepted that even within narrow industries, there are large and persistent productivity diﬀerences across ﬁrms and countries (Syverson, 2011). While a growing literature
shows that management practices aﬀect ﬁrm performance and help explain these productivity
diﬀerences (Ichniowski et al., 1997; Ichniowski and Shaw, 1999; Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007;
Bloom et al., 2013, 2019), less attention has been devoted to managers themselves.
Of particular interest to understanding how managers aﬀect outcomes are people management skills, which we take to be a manager’s interpersonal (i.e., social) skills in relations
with their subordinates. Non-cognitive skills like social skills play a key role in economic life
(Heckman and Kautz, 2012) and social skills are increasingly rewarded in the labor market
(Deming, 2017). How much do good people management skills matter for employee outcomes?
Are good people management skills rewarded inside the ﬁrm?
We answer these questions using employee surveys conducted at a large, high-tech ﬁrm
combined with rich personnel data that cover thousands of managers and tens of thousands
of employees. We show that people management skills (1) reduce employee attrition, particularly attrition the ﬁrm wishes to avoid, and that the relation appears causal; (2) do not
consistently improve most non-attrition outcomes; and (3) are rewarded by the ﬁrm. We explore how the impact of people management skills varies across levels of hierarchy, countries,
and occupations, providing granular quantiﬁcation of managerial diﬀerences within the same
multinational ﬁrm.
Progress has been made in examining how much managers matter using a “value-added”
(VA) approach. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) examine how much CEOs matter by regressing
ﬁrm outcomes on CEO ﬁxed eﬀects, pioneering an approach used by a subsequent ﬁnance
literature. Lazear et al. (2015) use data from one ﬁrm to show that frontline supervisors
matter a great deal for productivity. Bender et al. (2018) analyze interactions between employees/managers and management practices in Germany.
Despite its strengths, the VA approach faces two main limitations when applied to our
research questions. First, VA estimates measure the overall impact of a given manager on
individual outcomes, not the separate impact of people management skills. A manager’s
traits may include the ability to bring in high-value clients, or better problem-solving skills.
Second, VA studies require good objective data on worker productivity. However, in many
ﬁrms, direct data on individual worker productivity is scarce, and sometimes impossible to
measure, particularly in high-skill, collaborative environments.
We take a diﬀerent yet complementary approach to VA by measuring people management skills using employees’ responses to questions about their manager (e.g., whether their

1

manager is trustworthy or provides adequate coaching).1 We explore the extent to which
people management skills relate to employee outcomes, with the greatest focus on employee
attrition. Conventional wisdom, especially in high-tech ﬁrms, is that employee attrition is a
key way by which worker knowledge and skills are lost. As such, high-tech ﬁrms are deeply
interested in what can be done to reduce turnover, particularly that of high performers.
Our data are well-suited to address possible concerns about measuring people management skills using surveys. First, the response rate at our ﬁrm is about 95%. Second, while
employees may fear their manager will know how they evaluated them, this concern is mitigated due to the conﬁdential nature of the survey. Workers are truthfully told that their
individual responses will never be observed by the ﬁrm. Instead, managers receive aggregated
results, and only for managers with a minimum number of employees responding. Third,
survey responses may contain measurement error due to inattentiveness, sampling error, or
diﬀerent employees treating questions diﬀerently. We address this using an instrumental variable (IV) strategy where a manager’s score in one wave is instrumented using his or her score
in the other wave. Section 2 further describes the data. Section 3 covers our empirical strategy.
Our ﬁrst main ﬁnding, presented in Section 4, is that people management skills have
a strong negative relation to employee attrition. Increasing a manager’s people management
skills from the 10th to the 90th percentile predicts a 60% reduction in turnover. These results
are quite strong in terms of retaining the ﬁrm’s high performers, both deﬁned in terms of
classifying employees based on subjective performance scores and using the ﬁrm’s deﬁnition of
“regretted” voluntary turnover. Beyond classical measurement error, the IV strategy addresses
survey measurement error that is contemporaneously correlated with attrition.
Still, the question remains whether these results are causal. Even for our IV estimates,
there are concerns about non-contemporaneous measurement error in people management
skills that is correlated with employee attrition, as well as concerns that the ﬁrm optimally
sorts managers and employees together. We address these using multiple identiﬁcation strategies, some similar to those in the teacher VA literature (Chetty et al., 2014). Our ﬁrst
strategy analyzes outcomes of employees who join mid-way through our sample, using a manager’s quality measured before an employee joins the ﬁrm as an IV. This addresses concern
about non-permanent, unobservable shocks aﬀecting turnover and manager ratings, and reduces concern that the results are driven by the ﬁrm sorting managers and employees based
on long-time information about the employee. Our second strategy additionally analyzes
instances of workers switching managers, allowing us to test for non-random assignment of
1

Many organizations survey employees about their managers, including Google (Garvin et al., 2013), RBC
(Shaw and Schifrin, 2015), Pepsi (Bracken et al., 2016), and the US federal government (Arrington and Dwyer,
2018). CultureAmp, a ﬁrm survey vendor, informed us that about 15-20% of its 1,000+ clients use upward
feedback surveys (i.e., surveys of employees about their managers) focused on giving managers feedback.

2

managers and workers, and to analyze how the impact of people management skills varies
based on time together between a manager and employee. Our third strategy exploits managers moving across locations or job functions within the ﬁrm, allowing us to address more
permanent unobservables as well as to rule out assignment bias. All strategies point to people
management skills having a strong, causal eﬀect on attrition. Section 5 discusses heterogeneity
in MOR eﬀects.
Section 6 shows that people management skills do not have a consistent positive relation
to most observed non-attrition employee outcomes. We ﬁnd no evidence of a positive relation
between people management skills and employee salary growth, probability of promotion, or
patenting. There is some evidence of a positive relation for employee subjective performance,
but results are not robust across analyses. These ﬁndings suggest that better people management skills do not reduce attrition by making workers more “productive” (though we freely
admit that it is hard to measure knowledge worker productivity), but may instead cause workers to better enjoy their jobs. We caveat that most non-attrition outcomes are not observed
in our data and that eﬀects could be observed over a longer horizon.
Section 7 establishes our secondary result that managers with better people management
skills get rewarded by the ﬁrm. Better people managers attain substantially higher subjective
performance scores, are more likely to be promoted, and receive larger salary increases. Such
results are consistent with the ﬁrm valuing the role of good people management skills in
reducing employee turnover.
Our paper contributes to several literatures. First, it relates to work on individual
managers, from which Lazear et al. (2015), who study the impact of front-line supervisors
in a low-skill setting, is most related.2 Aside from focusing on a large high-tech ﬁrm, our
paper diﬀers from theirs in several other ways. Most notably, their VA approach shows that
managers matter, but this may be through “hard” skills, like problem-solving, and soft skills,
which is our focus. Also, unlike Lazear et al. (2015), we are able to test whether managers
are rewarded for skills. Our paper also diﬀers by analyzing quasi-experiments from managers
switching locations or functions, and by characterizing heterogeneity in estimates by hierarchy,
geography, and occupation. Beyond the broader VA literature, our paper relates to other work
that tries to open the black-box of what managers do. For example, Bandiera et al. (2019)
use CEO diary data and ﬁnd that CEOs who focus on high-level agendas outperform those
who focus on functional management. We instead explore managerial diﬀerences by using
employee surveys as a measure of manager skills. Like prior work showing that management
practices can be usefully measured using surveys (Ichniowski et al., 1997; Bloom and Van
2

Also, Bandiera et al. (2007) show that manager bonuses boost productivity. Bandiera et al. (2015) study
matching of top managers and ﬁrms. Friebel et al. (2018) show that store managers change behavior in
response to letters.

3

Reenen, 2007), we show the same is true of particular managerial skills.
Second, it relates to studies of compensation in ﬁrms (e.g., Baker et al., 1994a), providing
novel evidence that people management skills are rewarded within the ﬁrm. We ﬁnd that
people management skills are a much stronger predictor of rewards by the ﬁrm than attrition
VA; hence, a researcher using attrition VA who lacked data on people management skills
would reach diﬀerent conclusions than ours regarding manager rewards.
Third, we contribute to the growing literature on social skills in the workplace. People
management skills are one variety of “social” or “people” skills. Social skills are generally
considered to be a person’s ability to communicate eﬀectively with others (Borghans et al.,
2014), and we deﬁne people management skills as a manager’s ability to eﬀectively interact
with their subordinates. Deming (2017) emphasizes that social skills are important for teamwork (horizontal production). We provide novel evidence that social skills are also important
in management (vertical production). Relatedly, Schoar (2016) shows that an intervention
in garment factories aimed at improving supervisors’ communication skills and treatment of
workers improved productivity. Weinberger (2014) and Deming (2017) show that a worker’s
social and cognitive skills are complementary. As we observe a stronger relation between people management skills and attrition for workers in more cognitively demanding jobs (namely,
ones higher up in the ﬁrm’s hierarchy), our results suggest complementarity between a manager’s people management skills and a worker’s cognitive skills. This is noteworthy as it occurs
even within the ﬁrm’s relatively high-skilled workforce.
Fourth, it expands the literature on knowledge-based employees (e.g., Baker et al., 1994a;
Bartel et al., 2017; Kuhnen and Oyer, 2016; Brown et al., 2016). Much of empirical personnel
economics focuses on lower-skilled jobs (e.g., truckers, retail, and farm-workers), partially
because it is relatively simple to measure individual productivity. In contrast, for knowledgebased jobs, production is often complex, multi-faceted, and involves teamwork. Our analysis
sheds light on the managerial production function in these settings.
Finally, it relates to work on subjective performance evaluation and workplace feedback. Like subjective performance evaluations, employee surveys help account for diﬃcultto-measure aspects of performance (Baker et al., 1994b). Our paper highlights a version of
performance evaluation, namely upward feedback surveys, that has received much less attention than subjective performance ratings, particularly by economists.3
3
Surveys explored in psychology and management seem focused on diﬀerent issues like consistency of ratings
(e.g., Atkins and Wood, 2002) or rating system design (e.g., Bracken et al., 2016) rather than the causal impact
of people management skills on outcomes. Also, to our knowledge, this work does not use our IV approach or
quasi-experimental designs.

4

2

Data and Institutional Setting

Our data, obtained from a U.S.-headquartered high-tech ﬁrm, cover a period of two years and
three months, some time during 2011-2015, and are organized as a worker-month panel. To
preserve ﬁrm conﬁdentiality, certain details regarding the ﬁrm and exact time period cannot
be provided. We refer to the three years of the data as Y1 , Y2 , and Y3 .
The ﬁrm is divided into several broad business units and workers are classiﬁed by job
function. A core job function is engineering, comprising 36% of worker-months in our sample.
Engineers build and debug code, often working in teams. Many workers are in non-engineering
functions (e.g., marketing, ﬁnance, sales). As in many high-tech ﬁrms, the ﬁrm also has a
large number of lower-skilled workers in customer service/operations, but we exclude them
from our analysis, given our broad motivation of better understanding high-skilled workplaces.
About 21% of observations (worker-months) are for individuals in manager roles, so
the majority of observations are for non-managers, often referred to in industry as individual
contributors. While our data begin in January Y1 , 71% of workers in our sample are hired
before that date. Further details describing the data are in Appendix B.

2.1

Employee Surveys

Every year, employees are given a detailed survey used by the ﬁrm’s Human Resource (HR)
department and executives to gain an accurate sense of employee opinions. To ensure the
anonymity of responses, survey information about one’s manager is only collected on managers
who manage a minimum number of individuals.4
Surveys of this type are typically administered before year-end, and ours were performed
around September in Y1 and Y2 . The survey had the same manager questions and format in
Y1 and Y2 , and the response rate was about 95%. To match outcomes with their associated
survey, we follow what the ﬁrm’s HR analysts did for internal reporting. Observations from
January Y1 -September Y1 are assigned the survey information from the Y1 survey, whereas
other observations are assigned the survey information from the Y2 survey.
Manager questions. Every year employees are asked six key questions about their
manager. For each question, employees are asked whether they Strongly Disagree, Disagree,
4

In the Y1 survey, the threshold was 3 employees, whereas in Y2 , the threshold was 5 employees. We do not
know the number of people who responded for each manager. To check that measurement error from surveys
on small teams does not drive the results, we verify that our main results are robust to restricting to workers
where the manager has an at or above the median (i.e., at least 8 or 9) number of direct reports. The survey
is “third-party conﬁdential” meaning that the survey vendor, a third-party independent ﬁrm, has access to
responses so it can tie them to employee attributes to generate statistical information.

5

Neither Agree nor Disagree, Agree, or Strongly Agree. Speciﬁcally, we observe answers to the
following survey items about one’s immediate manager:5
1. communicates a clear understanding of the expectations from me for my job.
2. provides continuous coaching and guidance on how I can improve my performance.
3. actively supports my professional/career development.
4. consults with people for decision making when appropriate.
5. generates a positive attitude in the team, even when conditions are diﬃcult.
6. is someone whom I can trust.
The questions measure broad aspects of a manager’s eﬀectiveness in interacting well with
subordinates, which is presumably enhanced by clear expectations, appropriate trust, and
positivity. Thus, we use the responses to construct our measure of people management skills.
In the data provided to us, a manager’s rating on an item is the share of employees who
marked Agree or Strongly Agree. For example, if a manager has 8 direct reports, and 6 of
them marked Agree or Strongly Agree for one of the items, the manager’s score on that item
would be 75 out of 100.6 A manager’s overall rating (MOR) is the average of scores on the 6
items, e.g., if a manager had a score of 100 on the ﬁrst 3 items and a score of 50 on the second
3 items, MOR is 75. The MOR is easy to compute and is used by the ﬁrm in its internal
reporting and communications. We use MOR as our main measure of people management
skills. If employees experience multiple managers over the survey period, they only rate their
most recent manager.
Persistence of MOR. Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows that manager scores are somewhat
persistent over time using a binned scatter plot with no controls. The coeﬃcient of 0.37
means that a manager who scores 10 points higher in the Y1 survey in MOR is scored 3.7
points higher on average in the Y2 survey. Table 2 shows a similar pattern of some persistence
while applying control variables and using normalized survey scores. Each column regresses
MOR or one of the six manager questions from the Y2 survey on the same variable in the Y1
survey. In column 1, a manager who performs 1 standard deviation (σ) higher in Y1 scores
0.37σ higher in Y2 .
Though sizable, the predictiveness of the scores over time is perhaps not as high as one
might expect. We believe that the main reason is measurement error in the surveys. Even
though the ﬁrm strongly encouraged workers to take the surveys quite seriously (reﬂected in
the high response rate), measurement error often occurs when respondents are asked to answer
5

The manager questions are part of a longer survey covering other topics (e.g., ﬁrm decision-making, worker
engagement). To preserve ﬁrm conﬁdentiality, the wording may be slightly modiﬁed from the original.
6
It is common practice to break the 5-answer scale into 2 or 3 parts (Garvin et al., 2013). Using the share
of workers marking 4 or 5 (as we do) is consistent with how other ﬁrms measure managers on similar surveys.

6

many questions, particularly subjective ones (Bound et al., 2001). Measurement error could
arise from inattention, survey fatigue, short-term mood, or from MOR being created by taking
the share of individuals marking Agree or Strongly Agree to a question (thereby introducing
noise from an average over a discrete categorization).7 Observed persistence increases when
restricting attention to workers on larger teams, consistent with classical measurement error
shrinking persistence. Section 3 details how our empirical strategy addresses measurement
error.

2.2

Employee Outcomes

In knowledge-based ﬁrms such as the one we study, employee performance has multiple dimensions and is not measured by a single metric. Our data’s core employee outcomes are:
Turnover. Many ﬁrms consider turnover to be a signiﬁcant problem, especially hightech ﬁrms, because employee knowledge is a key asset and turnover is a loss of knowledge.
In fact, as is common in many high-tech ﬁrms, our ﬁrm has analysts who try to predict and
reduce turnover. We separately observe dates of voluntary attrition (“quits”) and involuntary
attrition (“ﬁres”). We also observe whether the ﬁrm classiﬁed quits as “regretted” (highlyvalued employee) or not, allowing us to go much further than is typical in analyzing turnover.
To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst paper in economics to analyze data on whether a worker’s
attrition was regretted by the ﬁrm, which is valuable because it sheds light on the issue of
“good” vs. “bad” attrition.
Subjective performance. The ﬁrm’s subjective performance score ratings of each
employee are on a discrete 1-5 scale, which is common (e.g., Frederiksen et al., 2017), and are
set biannually by an employee’s immediate and higher-up managers. While there are some
broad guidelines for the distribution of these scores across various units within the ﬁrm, there
is not a ﬁxed “curve” across managers regarding subjective performance.
Salary increases. One way of proxying an employee’s productivity improvements is the
extent to which her salary increases. Because salaries are listed in local currency, we restrict
analysis of salary to employees paid in U.S. dollars following Baker et al. (1994a). Salaries are
set by the compensation department, though managers play a role in aﬀecting worker raises.
Promotions. Promotions are pre-deﬁned in the data provided by the ﬁrm, and correspond roughly to an increase in a person’s salary grade. Promotions are a common proxy of
productivity for higher skilled workers (Brown et al., 2016; Lyle and Smith, 2014).
7

Other factors may limit persistence of MOR. First, managers may provide better supervision for certain
teams or projects. Second, managers may change behavior or invest in manager eﬀectiveness. Panels (b) and
(c) of Figure 1 shows histograms for MOR in both periods.

7

Patents. Patents are commonly used to measure innovation (Jaﬀe et al., 1993). We
analyze workers’ patent applications because it takes years for the patent oﬃce to approve
applications.8 Since patents vary widely in value, we also analyze citation-weighted patents
(Jaﬀe et al., 1993). Patents are most common among engineers, but non-engineers also patent.
While these outcomes all capture valuable aspects of worker performance, we do not
claim to fully measure “productivity” in our setting. Certain aspects of productivity, such as
the value of an engineer’s computer code or the contributions of a businessperson to a new
marketing strategy, seem impossible to quantify. This increases the usefulness of using surveys
to study managers relative to using VA.
Diﬀerent employee outcomes are available at diﬀerent frequencies, but are coded in our
data at the monthly level. Attrition events, promotions, and patent applications are based
on exact dates. Subjective performance reviews occur twice per year, but scores are coded
month-by-month. Annual salary is tracked at the monthly level, though salary increases are
more likely to occur in spring and fall.

2.3

Assignment of Managers and Employees

The initial assignment of employees to managers reﬂects the projects and functions that
require employees at any given time. Geographic needs also dictate circumstances in which
employees experience a change of manager. The ﬁrm has an online portal where managers
post internal workforce needs, and new employee-manager matches can form based on these
postings. Managers play a key role in hiring and are also involved with dismissals. Thus,
it is clear that employees are not being randomly assigned to managers. We further discuss
manager assignment in Sections 3 and 4. Manager changes are observed month-by-month.
As described in Sections 3 and 4.4, we adopt several identiﬁcation strategies to deal
with the possibilities that MOR and outcomes are both correlated with unobservable project
characteristics, e.g., some projects being exciting, leading to high scores in MOR and good
outcome measures. A remaining concern may be that managers are selected into projects
based on MOR. Conversations with several executives conﬁrm that this is not done in practice;
projects are assigned based on business needs and to some extent on domain expertise, but
not based on MOR.
In our sample, managers manage an average of 9.35 employees at once. Weighted by
worker tenure, employees experience an average of 1.52 managers in our sample.
8

Workers disclose inventions to the legal department, who decides whether to ﬁle a patent application.
Workers get a bonus when an application is ﬁled, plus another bonus after a patent grant, so there is a
signiﬁcant incentive to disclose useful inventions.

8

2.4

Sample Creation and Summary Statistics

To create our sample, we restrict attention to worker-months where an employee has a manager
with a non-missing MOR for both survey waves. This sample restriction is required for our IV
analysis, where we instrument manager MOR in the current period using MOR in the other
period. Our sample runs from January Y1 -March Y3 .
Table 1 provides summary statistics. While sample size cannot be shown to preserve
ﬁrm conﬁdentiality, our ﬁnal sample contains well over 1,000 managers, 10,000 workers, and
100,000 worker-months. Mean MOR is 81 out of 100. 81% of employees are co-located with
their manager and the rest are managed remotely. Mean attrition is 1.37% per month (∼15%
per year). Most separations are quits, but there are still many ﬁres.

3

Empirical Strategy

We wish to estimate how much manager j’s underlying people management skill, mj , aﬀects
an outcome, yit , of employee i:
yit = βmj(i,t) + εit

(1)

where j(i, t) means that j manages employee i at time t, though we will henceforth abbreviate
j(i, t) simply by j. Measurement error implies that instead of true people management skills,
we only observe the noisy survey measure, m
 j . In our data, we have the two waves of the
 j,2 , with m
 j,τ = mj + uj,τ , τ ∈ {1, 2}. t is at
survey, giving us two manager scores m
 j,1 and m
the monthly level, whereas there are two values of τ , which we call the period.
Perhaps the simplest approach to analyzing the impact of people management skills is
to estimate OLS regressions of the form:
 j,τ (t) + θi,t
yi,t = bm

(2)

where θi,t is an error term; and where τ (t) = 1 if t ≤ month 9 of Y1 and τ (t) = 2 otherwise.
However, OLS models may be biased by measurement error. An alternative approach (e.g.,
Ashenfelter and Krueger, 1994) is to instrument one survey measure with the other one:
 j,τ + θi,t
yi,t = bm

(3)

 j,−τ + ηj,t
m
 j,τ = cm
where m
 j,−τ is the measured people management score of manager j in the period other than
the current one, and θi,t and ηj,t are error terms.
Instead of assuming that the measurement error is classical, we will consider the possibility that the measurement error could be correlated with unobserved determinants of employee
outcomes, e.g., that being on a good project could aﬀect how an employee rates their man-

9

ager, as well as whether that employee attrites. Hence, we make fewer assumptions than most
empirical studies with measurement error. We still assume, though, that measurement error
is uncorrelated with a manager’s true people management skill:
Assumption 1 cov (mj , uj,τ ) = 0 for τ ∈ {1, 2}.
While we do not expect Assumption 1 to be literally true (given that MOR is capped at 0 and
100), we believe that it is approximately true in our setting, particularly because managers
are not selecting their own survey score.9 For simplicity, we also assume that var(uj,τ ) = σu2
for all j and τ , i.e., the variance of the measurement error is the same across managers and
periods.
We now compare OLS and IV estimators for this setting. For ease of exposition, we
τ)
plus Assumption 1 to
suppress i and j subscripts. For OLS, we use plim(bOLS ) = cov(yt ,m
var(m
τ)

get an equation for the inconsistency from OLS (derived in Appendix A.2):
σ2
cov(εt , uτ )
cov(εt , m)
+
plim(bOLS − β) = − 2 u 2 β +
2
2
σ +σ
σ +σ
σ2 + σ2
 m u 
 m  u 
 m  u 
Attenuation Bias

Contemp. Corr. ME

(4)

Assignment Bias

In (4), the ﬁrst term, Attenuation Bias, is standard under OLS with classical measurement
error. In the second term, Contemporaneously Correlated Measurement Error, the numerator,
cov (εt , uτ ), is the covariance between unobservables that aﬀect worker outcomes and survey
measurement error. We believe that such covariance is likely to be positive, but that is not
necessarily the case. For example, one issue for analyzing attrition as an outcome is that there
are individuals who quit before they get to take the survey. A manager may appear to have
a better score on the survey than if departed workers were allowed to take part in the survey.
In the third term, Assignment Bias, the numerator, cov(εt , m), is the covariance of people
management skills with worker outcome unobservables. This could be positive or negative.
Next, consider the IV estimator from (3). Note that diﬀerent workers may evaluate the
cov(yt ,m
 −τ )
, we get:
same manager during diﬀerent periods. Using plim(bIV ) = cov(
m
 τ ,m
 −τ )
cov (uτ , u−τ )
cov (εt , u−τ )
cov (εt , m)
plim(bIV − β) = − 2
β+ 2
+ 2
(5)
σm + cov (uτ , u−τ )
σm + cov (uτ , u−τ ) σm + cov (uτ , u−τ )

 

 



Attenuation Bias

Assignment Bias

Asynchronously Corr. ME

σu2

in (4). Thus, if the
In (5), the numerator of the ﬁrst term has cov (uτ , u−τ ) in place of
measurement errors are uncorrelated across the two surveys, there is no attenuation bias.
This assumption seems reasonable for certain types of measurement error, such as sampling
9
People answering questions about themselves are often subject to desirability bias (Bound et al., 2001),
but that is not the case here. A1 could still be violated if good or bad managers systematically engage in
inﬂuence activities to boost their scores, or if there is peer pressure to systematically boost scores of good or
bad managers. However, conversations with the ﬁrm indicate that inﬂuence activities are frowned upon and
any such biases are likely to be minimal. Our analysis of measurement error draws heavily on Pischke (2007).

10

error due to small numbers of subjects or people being happy because the current project is
going well. Other types of measurement error might be more persistent, e.g., there could be
a persistently good long-term project or people on a manager’s team have a general tendency
to rate managers highly on surveys. As we discuss later, such correlations can be avoided
by looking at managers who move across locations or job functions in the ﬁrm. In such
circumstances, we would expect substantially less attenuation bias than in OLS.
The second term of (5) has cov (εt , u−τ ) instead of cov (εt , uτ ) in the numerator. That
is, it involves the covariance between unobserved determinants of performance in the current
period and measurement error in the other period. For measurement error due to inattention
or non-response, this correlation may be quite small or zero. For issues like being on a good
project, this correlation may depend on how persistent the shock is over time.
The third term of (5) still has cov (εt , m) in the numerator, but it is divided now by
2
2
+σu2 . Thus, IV ampliﬁes assignment bias if cov (uτ , u−τ ) < σu2 .
σm +cov (uτ , u−τ ) instead of σm
 −τ :
We will also present reduced form results, i.e., OLS regressions of yt on m
2
σ
cov(εt , u−τ )
cov(εt , m)
+
plim(bRF − β) = − 2 u 2 β +
2
2
σ +σ
σ +σ
σ2 + σ2
 m u 
 m  u 
 m  u 
Attenuation Bias

Asynchronously Corr. ME

Assignment Bias

Relative to the IV, a disadvantage of the reduced form is that there is still the same attenuation
2
+ σu2 in the
bias as for OLS. A potential advantage is that assignment bias is scaled by σm
2
+ cov (uτ , u−τ ).
denominator instead of σm
Except if noted otherwise, standard errors are clustered by manager in the empirical
analysis, reﬂecting the main level of variation for our key regressor.
Comparison with studies on teachers. While teachers generally do not choose their
students, managers at our high-tech ﬁrm play a critical role in selecting people for their team.
Indeed, practitioners frequently argue that one of the most important parts of being a good
people manager is selecting the right people (Harvard Management Update, 2008). Thus,
randomly assigning employees to managers would not be informative of the overall impact
of good people management skills since it would rule out better people managers selecting
better people. Rather, diﬀerences in employee quality across managers might be viewed as
a mechanism by which managers improve outcomes as opposed to a source of bias. A more
informative hypothetical experiment for our setting, approximated in our design based on
managers switching locations or job functions, would be to randomly assign managers to
diﬀerent parts of the ﬁrm and then observe employee outcomes. Still, even if we do not wish
to rule out better managers selecting better people, we need to address the possibility of the
ﬁrm optimally sorting managers and employees together (“assignment bias”).
Control variables. Adding control variables helps address the possibility that MOR
11

and employee outcomes may diﬀer systematically. We control for the ﬁrm’s diﬀerent business
units, as well as for job function (or occupation). We also control for year of hire, current
year dummies, and a 5th order polynomial in employee tenure. We control for location,
employee salary grade, and an employee’s manager’s span of control. In tests of coeﬃcient
stability (Oster, 2019), Section 4.5 shows that our results are very similar when using even
ﬁner controls, including various interaction terms and year-month dummies.

4

Manager Quality and Employee Attrition

Section 4.1 shows baseline results on MOR and attrition, followed by our three research
designs: new joiners (Section 4.2); new joiners or employees switching managers (Section
4.3); and exploiting managers switching locations or job functions (Section 4.4). Exploiting
diﬀerent variation and addressing diﬀerent threats to identiﬁcation, all three designs provide
complementary evidence that people management skill substantially reduces attrition. Section
4.5 addresses further threats to identiﬁcation, assesses the quantitative importance of our
results, and estimates manager VA.

4.1

Baseline Results

Panel A of Table 3 shows our baseline results. Column 1 shows a strong ﬁrst stage (F > 100).
In column 2, the OLS coeﬃcient of -0.156 means that increasing MOR by 1σ is associated
with a monthly reduction in attrition of 0.156 percentage points (hereafter “pp”), which is
an 11% reduction relative to the mean of 1.37pp per month. In column 3, the IV coeﬃcient
is substantially larger at -0.475, implying that increasing MOR by 1σ corresponds to a 35%
reduction in turnover. By the diﬀerence of two Sargan-Hansen statistics, we reject that the
IV and OLS estimates are the same (p < 0.01). That the IV estimate is three times larger in
magnitude than the OLS estimate is consistent with OLS being signiﬁcantly biased downward
due to attenuation bias from measurement error.
Our IV estimate implies that moving from a manager in the 10th percentile of MOR to
one in the 90th percentile is associated with a turnover drop of roughly 60%.10 As a reference
point, Bloom et al. (2014) show that randomly assigning call-center employees to work from
home reduces turnover by 50%.
However, not all attrition is the same. It could be that good managers prevent quits,
but are willing to ﬁre individuals who are not contributing. Thus, Panels B and C perform
10

p10 of a standard normal is 1.28σ below the mean, corresponding to a monthly attrition rate of 1.3741.28*(-.475)=1.98pp. p90 corresponds to 0.77pp monthly, a reduction of slightly more than 60%.

12

the same analyses separately for quits and ﬁres.11 We observe highly signiﬁcant negative IV
results for both quits and ﬁres. The coeﬃcient is larger in absolute magnitude for quits, but
is larger in percentage terms for ﬁres, reﬂecting that ﬁres are rarer than quits. Also, there is a
larger percentage relation between MOR and regretted quits (Panel D) than there is between
MOR and non-regretted quits (Panel E), suggesting that MOR might help reduce unwanted,
or “bad” quits (from the ﬁrm’s perspective) more than it reduces “good” quits. Later, we will
shed further light on “good” vs. “bad” attrition by using subjective performance scores.
That high-MOR managers reduce both quits and ﬁres is consistent with people management skill positively impacting worker motivation. More motivated workers should be less
interested in outside opportunities and less prone to behave in ways that result in ﬁres.12
That the coeﬃcient is larger for regretted than non-regretted quits is consistent with complementarity between a worker’s skills and their manager’s people management skills, a point we
return to in Section 5, particularly in the context of attrition result heterogeneity according
to worker position in the hierarchy.
Figure 2 shows binned scatter plots for the reduced form regressions, showing a clear
negative relationship for all ﬁve attrition variables, plus whether a worker changes manager.

4.2

New Workers Joining the Firm

Restricting our IV analysis to new workers who join the ﬁrm in the second period, Table 4 also
ﬁnds a strong negative relation between a worker’s manager’s MOR and turnover (our sample
size here is 8% of that in Table 3). This “joiners” analysis allows us to address a couple of
concerns. First, in the joiners analysis, the survey responses of the workers under analysis do
not inﬂuence the instrument because they are new to the ﬁrm.
Second, our analysis reduces concerns about assignment bias. When an employee joins
a very large ﬁrm, they are unlikely to have substantial information about diﬀerences in people
management skills across managers that would enable them to choose their managers. Further,
as argued in Lazear et al. (2015) who use joiners to estimate manager VA, the ﬁrm is unlikely
to have substantial information about the new worker separate from the hiring manager. This
reduces the concern that εt is correlated with m separate from the possible role of better
managers in selecting better employees for their team.
Results. Despite having much less statistical power than in the full sample, the relationship between MOR and attrition in Table 4 is qualitatively similar. Looking at all attrition
11

Turnover is labeled as voluntary, involuntary, or missing/not assigned. We don’t use missing turnover
events in Panels B and C (they are included in Panel A). Involuntary exits or “ﬁres” include both true ﬁres
and layoﬀs. The “ﬁres” results become even stronger if months with layoﬀs are excluded.
12
It could also reﬂect high-MOR managers attracting less attrition-prone workers, though Section 4.3 shows
little evidence of observably better workers sorting to high-MOR managers when workers change managers.

13

in Panel A, the IV coeﬃcient of −0.550 is slightly larger in magnitude than that in Panel A of
Table 3, though it just misses statistical signiﬁcance at 10%. The coeﬃcient implies that a 1σ
increase in MOR corresponds to a 0.55pp (38%) reduction in monthly turnover. We also see
broadly similar results for other attrition variables, with particularly strong results for quits
(especially regretted quits), for which the IV estimate is statistically signiﬁcant.

4.3

Workers Joining the Firm or Changing Managers

Despite its clear beneﬁts, the joiners analysis has limitations. First, new workers may be
impacted diﬀerentially by MOR. Second, the sample size is small relative to our full sample. Third, it is diﬃcult to perform certain statistical tests regarding assignment bias. In
this subsection, instead of just analyzing workers joining the ﬁrm in the second period, we
additionally add instances of workers switching managers during the second period. These
switches occur for many reasons, such as new projects, manager turnover, promotions, and
several re-organizations (“re-orgs”) that occurred for exogenous reasons. This addresses the
three limitations of the joiners analysis, and we continue to ﬁnd a strong negative relation
between manager MOR and employee turnover outcomes.
Our analysis here is useful for several reasons. First, the sample is broader than only new
joiners—it is about 1/4 the size of that in Table 3. Second, we can do a test for non-random
sorting of existing employees to managers, following Rothstein (2010, 2017)—we happen to ﬁnd
little evidence of systematic sorting of better existing employees to better people managers.
Third, we can plot “event study” graphs analyzing how impacts of MOR on turnover vary
with how long a person has been with a manager; such a graph would be harder to interpret in
the pure joiners design, where time since manager is collinear with tenure. Fourth, analyzing
what happens to employees after changes in manager is generally useful for reducing concern
about assignment bias. While matching of managers and employees is not random, matching
occurring for reasons such as manager turnover or re-orgs reﬂects less active involvement by
the ﬁrm, particularly when there are many individuals being moved at the same time. Fifth,
as in the joiners analysis, the workers in this design do not inﬂuence the instrument.
When workers switch manager during period two, 4% of the time this is accompanied
by a promotion in the same month, 4% of the time they experience a change in job function,
and 8% of the time they experience a change in business unit. Thus, most changes in manager
are not from worker promotions, or from worker changes in job function or business unit.
Results. Table 5 reproduces Table 3 combining joiners (as in Table 4) and switchers.
In Panel A, the IV coeﬃcient for overall attrition is -0.332 (a 22% drop in attrition per 1σ
in MOR). This is a bit smaller in magnitude than our baseline attrition estimate and misses
conventional statistical signiﬁcance (p = 0.16). In contrast, the coeﬃcient for quitting (panel
14

B) is slightly larger in magnitude than the one in Table 3. The negative quit coeﬃcient is
driven by regretted quits, where the MOR coeﬃcient is statistically signiﬁcantly negative.
Interestingly, the MOR coeﬃcient for non-regretted quits is positive (though not statistically
signiﬁcant). Overall, the results suggest that MOR sharply reduces undesirable attrition,
whereas MOR may even increase “good” attrition, though the results on non-regretted quits
have large standard errors.
Time path of MOR impacts. Figure 3 takes the IV regressions in Table 5, but
interacts MOR with the quarter since receiving a new manager. Event time starts at 0
after each manager change, thus accommodating workers who experience multiple manager
changes in the second period.13 As seen in panel (a), the relation between MOR and turnover is
negative, but is small in magnitude during the ﬁrst six months after a manager change. Rather,
the turnover beneﬁt builds gradually, with much of the reduction in turnover occurring 7-12
months after a manager change. Other attrition variables show similar patters, particularly
for regretted quits. Figure C4 shows similar patterns using half-years instead of quarters.
Figure 3 seems consistent with a causal impact of MOR on attrition. If the eﬀect
were driven by assignment bias (e.g., the ﬁrm decides to match unobservably better workers
with better managers), one might imagine that turnover impacts would be seen immediately.
Instead, it may take some time for a worker to get to know and be aﬀected by their manager.
Testing for assignment bias. A concern with the switchers analysis is that the ﬁrm
may be matching unobservably high-quality managers and workers together. To test for this,
we can examine whether the MOR of an employee’s future manager predicts employee nonattrition outcomes in the current period, following Rothstein (2010, 2017). As detailed further
in Appendix A.6, we implement an IV procedure where we instrument the future manager’s
MOR during period 2 using MOR during period 1. We cannot use attrition for the test
because workers who will experience a new manager in the future do not attrite before then.
Table 6 examines the relation between a future manager’s MOR and key non-attrition
outcomes (subjective performance, salary, salary increases, and promotion propensity), as well
as two other important worker characteristics (restricted stock units granted to an employee
and whether the ﬁrm has designated a worker as a “key individual” whom they strongly want
to retain). These variables are discussed further in Section 7 when we discuss rewards for
managers. In the IV analyses in Panel B, we see little evidence that better people managers
receive teams with observably better characteristics. This suggests that assignment bias from
13

After joining the ﬁrm or changing manager in period 2, 17% of workers experience one additional change
in manager, 3.5% an additional two changes, and 0.5% an additional three changes. Results in Table 5 and
Figure 3 are robust to restricting to workers’ ﬁrst post-join/switch manager spell. Results in Table 4 are also
robust (and slightly stronger) when restricted to joiners’ ﬁrst manager spell.

15

sorting strong people managers with unobservably better employees is likely limited.14

4.4

Manager Moves across Locations or Job Functions

Our third research design exploits managers moving across locations or job function. In line
with Chetty et al. (2014), we collapse our data to the job function-location-period level (e.g.,
engineers at Location X in period 1), and examine the relation between average MOR and
average attrition. This serves two key purposes. First, it provides further evidence that
assignment bias does not drive our ﬁndings because by aggregating, we focus on diﬀerences
in MOR at an aggregate level, as opposed to MOR diﬀerences within location-job function.
Second, it helps address concerns about asynchronously correlated measurement error
from persistent unobservables. In our earlier joiners analysis, a persistent unobservable of a
good project could lead to employees rating their manager favorably in period 1, as well as
making new employees less likely to attrite in period 2. However, by aggregating up to the
location-job function-period level, we no longer exploit variation from some engineers at a
location working on a good project and some working on a bad project.
Implementation. Let Ql,f,τ,τ  be the (employee-month-weighted) mean normalized
MOR of managers at location l in job function f during period τ , and for which we use the
measurement of the managers’ MOR taken during period τ  . Let yl,f,τ be the mean quit rate
of employees at location l in job function f during period τ . We estimate:
yl,f,τ = bQl,f,τ,τ  + δl + δf + δτ + θl,f,τ

(6)

where δl , δf , δτ are location, job function, and period ﬁxed eﬀects, respectively; and θl,f,τ
is the error term. Following Chetty et al. (2014), we weight observations by the number of
employee-months per location-job function-period cell. While τ will vary based on the cell,
all cells will use the same τ  . That is, we measure all managers using the same survey wave
to help ensure that diﬀerences across cells reﬂect diﬀerences in manager quality as opposed to
diﬀerent measurements. We restrict attention to location-job functions that are in the data
for both periods (results are slightly stronger if we don’t). Standard errors are clustered by
location-job function.
Similar to Chetty et al. (2014), our key identifying assumption is that changes in average
14

Observed matching of employees and managers reﬂects not only potential assignment bias by the ﬁrm, but
also selection of employees by managers. Thus, the null results of the Rothstein test are also consistent with
high-MOR managers not selecting better existing employees for their teams (or, e.g., for negative assignment
bias by the ﬁrm and positive selection of employees by managers given the ﬁrm’s policies). An additional
caveat is that our setting diﬀers from other applications of the Rothstein test because we observe a limited
relation of MOR to non-attrition outcomes later in Section 6. Overall, one might view the Rothstein test
as less critical for the validity of our results (relative to other settings) given that managers selecting better
workers for their team (separate from assignment bias) is a potential mechanism of people management skills.

16

location-function people management skills are uncorrelated with average location-function
unobserved determinants of attrition, conditional on controls.15 To control for possible changes
in worker quality over the two periods (due to worker sorting or workers moving with their
managers), we include controls for average location-function worker characteristics. While
the key identifying assumption is diﬃcult to test, there were no evident eﬀorts by the ﬁrm
(outside of autonomous decisions by workers and managers) to optimally sort workers and
managers over time across location-job functions based on unobservables.
In our sample, 7% of managers experience a change in location, 9% a change in job
function, and 14% a change in location or job function. In the month of a location change,
the promotion rate is 2%, whereas in the month of a job function change, the promotion rate is
16%. Thus, a higher share of job function changes seem to occur from promotions compared to
location changes. We suspect that location changes involve a combination of business reasons
(e.g., moving to a close location because of business needs) and personal reasons.
Results. We obtain the same broad conclusion that people management skills reduce
attrition, even though we are exploiting a diﬀerent source of variation in MOR than in our
baseline analyses. Columns 1-2 of Table 7 show OLS results, one measuring all managers in
the sample using their wave 1 score, and the other measuring all managers using their wave 2
score. To account for attenuation bias due to measurement error, columns 3-4 show IV results,
where we instrument the mean MOR in the location-job function-period cell using the mean
MOR of the managers for that cell but measured during the other period.
As in our main results in Table 3, IV estimates are larger in magnitude than OLS.
For the overall attrition results in Panel A, the IV estimates imply that a 1σ increase in a
manager’s MOR decreases employee attrition by 0.53-0.66pp per month, which is a bit larger
in magnitude than our benchmark estimate in Panel A of Table 3, though our IV conﬁdence
intervals here overlap with those in Panel A of Table 3. Outside of Panel A, we have less
power (and often lose statistical signiﬁcance), but observe broadly similar results as before.

4.5

Additional Analyses

Categorizing workers by subjective performance scores. Beyond the earlier results
on diﬀerent types of attrition events, another way to analyze turnover is to look separately
at “high” and “low” productivity workers based on subjective performance scores (Appendix
Table C4). We residualize worker subjective performance on the Table 3 controls and regress
the residuals on worker ﬁxed eﬀects. Fixed eﬀects above the median are classiﬁed as high15

For even greater control, one might wish to control for location-function ﬁxed eﬀects instead of location
ﬁxed eﬀects and function ﬁxed eﬀects. However, we do not have enough power to do so. Instead, we control
for a rich set of worker characteristics collapsed to location-job function means.

17

productivity workers. Column 1 analyzes overall attrition. As in many studies (e.g., Hoﬀman
and Burks, 2017), high-productivity workers have lower attrition. While the IV coeﬃcient
is larger in absolute magnitude for low-productivity workers, it is slightly larger in percentage terms for high-productivity workers. MOR has stronger percentage associations with
quits and regretted quits for high-productivity workers than low-productivity ones: A 10th
to 90th percentile move in MOR reduces quits and regretted quits by roughly 50% among
low-productivity workers, and by roughly 70% for high-productivity workers.
Switching managers. Beyond leading people to exit the ﬁrm, poor people management
skills could also produce other types of “exits.” Instead of quitting the ﬁrm, a worker may
demand to be moved to a new manager. Appendix Table C5 repeats our analysis using
whether a worker changes manager as the outcome (instead of attrition). The Panel A IV
estimate implies that moving from a manager in the 10th percentile of MOR to one in the
90th percentile predicts a 45% reduction in the chance of switching managers.
Adding richer controls. A concern is that there is a persistent unobservable whose
eﬀect may not be alleviated by the above research designs (e.g., a manager is rated highly
because they oversee a good project and continue overseeing the project when they move
locations or functions). To proxy for such unobservables, we add further controls. Tables
C8-C11 show that our attrition estimates are quite similar when adding additional controls.
For the 4 sets of tests (sections 4.1-4.4), we add two-way interactions between business unit,
job function, and salary grade, plus current month-year dummies (instead of baseline year
dummies). To assess coeﬃcient sensitivity, we use the Oster (2019) test. Given our IV set-up,
we analyze the reduced form. As detailed in Appendix A.8, selection on unobservables would
need to be many times larger than selection on observables to reverse the sign of the results.
Is people skills the cause? Another concern may be that something else about
managers with good people management skills could be driving the results. Absent random
assignment of particular skills to managers, we check that the impact of MOR remains strong
as other manager characteristics are controlled for (Glover et al., 2017). While our data contain
relatively few non-MOR manager characteristics, our main results are robust to controlling
for them. For brevity, details are in Appendix A.9. Thus, the apparent eﬀects of MOR do
not seem due to any of the small number of observed managerial characteristics.
Quantitative importance. How much does the ﬁrm save each year in hiring costs
due to lower attrition from a manager at the 90th percentile of MOR relative to one at the
10th percentile? Using the IV estimate from Panel A of Table 3 and assuming a hiring cost
of 4 months of worker salary (Blatter et al., 2012), the savings is 5% of worker salaries for
each worker on his or her team, totalling almost half a worker’s salary per year when added
18

up over the members of a typical 9-person team. Focusing on hiring costs likely provides
a lower bound on total costs saved, both given the importance of turnover in high-tech for
transmitting ideas and given that MOR particularly reduces turnover that is “bad” from the
ﬁrm’s perspective. Appendix A.10 provides further detail on these calculations.
VA approach. We also perform a “value-added” analysis of managers on attrition:
yit = α + γj + Xit δ +

it

(7)

where yit is whether worker i attrites in month t; γj is a manager eﬀect; and Xit are controls.
The estimated standard deviation of VA may be biased upward if VA is estimated using ﬁnite
observations per manager (Lazear et al., 2015). We address this two ways. First, we weight
standard deviations by observations per manager. Second, following Silver (2016), we split
the data in two and estimate (7) for separate samples. We do this splitting employee-months
randomly in two or splitting by period. If sampling error is uncorrelated with underlying VA
and across samples, the covariance of estimated VA across the two samples is equal to the
variance of underlying VA.16 Appendix Table C14 shows substantial variation in VA. In the
split sample approach, the std. dev. of attrition VA is 0.67 (splitting randomly or by period).
The consequence of improving attrition VA by 1σ (0.67pp per month) is 40% larger than the
impact of improving underlying people skills by 1σ in Table 3 (0.48pp per month).

5

Heterogeneity

We examine variation in MOR by diﬀerent dimensions of heterogeneity, namely, hierarchy
position, geography, and worker occupation. We then analyze heterogeneity in terms of the
relation of MOR to attrition. For brevity, the results are discussed here, with relevant tables
and more information in Appendices A.11 and A.12.
The ﬁrm often segments employees into three groupings of hierarchy (low, medium, and
high) according to their salary grade. The share of employee-months in low, medium, and
high hierarchy jobs is 57%, 35%, and 8%, respectively.17 A worker’s hierarchy position can
change when a worker gets promoted.
Explaining variation in MOR. Managers in engineering have 0.22σ lower MOR than
managers in non-engineering job functions (consistent with stereotypes that social skills are
16

A manager’s underlying VA is γ. Let γˆ1 = γ + u1 and γˆ2 = γ + u2 be estimated VA in two split samples,
where u1 and u2 are errors. Under the stated assumptions, cov(γˆ1 , γˆ2 ) = var(γ) (see also Silver (2016)).
17
High hierarchy jobs include those such as Senior Director, Principal Design Engineer, and Distinguished
Research Scientist (our sample does not include the very small share of people at the top of the ﬁrm hierarchy).
Medium hierarchy jobs include those such as Senior Product Manager, Research Scientist, and Lead Designer.
Within the engineering job function, the share of employee-months in low, medium, and high hierarchy jobs
is 45%, 50%, and 5%, respectively. Outside of engineering, the shares are 64%, 26%, and 10%, respectively.

19

more scarce in engineers), and U.S. managers obtain higher scores than non-U.S. managers in
creating a positive atmosphere and involving people in decisions. However, country, location,
occupation, and ﬁrm rank explain only a modest portion of the variation in MOR scores,
even after correcting for measurement error in MOR. About 90% of MOR variation is withincountry and 80% of MOR variation is within-location. Appendix A.11 includes more details.
Heterogeneity in MOR eﬀects. Appendix Tables C15-C17 show that the negative
IV relation between MOR and the attrition variables is robust across hierarchy, geography,
and occupation. Interestingly, however, the attrition results are signiﬁcantly larger at higher
levels of the ﬁrm hierarchy, and are suggestively larger in U.S. locations of the ﬁrm. For
brevity, here in the main text, we focus primarily on heterogeneity by hierarchy.
Figure 4 compares the MOR-attrition relation for workers at lower positions in the
hierarchy with that for workers at medium or high positions in the ﬁrm hierarchy. We perform
an IV regression of diﬀerent worker attrition outcomes on manager MOR in the current period
and manager MOR in the current period interacted with whether the worker is currently at a
medium or high position in the ﬁrm hierarchy. The instruments are manager MOR in the other
period and manager MOR in the other period interacted with whether the worker is currently
at a medium or high position in the ﬁrm hierarchy. For overall attrition, we observe that the
MOR-attrition coeﬃcient is substantially larger for workers at medium or high positions in the
hierarchy compared to workers at low positions (p = 0.04 on the diﬀerence). This diﬀerence
is particularly strong for quits (p = 0.02) instead of ﬁres (p = 0.36).
Given that jobs higher in the hierarchy tend to involve higher cognitive skill than those
lower in the hierarchy, our results point to complementarity between an employee’s skills
and their manager’s people management skills. This mirrors the observed complementarity
between employee cognitive skills and employee social skills (Weinberger, 2014; Deming, 2017).
These results seem sensible. Workers performing relatively less cognitively demanding
tasks require managers to ensure that they are doing what they are supposed to, and people
management skills help ensure that workers feel satisﬁed in doing the task at hand. However,
in highly cognitively demanding jobs, there is frequently not a single answer to problems.
It may not even be clear what problems an employee should be working on. A manager’s
people management skills may play an important role in helping employees feel challenged and
supported in more ambiguous environments. Those in more cognitively demanding jobs may
also be more accustomed to having positive and supportive relationships with their managers.
Other explanations are also possible, but seem less likely. One possibility is that the
results reﬂect that employees who are higher in the hierarchy tend to have higher tenure than
workers lower in the hierarchy. However, the ﬁndings are very similar (and slightly stronger)
when controlling for the interaction of MOR and a dummy for the worker having above median
20

tenure, as seen in panel (a) of Appendix Figure C5. Another possibility is that the results
reﬂect that employees who are higher in the hierarchy tend to be managers themselves, and
people management skills could have larger impacts on workers who are also managers. The
chance of an employee being a manager is 4%, 35%, and 85%, when the employee is at a low,
medium, or high position in the ﬁrm’s hierarchy, respectively.18 However, Figure 4 is similar
when excluding employees who are managers themselves, as seen in panel (b) of Appendix
Figure C5. A further explanation is that the composition of engineers/non-engineers diﬀers
by position in the hierarchy (e.g., the share of non-engineers is 71% for workers low in the
hierarchy compared to 54% for workers medium or high in the hierarchy), but Figure 4 is
similar when controlling for the interaction of MOR and a dummy for the worker being an
engineer, as seen in panel (c) of Appendix Figure C5.19
On geography, Appendix Table C16 provides some evidence that attrition results are
stronger for U.S. workers compared to abroad. In our ﬁrm, workers abroad have similar aggregate positions in the ﬁrm hierarchy relative to U.S. workers. Still, our general sense is that
tasks done by U.S. workers often tend to involve greater skill than those done overseas, consistent with complementarity between employee skills and manager people management skills.
In addition, research on global management (Hofstede, 2001; Bloom et al., 2012) emphasizes
that there are key diﬀerences across countries and cultures in attitudes toward authority and
managers. For example, it could be that the survey uncovers people management skills that
are social and interpersonal, as opposed to distant and authoritarian, and that U.S. workers
react more positively to the former style than workers in other countries.20

6

Manager Quality and Non-attrition Outcomes

This section shows that manager MOR does not have a consistent positive relation to most
non-attrition outcomes of subordinate employees. Baseline IV results show a moderate positive
18

As we believe is common at other high-tech ﬁrms, there are some individuals who are high up in the ﬁrm’s
hierarchy, but who do not manage other people; for example, some engineers specialize in addressing diﬃcult
engineering problems, but do not have direct reports.
19
Another explanation is that being higher up in the hierarchy reﬂects geography, as we also tend to see some
evidence that MOR coeﬃcients are larger for U.S.-based workers (compared to workers abroad). However,
Figure 4 is robust to restricting attention to U.S.-based workers (panel (d) of Figure C5). Last, results are
similar when controlling for the interaction of MOR and whether a worker is co-located with their manager.
20
There are also alternative explanations. First, the result could additionally reﬂect complementarity with
some other feature of the U.S. Second, U.S. workers have a higher rate of being co-located with their manager
than foreign workers (83% to 76%), but results are similar if one controls for MOR x (whether a worker is
co-located with their manager). Third, MOR is based on surveys in English—though a simple explanation is
not immediate (as we use IV to address measurement error), MOR might seem to matter less when questions
are not in workers’ native language. However, results from Panels D and E of Table C16 (where we see
statistical signiﬁcance) are robust to restricting to English-speaking countries. These explanations should not
be over-interpreted, as we regard our geographic heterogeneity ﬁndings as more suggestive.

21

relation between MOR and subjective performance, but this relation is not consistently robust
to our research designs.
Baseline results. Column 1 of Table 8 shows that MOR appears to have only a modest
positive relation to employee performance as measured by normalized subjective performance
scores. A 1σ increase in MOR is associated with a 0.05σ increase in employee subjective
performance under OLS, and a 0.09σ increase under IV. As for the earlier attrition results,
OLS is likely biased downward due to attenuation bias.
In column 2, the outcome is the increase in log salary between now and 12 months into
the future. A 1σ increase in MOR predicts a 0.12% increase in worker salary in OLS and a
0.06% increase in IV, both insigniﬁcant. The mean salary increase per year is conﬁdential, but
is between 4% and 8%. With 95% conﬁdence, our IV coeﬃcients rule out that a 1σ increase
in MOR predicts an additional annual raise of more than 0.47%.21
Column 3 of Table 8 examines employee promotions. Panel A shows an insigniﬁcant
positive relation in the OLS that turns negative in the IV in Panel B. The top of the IV 95%
conﬁdence interval is 0.24. With a mean monthly promotion rate in our sample of 1.5pp, we
can rule out that a 1σ increase in MOR would increase the promotion probability by about
15%. Recall that we ﬁnd 1σ decreases attrition by 28%, so the top of the conﬁdence interval
for promotion is about half as large.
Column 4 shows no relation between MOR and patent applications. The mean patent
rate in-sample is roughly 0.002 patents per worker-month, or about 3 times the size of the
IV standard error. To address the fact that many patents are not valuable, column 5 analyzes citation-weighted patents, deﬁned as a worker’s patent applications in a month, plus
log(1+citations to those patents), and we still observe no relation. For citation-weighted
patents, the mean rate is also about 3 times the IV standard error. To focus on new inventions (as opposed to revisions of past applications), we conservatively restrict attention
in Table 8 to patent applications where the priority date equals the application date. If we
don’t make this restriction, our precision increases, with a coeﬃcient very close to 0 and an
IV standard error 4 times smaller than the mean patent rate.
Research designs. Appendix Table C18 performs our diﬀerent research designs for
non-attrition outcomes. While the diﬀerent designs provide consistent evidence that MOR
reduces attrition, they do not support that MOR aﬀects non-attrition outcomes.
Diﬀerential attrition. That MOR reduces turnover could potentially bias estimation
for non-attrition outcomes. To address this, we repeated our analysis in Table 8 while re21
A null result also occurs if the outcome is log salary or log restricted stock holdings. These results suggest
that MOR’s impact on attrition is unlikely to be driven by workers of high-MOR managers receiving greater
pay. We also examined whether subordinates of high-MOR managers have pay respond more to subjective
performance (contemporaneous or average) than subordinates of low-MOR managers, and saw no diﬀerence.

22

stricting to worker-months where a worker’s manager experiences zero subordinate attrition
events in the analysis sample (Panel A) or no more than 1 or 2 of such events (Panels B and
C). Our conclusions are substantively unchanged in such analyses.
Why do we see large impacts of people management on attrition, but not on
other outcomes? There are several possibilities. First, good people management may matter most for attrition, which may reﬂect whether an employee feels respected and motivated.
People management skills may matter less for subjective performance, salary growth, promotions, or patents, for which technical talent and knowledge may be more important. Second,
it may be easier for a manager to reduce attrition (e.g., by making someone feel respected
and motivated), but harder to aﬀect subjective performance. Third, it could be that certain
outcomes take more time and interaction to be aﬀected, and that our data’s time-frame is too
short to observe such eﬀects. It is hard to distinguish these possibilities in our data.
While we do not see positive results for most non-attrition outcomes, we also do not
see negative ones. If MOR reduced attrition via giving employees lower workload or other
amenities that were against the ﬁrm’s interests, this would likely show up in negative nonattrition results, but the results do not support such an interpretation.

7

How does the Firm Reward Good Managers?

We now examine whether MOR is “rewarded” by the ﬁrm in terms of how it evaluates,
compensates, and promotes its managers. In large high-skill ﬁrms such as the one we study,
the concept of reward is complex and multi-faceted. Individuals can be rewarded through
promotions, salary increases, or stock grants. The ﬁrm could also respond by changing span
of control, e.g., so that better people managers get to manage more people (Garicano, 2000).
We estimate regressions similar to those in Section 3 except the dependent variable is manager
rewards instead of employee outcomes. For OLS, this would be:
 j,τ (t) + θj,t
Rj,t = bm

(8)

where Rj,t is a reward (e.g., subjective performance score, or stock grants) achieved by manager
j in month t. We include the same controls as for our analysis of worker outcomes. Relevant
robustness checks and calculation details are provided in Appendix A.14.
Manager subjective performance. Subjective performance is a critical measure of
reward at our ﬁrm, as the subjective score is a key determinant of ﬁnancial rewards. As seen in
column 1 of Table 9, a 1σ increase in MOR predicts a 0.09σ increase in subjective performance
in OLS, but a 0.40σ increase in subjective performance in IV. The IV estimate is substantial,
both statistically and economically. OLS is likely attenuated due to measurement error.

23

Promotions. Column 2 of Table 9 shows that a 1σ increase in MOR predicts a 0.67pp
increase in promotion probability each month. Given the average monthly promotion rate of
roughly 1.5pp, a manager at the 90th percentile of MOR is over 3 times more likely to be
promoted than one at the 10th percentile. This suggests that the ﬁrm promotes good people
managers to higher levels of the ﬁrm where they may have greater impact, consistent with the
complementarity results shown in Section 5.
Compensation. A 1σ increase in MOR is associated with a 1.4% larger increase in
salary over a 12-month period. The average annual increase in salary for managers is conﬁdential, but is between 4-8%, so the estimate is economically meaningful. Using 1-month
increase in log salary, there is also a signiﬁcantly positive IV relationship. Another means of
compensation, particularly in high-tech ﬁrms, is restricted stock grants, which are given to
reward and retain valued employees. Table 9 shows that there is no relation between MOR
and the level of an employee’s stock grant holdings, or between MOR and disbursement of
new stock grants. Thus, higher people management skills predict high salary growth, but not
stock grants.
We also analyzed the level of salary (instead of increases in salary) and saw no signiﬁcant
relation with MOR. We do not combine salary and stock grants because stock grants take
time to vest and are hard to value. The ﬁrm also pays non-stock cash bonuses, but much of
these are based on ﬁrm performance, and are not included in our data.
Span of control. Column 6 shows that an increase in MOR by 1σ predicts an increase
in span of control by 0.3 individuals, but it is not statistically signiﬁcant (though the standard
error of 0.3 also seems relatively large).
Key individual designation. Individuals at the ﬁrm who are believed to be especially
important can be designated by the ﬁrm as “key individuals.” The designation is not permanent. A 1σ increase in MOR predicts a 2.1pp increase in the probability of being designated
a key individual, though the relation is not statistically signiﬁcant. Roughly 20% of managers
are key individuals.
Manager VA as a regressor. Appendix Table C23 shows that attrition VA is not a
consistent predictor of rewards. We use split sample IV to address sampling error in VA. We
also observe that our MOR reward results from Table 9 are qualitatively robust to controlling
for attrition VA, i.e., a manager with higher MOR is more likely to receive rewards, even
controlling for the manager’s ability to retain workers. This suggests, as one might expect,
that the ﬁrm values MOR beyond its impact on attrition.
Discussion. Table 9 shows that better people managers receive signiﬁcant rewards
from the ﬁrm in some important dimensions. Even though the ﬁrm has a strong engineering
24

culture and values technical skills, it still rewards people management skills. One important
caveat regarding the reward results is that we only observe a relatively short panel. Given that
subjective performance and promotions are often the gateway to future rewards, we speculate
that MOR might be rewarded to an even greater extent in the longer-run than seen here.
To get a sense of the long-run importance of the estimates, note that increasing MOR
from the 10th to 90th percentile increases the annual chance of promotion by 21pp. Thus,
after a 10-year period, a manager in the 90th percentile of MOR will have experienced two
more promotions on average than a manager in the 10th percentile, which represents a large
diﬀerence in the ﬁrm’s hierarchy.
Another question is, for high MOR managers, how much cost does the ﬁrm incur in higher
manager salaries relative to the beneﬁts of lower worker turnover? Using (1) that managers at
p90 of MOR receive an additional 3.6% salary raise each year relative to managers at p10 of
MOR, (2) that average manager duration at the ﬁrm is roughly 6 years, and (3) that managers
earn roughly 50% more than their workers, we estimate that the ﬁrm pays out roughly $0.27
in higher salaries for each $1 in beneﬁt from lower turnover. Hence, the extra pay that high
MOR managers receive are well worth the return to the ﬁrm from lower attrition of employees.

8

Conclusion

Managers are at the heart of organizations, but measuring what managers do is challenging.
An approach taken in studying CEOs and managers in lower-skill ﬁrms has been to calculate
a manager’s VA using performance metrics. However, such an approach is hard to take to
knowledge-based ﬁrms and other ﬁrm contexts where objectively measuring productivity is
challenging. We pursue an alternative approach using employee surveys. Employee surveys
also help us address a more reﬁned research question. VA papers answer: how much do
managers matter overall? We answer: how much do people management skills, or interpersonal
skills for dealing with one’s subordinates, matter? Upward feedback surveys are used by many
ﬁrms, but we have little hard evidence on the importance of people management skills.
We ﬁnd a strong, positive relationship between people management skills and employee
retention, a critical outcome in high-skill ﬁrms. Results are particularly strong for attrition
that is “bad” from the ﬁrm’s perspective. A causal interpretation is strengthened using
several complementary research designs. The results imply that replacing a manager at the
10th percentile of people management skills with one at the 90th percentile reduces the total
subordinate labor costs by 5% solely from lower hiring costs due to less attrition. Moreover,
managers with better people management skills receive higher subjective performance scores,
are more likely to be promoted, and receive larger salary increases, consistent with the ﬁrm

25

attaching signiﬁcant value to these skills. Interestingly, we ﬁnd little relationship between
people management skills and most observed non-attrition employee outcomes, though this
could occur because many aspects of worker behavior are not observed or because the timeframe of our dataset is too short.
While our conclusions are speciﬁc to one ﬁrm, our main ﬁndings on the importance of
people management skills are robust across diﬀerent hierarchy levels, geographies, and occupations within the large, multinational ﬁrm we study. This strengthens the case for external
validity, and suggests that our conclusions may hold in other contexts. People management
skills are particularly important for attrition in higher-level jobs and (more suggestively) for
U.S. workers. These results, together with people management skills mattering more for reducing “bad” attrition, suggest complementarity between a manager’s people management
skills and a worker’s cognitive skills (provided that cognitive skill is higher for high-level jobs,
U.S. jobs, and workers where the ﬁrm regards attrition as bad instead of good). Methodologically, we illustrate the value of analyzing personnel data from a large ﬁrm, giving the
researcher signiﬁcant information and detail about the type of jobs that workers are doing,
while still accessing a large sample of workers across various dimensions of heterogeneity.
Our results help open the black box of managerial production. One open question is,
what are the precise managerial behaviors by which people management skills matter? While
unavailable to us, email or calendar data might further elucidate manager behavior. Also,
what interventions (if any) can improve people management skills in high-skill workplaces?
Future work can help further open the black box by answering these questions.

References
Arrington, Glenda and Rocky Dwyer, “Can Four Generations Create Harmony Within a PublicSector Environment?,” Intl. J. of Applied Management and Technology, 2018, 17 (1), 1–21.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Alan Krueger, “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling from
a New Sample of Twins,” American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (5), 1157–1173.
Atkins, Paul WB and Robert E Wood, “Self-versus Others’ Ratings as Predictors of Assessment
Center Ratings: Validation Evidence for 360-degree Feedback Programs,” Personnel Psychology,
2002, 55 (4), 871–904.
Baker, George P., Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom, “The Wage Policy of a Firm,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (4), pp. 921–955.
, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy, “Subjective Performance Measures in Optimal
Incentive Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (4), 1125–1156.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, “Incentives for Managers and Inequality
Among Workers: Evidence from a Firm-level Experiment,” QJE, 2007, 122 (2), 729–773.
, Luigi Guiso, Andrea Prat, and Raﬀaella Sadun, “Matching ﬁrms, managers, and incentives,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (3), 623–681.

26

, Stephen Hansen, Andrea Prat, and Raﬀaella Sadun, “CEO Behavior and Firm Performance,” Journal of Political Economy, 2019, Forthcoming.
Bartel, Ann P., Brianna Cardiﬀ-Hicks, and Kathryn Shaw, “Incentives for Lawyers: Moving
Away from Eat What You Kill,” ILR Review, 2017, 70 (2), 336–358.
Bender, Stefan, Nicholas Bloom, David Card, John Van Reenen, and Stefanie Wolter,
“Management Practices, Workforce Selection, and Productivity,” Journal of Labor Economics,
2018, 36 (S1), S371–S409.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, “Managing with Style: The Eﬀect of Managers
on Firm Policies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1169–1208.
Blatter, Marc, Samuel Muehlemann, and Samuel Schenker, “The costs of hiring skilled
workers,” European Economic Review, 2012, 56 (1), 20–35.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
Across Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1351–1408.
, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts, “Does Management Matter? Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (1), 1–51.
, Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, Megha Patnaik, Itay Saporta-Eksten,
and John Van Reenen, “What Drives Diﬀerences in Management Practices?,” American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (5), 1648–1683.
, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying, “Does working from home work?
Evidence from a Chinese experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 130 (1), 165–218.
, Raﬀaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen, “The Organization of Firms Across Countries,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (4), 1663–1705.
Borghans, Lex, Bas Ter Weel, and Bruce A Weinberg, “People Skills and the Labor-market
Outcomes of Underrepresented Groups,” ILR Review, 2014, 67 (2), 287–334.
Bound, John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz, “Measurement Error in Survey Data,”
Handbook of Econometrics, 2001, 5, 3705–3843.
Bracken, David W, Dale S Rose, and Allan H Church, “The Evolution and Devolution of
360◦ Feedback,” Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 2016, 9 (4), 761–794.
Brown, Meta, Elizabeth Setren, and Giorgio Topa, “Do Informal Referrals Lead to Better
Matches? Evidence from a Firm’s Employee Referral System,” JOLE, 2016, 34 (1), 161–209.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoﬀ, “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates,” AER, 2014, 104 (9), 2593–2632.
Deming, David J., “The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1593–1640.
Frederiksen, Anders, Lisa B. Kahn, and Fabian Lange, “Supervisors and Performance Management Systems,” Working Paper 23351, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2017.
Friebel, Guido, Matthias Heinz, and Nick Zubanov, “Making Managers Matter,” 2018.
Mimeo, Goethe University.
Garicano, Luis, “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production,” Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108 (5), 874–904.
Garvin, David A, Alison Berkley Wagonfeld, and Liz Kind, “Google’s Project Oxygen: Do
Managers Matter?,” 2013, Harvard Business School Case Study.

27

Glover, Dylan, Amanda Pallais, and William Pariente, “Discrimination as a Self-Fulﬁlling
Prophecy: Evidence from French Grocery Stores,” QJE, 2017, 132 (3), 1219–1260.
Harvard Management Update, “How Great Managers Manage People,” Harvard Business Review, 2008.
Heckman, James J. and Tim Kautz, “Hard Evidence on Soft Skills,” Labour Economics, 2012,
19 (4), 451–464.
Hoﬀman, Mitchell and Stephen V. Burks, “Training Contracts, Employee Turnover, and the
Returns from Firm-sponsored General Training,” 2017. NBER Working Paper 23247.
Hofstede, Geert, Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations Across Nations, Sage, 2001.
Ichniowski, Casey and Kathryn Shaw, “The eﬀects of human resource management systems on
economic performance: An international comparison of US and Japanese plants,” Management
Sience, 1999, 45 (5), 704–721.
,
, and Giovanna Prennushi, “The Eﬀects of Human Resource Management Practices on
Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,” AER, 1997, 87 (3), 291–313.
Jaﬀe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, “Geographic Localization
of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” QJE, 1993, 108 (3), 577–598.
Kuhnen, Camelia M. and Paul Oyer, “Exploration for Human Capital: Evidence from the
MBA Labor Market,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (S2), S255–S286.
Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn Shaw, and Christopher Stanton, “The Value of Bosses,” Journal
of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (4), 823–861.
Lyle, David S. and John Z. Smith, “The Eﬀect of High-Performing Mentors on Junior Oﬃcer
Promotion in the US Army,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2014, 32 (2), 229–258.
Oster, Emily, “Unobservable Selection and Coeﬃcient Stability: Theory and Evidence,” Journal
of Business & Economic Statistics, 2019, 0 (0), 1–18.
Pischke, Jorn-Steﬀen, “Lecture Notes on Measurement Error,” 2007. URL: http://econ.lse.
ac.uk/staff/spischke/ec524/Merr_new.pdf. Last visited on 2017/07/06.
Rothstein, Jesse, “Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and Student
Achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 175–214.
, “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers: Comment,” AER, 2017, 107 (6), 1656–84.
Schoar, Antoinette, “The Importance of Being Nice: Supervisory Skill Training in the Cambodian
Garment Industry,” 2016. Mimeo MIT.
Shaw, Kathryn and Debra Schifrin, “Royal Bank of Canada: Transforming Managers (A),”
2015, Stanford GSB Case Study.
Silver, David, “Haste or Waste? Peer Pressure and the Distribution of Marginal Returns to Health
Care,” 2016. Mimeo, UC Berkeley.
Syverson, Chad, “What Determines Productivity?,” J. Economic Literature, 2011, 49 (2), 326–65.
Weinberger, Catherine J, “The increasing complementarity between cognitive and social skills,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (4), 849–861.

28

70

MOR in P2
75
80

85

90

Figure 1: Manager Overall Rating (MOR): Correlation across Surveys and Histograms

65

Coefficient = 0.371
(0.031)
40

60

80

100

MOR in P1

.15
.125
.1
Density
.075
.05
.025
0

0

.025

.05

Density
.075

.1

.125

.15

(a) Correlation of MOR across Two Surveys

0

10

20

30

40

50
60
MOR in P1

70

80

90

100

0

(b) MOR in Period 1

10

20

30

40

50
60
MOR in P2

70

80

90

100

(c) MOR in Period 2

Notes: Panel (a) presents a binned scatter plot of MOR in period 2 on MOR in period 1 with no control
variables. We use “binscatter” in Stata. An observation is a manager. In the lower-right of the ﬁgure, we list
the regression coeﬃcient (with a robust standard error in parentheses) for a manager-level regression of
MOR in period 2 on MOR in period 1. Panels (b) and (c) present histograms of MOR. In each period, 12%
of managers receive the highest score of 100. As discussed in Section 4.5, our main results are robust to
using MOR in quintiles or percentiles, or to excluding cases where MOR equals 100. We restrict attention in
this ﬁgure to managers who also appear in our cleaned data (i.e., after dropping duplicates, customer service
workers, and months in April-May Y3 , but before requiring workers to have MOR non-missing in both
periods) as workers.

29

.6

Mean monthly rate (x100)
1.2
1.4
1.6

Mean monthly rate (x100)
.7
.8
.9

1

1.8

Figure 2: Reduced Form Binned Scatter Plots: Regressing Attrition Variables on Current
Manager MOR in Other Period

-2

-1

0
MOR in Other Period

1

Coefficient = -0.090
(0.023)

.5

1

Coefficient = -0.154
(0.032)
2

-2

-1

1

2

(b) Quits

Mean monthly rate (x100)
.3
.4

Mean monthly rate (x100)
.5
.6
.7

.5

.8

(a) Attrition

0
MOR in Other Period

-1

0
MOR in Other Period

1

Coefficient = -0.075
(0.020)

.4

.2

Coefficient = -0.061
(0.015)
-2

2

-2

0
MOR in Other Period

1

2

(d) Regretted Quits

.1

5

Mean monthly rate (x100)
5.5
6
6.5

Mean monthly rate (x100)
.15
.2
.25

7

.3

(c) Fires

-1

-2

-1

0
MOR in Other Period

1

Coefficient = -0.443
(0.174)

4.5

Coefficient = -0.015
(0.010)
2

-2

(e) Non-regretted Quits

-1

0
MOR in Other Period

1

(f) Worker changes manager

Notes: This ﬁgure presents binned scatter plots corresponding to the reduced form regressions in Table 3.
We use “binscatter” in Stata with 20 bins. Controls are the same as in Table 3.

30

2

-1.5

-2

-1

IV coefficient estimate
-1
0

IV coefficient estimate
-.5
0

1

.5

Figure 3: Impacts of MOR on Attrition Outcomes by Quarter Since Getting a New
Manager

0

1
2
Quarter relative to manager change

3

0

3

-1.5

-1.5

-1

IV coefficient estimate
-.5
0

IV coefficient estimate
-1
-.5
0

.5

(b) Quits

.5

(a) Attrition

1
2
Quarter relative to manager change

0

1
2
Quarter relative to manager change

3

0

3

(d) Regretted Quits

-6

-.2

-4

0

IV coefficient estimate
-2
0

IV coefficient estimate
.2
.4

2

.6

(c) Fires

1
2
Quarter relative to manager change

0

1
2
Quarter relative to manager change

3

0

(e) Non-regretted Quits

1
2
Quarter relative to manager change

3

(f) Worker changes manager

Notes: The dotted lines show 95% conﬁdence intervals on coeﬃcients, with standard errors clustered by manager. This ﬁgure
comes from an IV regression similar to that in Table 5, with one main diﬀerence. The main diﬀerence is that instead of using
MOR, we use MOR interacted with quarters since getting a new manager. In addition, we include dummies for the quarter
since getting a new manager. “Quarter 0” includes the month during which a worker gets a new manager, followed by the two
months after (i.e., months 2 and 3). “Quarter 3” includes months 10, 11, and 12. Beyond quarters 0-3 shown here, we also
include a single dummy for being in quarters 4 or 5 (this is a small bin, including about 5% of observations in the analysis,
whereas the other bins each include about 10% or more). Both current period MOR (the regressor) and other period MOR (the
instrument) are interacted with quarters since getting a new manager.

31

32
Fire
(x100)
p= .36

Regretted
quit
(x100)
p= .13

Low in Hierarchy
Medium or High in Hierarchy

Quit
(x100)
p= .02

95% CI
95% CI

Non-regretted
quit
(x100)
p= .01

Manager
change
(x10)
p= .02

Notes: This ﬁgure shows how the relationship between normalized manager MOR and worker attrition varies by a worker’s position in the ﬁrm
hierarchy. We show results from an IV regression of diﬀerent worker attrition outcomes on manager MOR in the current period and manager MOR in
the current period interacted with whether the worker is currently at a medium or high position in the ﬁrm hierarchy. The instruments are manager
MOR in the other period and manager MOR in the other period interacted with whether the worker is currently at a medium or high position in the
ﬁrm hierarchy. The full speciﬁcation appears in Panel E of Appendix Table C15. In the ﬁgure here, the coeﬃcients on “Low in Hierarchy” correspond
to those on MOR, whereas the coeﬃcient on “Medium or High in Hierarchy” correspond to the sum of the coeﬃcients on MOR and MOR x (Medium
or High in Hierarchy). The standard error for “Medium or High in Hierarchy” is computed in Stata using “lincom” (i.e., using the Delta Method).
The 6 p-values shown are tests of whether the coeﬃcient on MOR x (Medium or High in Hierarchy) equals 0, i.e., whether there is a diﬀerential eﬀect
of MOR by hierarchy. The whiskers show 95% conﬁdence intervals, with standard errors clustered by manager.

Attrition
(x100)
p= .04

Figure 4: Heterogeneity in the MOR-Attrition Results by a Worker’s Position in the Firm Hierarchy

0
MOR coefficient
-.6
-.4
-.2
-.8
-1

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A: Overall numbers
Share of records, employee in US
0.70
Share of records from managers
0.21
Share of records for engineers
0.36
Worker is co-located with their manager
0.81
Worker has same function as their manager
0.86
Average manager span (employees/mgr)
9.35
Managers per employee in the sample
1.39
Managers per employee (weighted by tenure) 1.52
Worker was hired during the sample period
0.29
Low level in the ﬁrm hierarchy
0.57
Medium level in the ﬁrm hierarchy
0.35
High level in the ﬁrm hierarchy
0.08
Panel B: Summary statistics for outcomes and regressors
Variable:

mean

Attrition probability (monthly) x100
Quit probability (monthly) x100
Fire probability (monthly) x100
Regretted quit prob (monthly) x100
Non-regretted quit prob (monthly) x100
Subjective performance rating
Log salary
Promotion probability (monthly)
Patents (monthly)

1.37 11.64
0.79
8.86
0.29
5.39
0.62
7.86
0.17
4.11
3.32
0.81
Conﬁdential
Conﬁdential
Conﬁdential

Manager
Manager
Manager
Manager
Manager
Manager
Manager

overall rating (MOR)
gives clear expectations
provides coaching
supports career dev
involves people in decisions
instills positive attitude
is someone I trust

81
84
75
77
84
83
83

sd

15
16
21
19
17
18
17

min

max

0
0
0
0
0
1

100
100
100
100
100
5

15
0
0
0
0
0
0

100
100
100
100
100
100
100

Notes: This table presents important summary statistics regarding our analysis sample. The data are at the
employee-month level. While exact sample size cannot be shown to preserve ﬁrm conﬁdentiality, our sample
contains well over 1,000 managers, 10,000 workers, and 100,000 worker-months. Observation counts vary
slightly by variable, reﬂecting that our dataset is created by linking multiple ﬁrm data ﬁles. We also cannot
disclose the exact time frame of the sample, but the sample is for a 27-month period between January Y1
and March Y3 in 2011-2015. Thus, Y1 corresponds to 2011, 2012, or 2013, but we cannot disclose which year
it is. In Panel A, “Share of records, employee in US” refers to the share of employee-months in the dataset
where the employee is working at a US location. “Co-located with manager” refers to the share of
employee-months where the employee and manager are working at the same location. For several
non-attrition outcomes, we cannot give exact summary statistics. However, as part of Sections 6 and 7, we
provide approximate mean values in-text as appropriate to help interpret the regression coeﬃcients. The
overall attrition probability is greater than the sum of the quit and ﬁre probabilities because there are a
number of exits which are not classiﬁed in the data as voluntary or involuntary.

33

34

0.23

0.37***
(0.04)

(1)
Overall
MOR

0.18

0.25***
(0.04)

(2)
Clear
expectations

0.21

0.29***
(0.03)

(3)
Coaching

0.22

0.31***
(0.03)

(4)
Career dev

0.18

0.29***
(0.04)

(5)
Involves
people in
decisions

0.25

0.43***
(0.04)

(6)
Positive
attitude

0.20

0.35***
(0.04)

(7)
Someone
I trust

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. An observation is a manager. Each column regresses a normalized managerial score variable in Y2 on
the same variable in Y1 . For example, column 1 regresses a manager’s overall rating (MOR) in Y2 on a manager’s MOR in Y1 as well as control
variables. The sample is restricted to managers for whom we have manager scores for both waves of the employee surveys. We include control
variables corresponding to a manager’s ﬁrst observation in the data as a manager. All regressions include business unit dummies, job function
dummies (8 categories), salary grade dummies, dummies for year of hire (observations before 2001 are lumped in one category), and location
dummies. Locations with less than 2,000 employee-months are lumped into a separate location category, and we also include a separate dummy
variable for a location being in the US. The questions from the survey are listed in the main text in Section 2.1. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at
5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%

R-squared

Characteristic in Y1

Dep. Variables:

Table 2: Managerial Characteristics are Persistent: Predicting Manager Ratings on Diﬀerent Dimensions in the Y2 Survey
using Ratings from the Y1 Survey

Table 3: MOR and Employee Attrition: Baseline Results
Speciﬁcation:
Panel A: Attrition
MOR in other period

1st Stg

-0.278***
(0.074)
0.791
124.6

0.325***
(0.029)

MOR in current period
Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument
Panel D: Regretted Quits
MOR in other period
0.325***
(0.029)
MOR in current period
Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument
Panel E: Non-regretted Quits
MOR in other period
0.325***
(0.029)
MOR in current period

1.374

-0.090***
(0.023)
-0.103***
(0.023)
0.791

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

-0.475***
(0.103)
1.374
124.6

0.325***
(0.029)

MOR in current period

Reduced Form
-0.154***
(0.032)

-0.156***
(0.031)
1.374

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

Panel C: Fires
MOR in other period

IV

0.325***
(0.029)

MOR in current period

Panel B: Quits
MOR in other period

OLS

0.791

-0.061***
(0.015)
-0.033**
(0.014)
0.291

-0.188***
(0.048)
0.291
124.6

0.291

-0.075***
(0.020)
-0.084***
(0.021)
0.621

-0.230***
(0.065)
0.621
124.6

0.621

-0.015
(0.010)
-0.019**
(0.010)
0.169

-0.048
(0.030)
0.169
124.6

0.169

Notes: Standard errors clustered by manager in parentheses. An observation is an employee-month. In Panel
A, the dependent variable is a dummy for whether an employee attrites in a given month. In the other
panels, the dependent variable is a dummy for whether an employee experiences a particular type of attrition
event in a given month. In all regressions, the dependent variable is multiplied by 100 for readability. All
regressions include the same controls as in Table 2, plus current year dummies, the span of control for an
employee’s manager (plus a dummy for span being missing), and a 5th order polynomial in employee tenure.
Also, unlike Table 2, the controls are over time instead of for one month. While exact sample size cannot be
shown to preserve ﬁrm conﬁdentiality, our sample contains well over 1,000 managers, 10,000 workers, and
100,000 worker-months. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%

35

Table 4: MOR and Employee Attrition: Exploiting New Joiners
Speciﬁcation:
Panel A: Attrition
MOR in other period

1st Stg

OLS

0.296***
(0.043)

MOR in current period

-0.643**
(0.308)
0.864
47.19

0.296***
(0.043)

MOR in current period

Panel D: Regretted Quits
MOR in other period
0.296***
(0.043)
MOR in current period
Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument
Panel E: Non-regretted Quits
MOR in other period
0.296***
(0.043)
MOR in current period
Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

0.864

-0.052
(0.054)
-0.028
(0.045)
0.362

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

1.446

-0.190**
(0.093)
-0.212**
(0.086)
0.864

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument
Panel C: Fires
MOR in other period

-0.550
(0.370)
1.446
47.19

0.296***
(0.043)

MOR in current period

Reduced Form
-0.163
(0.114)

-0.252**
(0.100)
1.446

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument
Panel B: Quits
MOR in other period

IV

-0.175
(0.180)
0.362
47.19

0.362

-0.181**
(0.088)
-0.190**
(0.083)
0.798

-0.613**
(0.292)
0.798
47.19

0.798

-0.016
(0.017)
-0.024*
(0.015)
0.0603

-0.053
(0.057)
0.0603
47.19

0.0603

Notes: This table is similar to Table 3, but restricts to new employees joining the ﬁrm after the
administration of the second survey (i.e., during period 2). The sample size is 8% of that in Table 3. *
signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%

36

Table 5: MOR and Employee Attrition: Exploiting New Joiners and People Switching
Managers
Speciﬁcation:
Panel A: Attrition
MOR in other period

1st Stg

-0.332
(0.236)
1.512
57.94

0.280***
(0.037)

MOR in current period

-0.308*
(0.185)
0.880
57.94

0.280***
(0.037)
-0.015
(0.024)
0.327

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

0.880

-0.043
(0.028)

MOR in current period

Panel D: Regretted Quits
MOR in other period
0.280***
(0.037)
MOR in current period

1.512

-0.086
(0.053)
-0.147***
(0.047)
0.880

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

Reduced Form
-0.093
(0.069)

-0.157***
(0.061)
1.512

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

Panel C: Fires
MOR in other period

IV

0.280***
(0.037)

MOR in current period

Panel B: Quits
MOR in other period

OLS

-0.153
(0.097)
0.327
57.94

0.327

-0.116**
(0.047)
-0.127***
(0.045)
0.722

Panel E: Non-regretted Quits
MOR in other period
0.280***
(0.037)
MOR in current period

-0.412**
(0.166)
0.722
57.94

0.722

0.029
(0.019)
-0.020
(0.015)
0.158

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

0.105
(0.073)
0.158
57.94

0.158

Notes: This table is similar to Table 3, but restricts to new employees joining the ﬁrm after the
administration of the second survey (i.e., during period 2) or to observations following a change in manager
during the second period (more precisely, to observations where a worker’s manager diﬀers from the manager
they had during September Y1 when the ﬁrst survey was administered). The sample size is about 1/4 the
size of that in Table 3. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%

37

38
25.19
0.011
(0.029)

F-stat on excl instrument

Panel C: Red. Form
MOR of future manager
measured in 1st period
-0.178
(0.378)

30.08

-0.574
(1.209)

0.243
(0.175)

29.22

0.795
(0.567)

0.294*
(0.155)

(3)

Log
salary
growth
x100

0.049
(0.134)

28.10

0.176
(0.471)

0.170
(0.149)

(4)

Promoted
x100

1.571
(1.667)

9.29

8.495
(9.357)

2.326
(1.589)

-0.126
(0.476)

28.10

-0.450
(1.694)

0.785
(0.640)

Log
Key
stock
individual
grant
(x100)
holdings
x100
(5)
(6)

Notes: Standard errors clustered by future manager in parentheses. The controls are the same as in Table 3. The table presents regressions of
employee outcomes at the start of the sample as a function of the MOR of the employee’s new manager. The sample is restricted to switchers from
the Table 5 sample (i.e., people switching managers in the second period and no new joiners) and restricts attention to the new manager after a
worker’s ﬁrst change in manager during the second period. An observation is an employee-month occurring during period 1 (January Y1 -September
Y1 ). Panel A presents regressions of employee outcomes on the new manager’s MOR as measured during period 2. Panel B presents IV regressions of
employee outcomes on the new manager’s MOR as measured during period 2, while instrumenting using the new manager’s MOR as measured during
period 1. The F-statistic on the excluded instrument varies across columns due to variation in the number of observations per column. Results in
column 5 are robust to using a conﬁdence interval based on Moreira’s conditional likelihood ratio test. Panel C presents the reduced form regression
of employee outcomes on the new manager’s MOR as measured during period 2. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%

0.041
(0.106)

Panel B: IV
MOR of future manager
measured in 2nd period

-0.776**
(0.394)

(2)

(1)
0.028
(0.026)

Log
salary
x100

Subjective
performance
(normalized)

Panel A: OLS
MOR of future manager
measured in 2nd period

Dep. Var.

Table 6: Testing for Assignment Bias: Predicting Employe Outcomes Before Manager Switch as a Function of MOR of Future
Manager

Table 7: MOR and Employee Attrition: Exploiting Managers Moving Across Locations and
Job Functions
Speciﬁcation:
Panel A: Attrition
MOR of current manager in 1st period

OLS

OLS

-0.227**
(0.108)

MOR of current manager in 2nd period
Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

1.458

Panel B: Quits
MOR of current manager in 1st period

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

0.722

Panel C: Fires
MOR of current manager in 1st period

-0.234**
(0.097)
1.458

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

0.238

Panel D: Regretted Quits
MOR of current manager in 1st period

-0.064
(0.060)
0.722

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

0.606

Panel E: Non-regretted Quits
MOR of current manager in 1st period

-0.087*
(0.045)
0.238

Mean dep. var.
F-stat on excl instrument

0.116

0.238
24.24

-0.254**
(0.118)
0.238
27.93

-0.224
(0.142)
-0.079
(0.054)
0.606

-0.041
(0.031)

MOR of current manager in 2nd period

0.722
24.24

-0.199
(0.131)
0.722
27.93

-0.246*
(0.128)

-0.047
(0.059)

MOR of current manager in 2nd period

1.458
24.24

-0.525**
(0.222)
1.458
27.93

-0.181
(0.151)

-0.110*
(0.059)

MOR of current manager in 2nd period

IV

-0.661**
(0.266)

-0.086
(0.063)

MOR of current manager in 2nd period

IV

0.606
24.24

-0.108
(0.120)
0.606
27.93

0.032
(0.080)
0.011
(0.031)
0.116

0.116
24.24

-0.095
(0.067)
0.116
27.93

Notes: Standard errors clustered by location-job function in parentheses. This table presents regressions as
in equation (6). An observation is a location-job function-period. We use the raw locations with no
groupings, and we exclude locations that have less than 10 worker-month observations in the data provided
before sample restrictions. The dependent variable is average attrition in that cell. The regressor is the
average MOR for managers in that cell, while measuring that manager’s MOR in a particular period. All
regressions include collapsed forms of the controls in Table 3, but instead of controlling for current year, we
control for period. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%

39

40
0.029***
(0.007)

0.090***
(0.022)
129.0

0.053***
(0.007)

Subjective
performance
(normalized)
(1)

0.022
(0.071)

0.064
(0.205)
112.6

0.123
(0.079)

(2)

-0.006
(0.044)

-0.020
(0.135)
124.6

0.072
(0.048)

(3)

Log Salary
Promotion
Growth (x100)
(x100)

0.004
(0.021)

0.011
(0.065)
124.6

0.029
(0.025)

(4)

Patents
(x100)

0.012
(0.036)

0.038
(0.110)
124.6

0.048
(0.042)

Citationweighted
patents (x100)
(5)

Notes: Standard errors clustered by manager in parentheses. The controls are the same as in Table 3. Due to conﬁdentiality, we cannot show the
means of most of the variables here, but we discuss approximate information about their levels as appropriate in Section 6 when we discuss the
results. In column 1, “subjective performance” is an employee’s subjective performance on a 1-5 scale. We then normalize scores across the full
sample. In column 2, “log salary growth” represents the change in a worker’s log salary from the present month to one year ahead, with coeﬃcients
multiplied by 100 for readability. That is, for an employee in May Y1 , the outcome variable is log(salary) in May Y2 minus log(salary) in May Y1 . In
column 3, the outcome is whether an employee receives a promotion, with coeﬃcients multiplied by 100 for readability. In column 4, the dependent
variable is patent applications per month, with coeﬃcients multiplied by 100 for readability. In column 5, “citation-weighted patents” is deﬁned as a
worker’s patent applications in a month, plus log(1+citations to those patents), with coeﬃcients multiplied by 100 for readability. For the analysis of
patents and citation-weighted patents, to ensure we restrict to new inventions (as opposed to revisions of past patent applications), we restrict
attention to patent applications where the priority date equals the application date. The score is from 0-100, and is normalized across the full sample.
In Panel B, the F-statistic on the excluded instrument varies across columns due to variation in number of observations per column. * signiﬁcant at
10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%

Panel C: Red. Form
MOR in other period

F-stat on excl instrument

Panel B: IV
MOR in current period

Panel A: OLS
MOR in current period

Dep. Var.

Table 8: MOR and Employee Non-Attrition Outcomes

41
0.131***
(0.0234)

67.44

0.397***
(0.083)

0.221**
(0.0950)

67.46

0.673**
(0.311)

0.101
(0.0899)

(2)

(1)
0.0868***
(0.0231)

Promoted
(x100)

Subjective
performance
(normalized)

0.462**
(0.193)

46.16

1.405**
(0.627)

0.135
(0.162)

(3)

Log
salary
growth
(x100)

-0.216
(1.700)

55.97

-0.670
(5.252)

-2.685*
(1.543)

1.882
(3.173)

54.56

5.874
(9.943)

0.277
(3.190)

Log
Log
stock
change in
grant
stock
holdings
grants
(x100)
(x100)
(4)
(5)

0.0843
(0.0986)

49.83

0.260
(0.303)

0.0637
(0.0937)

(6)

0.682
(0.870)

67.46

2.078
(2.696)

-0.895
(0.863)

(7)

Change in
Key
span of
individual
control
(x100)

Notes: Standard errors clustered by manager in parentheses. An observation is a manager-month. The controls are the same as in Table 3. Due to
conﬁdentiality, we cannot show the means of most of the variables here, but we discuss approximate information about their levels as appropriate in
Section 7 when we discuss the results. “Subjective performance” is a manager’s subjective performance on a 1-5 scale, and then normalized.
“Promoted” is whether a manager receives a promotion in a given month, with coeﬃcients multiplied by 100 for readability. “Log salary growth”
represents the change in a manager’s log salary from the present month to one year ahead. “Stock grant holdings” measure the value of a person’s
unvested stock grants. “Log change in stock grants” uses the data ﬁeld from the ﬁrm on the value of new stock grants issued by the ﬁrm in the last
year, and takes the log. “Change in span of control” represents the change in a manager’s span of control from the present month to one year ahead.
The “key individual” designation by the ﬁrm to individuals who are deemed to especially important. In Panel B, the F-statistic on the excluded
instrument varies across columns due to variation in number of observations per column. Compensation variables are in nominal terms. * signiﬁcant
at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%

Panel C: Red. Form
MOR in other period

F-stat on excl instrument

Panel B: IV
MOR in current period

Panel A: OLS
MOR in current period

Dep var:

Table 9: Manager Rewards

