NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KEYNES ON THE SEQUENCING OF ECONOMIC POLICY:
RECOVERY AND REFORM IN 1933
Sebastian Edwards
Working Paper 24367
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24367

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018

I thank Michael Poyker for his assistance. I have benefitted from conversations with Michael
Bordo, Leonidas Montes, and Ed Leamer. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Keynes on the Sequencing of Economic Policy: Recovery and Reform in 1933
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 24367
March 2018
JEL No. B21,B22,B26,B27,E31,F31,N12,N22
ABSTRACT
On December 31 1933, The New York Times published an open letter from John Maynard
Keynes to President Franklin D. Roosevelt. In it Keynes encouraged FDR to expand public works
through government borrowing. He also criticized FDR’s exchange rate policy, and argued that
there was a need for lower long-term interest rates. But perhaps the most interesting feature of
this letter is that Keynes made comments on the sequencing and speed of economic policies. He
argued that “recovery” policies should precede “reform” measures. In this paper I analyze this
particular aspect of the open letter, and I argue that for Keynes exchange rate stability was a key
component of what he considered to be the appropriate order of policy. I also provide a
comparison between Keynes’s views on sequencing and those developed in the 1980s and 1990s.

Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

1

1. Introduction
On September 24 1933, Felix Frankfurter, the prominent Harvard law professor, sailed in the
steamer Britannic to London. According to The New York Times, the trip had a double purpose:
on the one hand Frankfurter was to be the Eastman Professor at Oxford, and on the other he was
“on an unofficial presidential mission, assisting the Chief Executive [President Franklin Delano
Roosevelt] in keeping abreast of affairs, particularly financial matters all over the world.” 1
During his year-long stay in the United Kingdom, Frankfurter met all sorts of people, gave a
number of lectures, and cemented friendships with some of the most influential intellectuals of
the time, including Isaiah Berlin and John Maynard Keynes.
On December 6 1933, Frankfurter went to Cambridge, where he was a guest of Keynes for
King’s Founder’s Feast. During the visit the conversation touched on many topics, including the
economic experiments undertaken by the new U.S. administration. 2 A few days later the Harvard
professor wrote to Keynes and suggested that he penned an article for a U.S. newspaper giving
his opinion about President Roosevelt’s economic policies. In particular, he wanted Keynes to
support an expansion of public works. Frankfurter wrote: 3
I do hope you’ll find it convenient to write the kind of letter that we sketched in
our talk for transmission to the president. For he is ‘the trustee of
experimentation’ and I know that formulated directions from you may greatly
help matters.
On December 12, Frankfurter wrote to President Roosevelt and informed him about his visit to
Cambridge. Four days later, on December 16, he told the president that Keynes had written an
open letter, which would be published by The New York Times on December 31, 1933.
Frankfurter wrote: “So that you may see what he has to say before it is published, Keynes this
morning sent me the enclosed, which I hasten to get off directly to you through Miss LeHand
(without forwarding it through the pouch) in the hope that it may catch the Bremen which leaves
tonight.” 4

The New York Times, "Frankfurter sails; Held Roosevelt Aide,” September 25, 1933, page 2. According to Lash
(1975, p. 53), during the early years of the Roosevelt administration, Frankfurter not only dispensed advice to the
president, but he also acted as "a one-man recruiting agency for the New Deal." In 1939 Roosevelt appointed
Frankfurter to the U.S. Supreme Court, where he served until 1962.
2
Roosevelt had been inaugurated on March 4 1933. See Section 2 for some historical background.
3
Moggridge (1992, p. 580).
4
Freedman (1967, p. 177). Miss LeHand was FDR’s personal secretary. Frankfurter was also the intermediary of a
private letter by a group of Oxford dons to Roosevelt. That letter was signed by Roy Harrod, James Meade, and
W.M. Allen, among other. See Freedman (1967, p. 168-173).
1

2

The open letter was published on Sunday, December 31, with the title “From Keynes to
Roosevelt: Our recovery plan assayed.” The only difference between the published version and
the one sent by Frankfurter to the president was that the NYT included nine headings. The letter
took almost a full page of the paper. There were two photographs, one of Keynes, and one of a
“slum clearance,” with the caption, “Public works: the way out?” A somewhat shorter version
was published in The Times of London on January 2, 1934 (p. 11) under the title, “Mr.
Roosevelt’s experiments: the dual policies, reconstruction and recovery.” This version also
included headings, although they were different from those in The New York Times. 5 In the letter
Keynes provided an assessment of the administration’s policies, and stated that there was an
important difference between “recovery” and “reform.” He pointed out that the former was more
urgent than the latter, and he was critical of the Roosevelt administration for not defining
priorities, and for pushing “reform” policies too fast. He asserted that an increase in government
loan-expenditures was key to get the recovery going, and to move the nation out of the Great
Depression. He commented on FDR’s gold policy – including on the U.S. abandonment of the
gold standard in April 1933 –, and he was critical of the way in which monetary policy had been
conducted. 6
Throughout the years, a number of authors have referred to the open letter, but there have been
no attempts to analyze it in detail, or to use data to discuss Keynes’s main assertions – see
Section 3 for a review of the literature. 7 The purpose of this paper is to deal with this omission,
and to analyze in some detail Keynes’s advice to the President in the open letter. In particular, I
discuss Keynes’s references to the appropriate “sequencing” of economic policy – the order in
which “recovery” and “reform” should be undertaken–, and his criticism of the way the
Roosevelt administration proceeded during its first nine months. Issues related to sequencing and
speed have attained significance in policy debates at different times in history. For instance, they
became particularly important during the late 1980s and early 1990s, when a large number of
nations embarked on economic reforms in Latin America, Asia, and in the former Soviet bloc.
During this period authors such as McKinnon (1982, 1993), Krueger (1986), Harberger (1986),
Mussa (1986), Edwards (1990), and Mundell (1995) wrote on the subject. Interestingly, during
those years, when academics and economist at the multilateral institutions – the International

All quotes from the letter in this paper are taken from this version of the letter. The New York Times (NYT),
December 31, 1933, p. 2 XX. The letter is reproduced in Keynes’s Collected Works, JMK XXI (1982), p. 289-297. The
Times of London version is in JMK XXI (1982), p. 297-304.
6
This was not the first time Keynes opined on the effectiveness of policies to fight the Depression in foreign
countries. In a lengthy article published in the Melbourne Herald on June 27 1932, he discussed in great detail
Australia’s adjustment policies, including the devaluation of the currency and the cut in civil servants’ salaries. For
details, see Markwell (2000).
7
The only exception is Edwards (2017c), where an econometric analysis of the exchange rate and gold policy
aspects of the letter is provided.
5

3

Monetary Fund and the World Bank – discussed issues related to sequencing and speed, no
references were made to Keynes views on the subject.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, I provide some historical background
on the state of the U.S. economy in 1933. Section 3 contains a summary and deconstruction of
the open letter, and a review of the literature that has discussed it throughout the years. I consider
academic works as well as memoirs and diaries from individuals that had policy responsibilities
in 1933. In Section 4, which is the core of the paper, I deal with Keynes’s views on sequencing.
The Section is divided into two parts: I first provide an in depth analysis of Keynes’s thoughts on
the appropriate order and speed of policy. I then argue that for Keynes exchange rates stability,
as defined in The means to prosperity – a pamphlet also published earlier in 1933 – was a central
component of his views of the correct sequencing. Finally, in Section 5 I provide some
concluding remarks, including some comments on how Keynes’s views on sequencing are
related to those developed in the 1980s and 1990s when a score of countries moved towards
liberalizing and stabilizing their economies.
2. Historical background
When Franklin D. Roosevelt was inaugurated as president on March 4 1933, the U.S. was in the
fourth year of the worst economic crisis it had ever faced. The 1929-33 slump was several times
deeper and more devastating than anything America had seen before. Between 1929 and 1932,
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) measured in current dollars dropped by more than 50%,
production of durable goods, including automobiles, declined by 81%, and the value of
agricultural production was down by 63%. During the same period employment declined by
almost 50%, and the number of unemployed surpassed 15 million. Those who still had jobs
earned much less than during 1929: according to the Federal Reserve, average wage rates
declined by 67%, and cash income in the rural sector was down by more than 70%. 8 The United
States had had recessions and financial panics in the past, but nothing resembled this. The most
recent slump had happened in 1921-1923, but in every single category that downturn had been
milder and the recovery faster. 9 The panics of 1907 and 1873 had been serious, but they were
rather small disturbances when compared to what President Herbert Hoover called the Great
Depression. 10

These data compare, for each variable, the peak and the trough throughout the cycle. The data are from
“Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1957,” and from Sachs (1934).
9
See Table III in Sachs (1934) for a comparison of the 1929-33 and 1921-23 episodes. For a succinct history of
financial crises from around the world see Kindelberger (1978); the modern reference is Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009).
10
Hoover was not the first president to use the term “depression” to refer to an economic turndown. James
Monroe labeled the 1819 bank panic as a depression. For an analysis of this period, with an emphasis on the first
8

4

One of the most destructive aspects of the crisis was the generalized collapse of prices. Between
mid-1929 and mid-1932 the index of wholesale prices went down by approximately 70%; during
the same period the cost of living for the typical household declined by 40%. Things were
particularly bad in the agricultural sector, where the prices of some crops were so low that it was
not worth harvesting them. A bushel of wheat that in 1919 had commanded 1.53 dollars, was
sold at 13.5 cents in 1932. And the price of cotton, the commodity that Roosevelt would monitor
throughout his presidency, experienced a decline from 35.34 cents per pound in 1919, to 6.52
cents in 1932 – a reduction of 82 percent.
On March 5th, one day after Inauguration, President Roosevelt convened Congress for an
Extraordinary Session, and the legendary “Hundred Days” began. In the early morning of March
6, a banking holiday and a gold embargo were declared. Five weeks later the nation abandoned
the gold standard. However, it would take almost nine months for the dollar to be officially
devalued with respect to gold. 11 Between March and June, 1933, Congress passed legislation that
would fundamentally alter the way the economy functioned, and set the bases for the welfare
state. On May 12th the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), the Federal Emergency Relief Act,
and the Tennessee Valley Authority Act were enacted into law. A few days later, on May 27th,
the Securities Act of 1933 saw the light of day. During the first two weeks of June Congress
continued to work at a frantic pace. On June 13th the Homeowners Loans Act was passed, and on
June 16th, the last day of the Extraordinary Session, the Glass-Steagall Banking Act, the
Emergency Railroad Transportation Act, and the Farm Credit Act were passed. That same day
the National Recovery Act (NRA), which introduced some elements of planning into the
economy, was signed into law. During his first months in office FDR repeatedly stated that the
overriding goal of his economic policies – including of the abandonment of the gold standard –
was to generate an increase in prices, and in particular in agricultural prices.
3. The open letter and the literature
3.1 The letter: summary and deconstruction
It is possible to divide Keynes’s letter – which has 19 paragraphs – into six different themes,
each of them related to a set of policy issues of importance to the U.S. in 1933. In what follows
all the quotes refer to the letter as published by The New York Times and reproduced in Volume
XXI of Keynes’s Collected Works, JMK XXI (1982):

year of the Roosevelt administration and on the abandonment of the gold standard and the devaluation of the
dollar, see, for example, Edwards (2018).
11
On January 31 1934, the official price of the metal was set at $35 an ounce, up from $20.67, a price that had
prevailed since 1834.

5

12
13

•

The importance of Roosevelt’s experiment: In paragraphs 1 and 19 Keynes writes that
FDR’s experiments are not only important for the U.S., but also for the rest of the
world. Keynes opens the missive by stating that FDR is the “trustee for those… who
seek to mend the evils of our condition by reasoned experiment.” The idea that
Roosevelt was an experimenter was, at the time, quite widespread. In fact, and as
noted above, in the communication urging Keynes to write the letter, Frankfurter
referred to the new president as “the trustee of experimentation.” 12 Moreover, during
the presidential campaign FDR had stated vehemently that experimenting in the arena
of economic policy was fundamental to defeat the Depression. For instance, in the
Oglethorpe speech of May 22 1932, he said: “[T]he country demands bold, persistent
experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it: If it fails, admit it
frankly and try another.” 13 In the first paragraph of the open letter Keynes states that
it is fundamental that FDR succeeds in his experiments. Keynes writes that if
Roosevelt fails, “rational change” would be discarded, “leaving orthodoxy and
revolution to fight it out.” Keynes returns to this topic in the final paragraph of the
open letter, where he affirms that Roosevelt success is important “to the material
prosperity of the United States and the whole world.”

•

The sequencing of policy: This subject, which is the focus of attention of this paper, is
tackled in paragraphs 2 through 4. According to Keynes, FDR is “engaged on a
double task, Recovery and Reform; – recovery from the slump, and the passage of
those business and social reforms which are long overdue.” Keynes then points out
that in his view it is important for “recovery” policies to be implemented before the
policies of “reform” are put in place fully. Moreover, he argues that reform should be
pursued gradually, in order not to affect confidence. His preference is that “recovery”
shows some results before “reform” policies are applied with force. In the letter
Keynes explicitly associates “reform” with two key policies of the Roosevelt
administration: the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA), whose aim was to
control the acreage devoted to key crops, and the National Recovery Administration
(NRA) whose purpose was to avoid cut-throat competition, and thus further declines
in prices and disinflation. Keynes writes that in the reform area “haste will be
injurious.” In these three paragraphs Keynes questions the wisdom of implementing
recovery and reform policies simultaneously, something that, in his view, the
Roosevelt administration has done during its first nine months.

Freedman (1967, p. 177).
Roosevelt (1938, p. 639-647), emphasis added.

6

•

Aggregate demand and loan–expenditures: In paragraphs 5 through 7, Keynes deals
with “the technique of Recovery itself,” and provides his rapidly evolving views
about the functioning of the macro economy, views that he would present more fully
thirty months later in The General Theory. He points out that in modern economies
output is “primarily produced for sale; and the volume of output depends on the
amount of purchasing power.” He argues that an expansion in output would only take
place if households spend more out of their incomes, firms increase investment,
and/or the government creates additional incomes “through the expenditure of
borrowed or printed money.” He then proceeds to explain that during bad times it is
very difficult for households to increase expenditures. He further points out that firms
will only expand their investment during the “second wave of attacks on the slump
after the tide has been turned by the expenditures of public authority.” 14 The
combination of these two factors leaves the government as the only entity capable of
contributing to a robust recovery. In paragraph 6 he writes that higher prices are
“usually a symptom of rising output and employment.” He then adds that in order for
prices to rise it is important that the monetary authority allows that to happen, by
supporting “the increased monetary turn-over.” He also points out that higher prices
will help debtors, by reducing the real value of their liabilities. 15 In paragraph 7 he
clarifies that higher prices should not be a goal by themselves. He writes: “the
stimulation of output by increasing aggregate purchasing power is the right way to get
prices up; and not the other way round.”

•

The role of public works: Paragraphs 8 through 10, and 17 expand on the points made
above, by emphasizing the role of loan-expenditures in the recovery. At the beginning
of paragraph 8 Keynes writes: “I lay overwhelming emphasis on the increase of
national purchasing power resulting from governmental expenditure, which is
financed by loans and not by taxing present incomes. Nothing else counts in
comparison with this.” During a major downturn only large increases in government
expenditures can resuscitate the economy: “That is why war has always caused
intense industrial activity.” In paragraph 9 he criticizes the Roosevelt administration
for having failed to increase government expenditures during its first six months in
office. 16 He returns to this general subject in paragraph 17, where he writes that it is
not his role “to choose particular objects of expenditure. But preference should be

Emphasis in the original.
This point had been made repeatedly by Irving Fisher.
16
In fact, one of the first economic measures undertaken by the new administration was to pass the Economy Act,
aimed at balancing the budget, through large government expenditure cuts. See Table 1.
14
15

7

given to those which can be made to mature quickly on a large scale, as for example
the rehabilitation of the physical condition of the railroad.”
•

The role of monetary policy: Keynes devotes two paragraphs– 11 and 18 – to
monetary policy. In paragraph 11 he refers to the Quantity Theory of Money as a
“crude economic doctrine.” He then points out that given the conditions in the US, it
is very unlikely that monetary policy would be effective: “[T]his it is like trying to get
fat by buying a larger belt… It is the most misleading thing to stress the quantity of
money, which is only a limiting factor, rather than the volume of expenditure, which
is the operative factor.” Keynes comes back to money in the penultimate paragraph
(18) where he points out that what really matters is the long-term interest rate, and
suggests that the Federal Reserve tries to twist the yield curve. He tells the President:
“I see no reason why you should not reduce the rate of interest in your long term
government bonds to 2½% or less.” He then adds that the way to achieve this is
through a policy where the Federal Reserve System “would replace its present
holdings of short-dated Treasury issues by purchasing long-dated issues in
exchange.”

•

Gold and exchange-rate policies: Keynes deals with these matters in paragraph 12
through 16. He writes that the “exchange rate policy of a country should be entirely
subservient to the aim of raising output and employment to the right level.” He then
adds the sentence that many people quote – most times without having read the letter:
“The recent gyrations of the dollar have looked to me more like a gold standard on
the booze than the ideal managed currency of my dreams.” This was a direct criticism
of the Administration’s “gold buying program,” launched on October 25 1933. 17
According to this plan, the government was allowed to purchase gold at prices
determined periodically by the Secretary of the Treasury and the President; these
prices were, almost every day, significantly higher than the world price for gold.
Keynes points out that stability of the exchanges is desirable under most
circumstances. This, however, does not mean that he advocates a return to the
traditional gold standard. Throughout these paragraphs he summarizes his views on a
new international economic order, as presented in the May 1933 pamphlet The means
to prosperity.

There were two phases for the gold buying program. Generally, the second phase, which started in late October,
is singled out as “the gold buying program.”
17

8

The letter generated immediate reactions, both in the U.S. and in Great Britain. On January 1,
1934, the New York Times published an article with comments by three academics: Professors
Raymond Moley from Columbia, Irving Fisher from Yale, and Willford I. King from New York
University. 18 Moley, who until a few weeks earlier had been an Assistant Secretary of State,
argued that both the NRA and the AAA contributed positively to recovery. He said:
[Keynes] misses two points: First, the NRA is not primarily concerned with
increasing production, but with spreading work and in the balancing production
within the great fields of industry. Second, the NRA followed the AAA and was
intended to help the industry to absorb the new purchasing power by agriculture
provided by the AAA. The two are in balance… In the main, Mr. Keynes’s
constructive suggestions are sound. The trouble is he doesn’t realize that most of
those are already adopted. The Roosevelt program must be seen as a whole, not
one aspect of it.
Irving Fisher was in general agreement with Keynes. He said: “[H]ad the NRA program been
deferred six months or a year, and if it had been possible to launch the public works program
more promptly, we might have been considerably farther along in our recovery. But as a matter
of fact the public works program could probably not have been pushed any faster.” Professor
King expressed skepticism about Keynes’s views, and argued that increased government
expenditure financed by borrowing was likely to crowd-out private expenditure “by exactly the
same amount it is increasing public purchasing power.”
Although Keynes did not answer the comments published in the U.S., he did write to the Times
of London, commenting on a letter from Ian MacDonald Horobin, a Conservative M.P. Keynes’s
letter was published on January 8. He asserted that his was not an attack on the NRA; all he was
doing was describing “these measures as reform but not recovery.” 19
In the New York Times letter Keynes used harsh language when describing FDR’s policies:
“crack brained and queer,” “on the booze,” “foolish application,” “set of fallacies,” “crude
economic doctrine,” and so on. This contrasts sharply with the language used just a few months
earlier, when on July 4 1933, he published in the Daily Mail a piece titled “President Roosevelt
is magnificently right.” 20 An interesting question is what happened during those few months that
prompted Keynes to change his language in such a way. The answer has to do, largely, with
FDR’s “gold buying program,” launched in August and expanded in October. As I argue below,
for Keynes, manipulating the price of gold as a way out of the Depression made little sense. It
“3 reply to Keynes on NRA criticism,” NYT, January 1, 1934, p. 5.
Times of London, “Mr. Roosevelt’s efforts,” January 8, 1934, p. 13. JMK XXI (1982), p. 304.
20
JMK XXI (1982), p. 273.
18
19

9

was a gimmick, a policy based on a statistical coincidence that got the relation between cause
and effect wrong. Further, and as noted in the Section 4 of this paper, it was contrary to what he
had advocated in The means to prosperity. In addition, Keynes was disappointed that the NRA
and AAA had not been accompanied by an aggressive public works program.
3.2 The literature
Most of Keynes biographers mention the open letter in their renditions of Keynes’s life,
academic work, and policy advice. None of them, however, analyzes it in detail. Harrod (1951, p.
447-8) refers to the letter within the context of the London World Monetary and Economic
Conference of 1933, and the evolution of Keynes’s views on the international monetary system.
He states, without elaborating, that in Keynes’s opinion FDR’s gold buying program was based
on a crude version of the quantity theory. 21 He also stresses Keynes’s distinction between
“recovery” and “reform.” However, he does not analyze why Keynes preferred a particular order
of policy. In the second volume of his biography, Skidelsky (1992, p. 492-494) provides a more
detailed examination of the letter. He discusses its origin, including Frankfurter’s role in
persuading Keynes to write it, and provides briefs comments on some of its content. Skidelsky
(p. 493) emphasizes Keynes’s criticism of the NRA, a program of reform disguised as recovery
that “should be put into cold storage.” He also points out, briefly, that Keynes believed that it
was a mistake to try raising output by depreciating the currency. Moggridge (1992, p. 580-581)
refers to the letter and to Keynes’s views on public works and the dollar. He points out that it is
unclear whether the missive influenced FDR’s policies. Felix (1999, p. 243) refers to the open
letter on passing, and mentions that in 1933 Keynes was renewing his friendship with Felix
Frankfurter.
A number of authors who have dealt with the U.S. abandonment of the gold standard have
mentioned the letter; none of them, however, has analyzed it in detail. In Ahamed’s (2009) book
on monetary policy in the interwar period, the anti-penultimate chapter is titled “Gold standard
on the booze,” a quote taken directly from the letter. The analysis touches on many policies
undertaken during the first year of the Roosevelt administration. However, the letter itself is only
mentioned on passing. According to Sumner (1999, p. 528 and 2015, p. 261) the letter shows that
Keynes’s concern about inflation was rather high. Rauchway (2015, p. 96) argues that the letter
shows that “Keynes did not seem to understand the political opposition Roosevelt faced.”
Dimand (1994, p. 93) deals with the letter briefly when discussing Irving Fisher’s proposal for a
“compensated dollar.” Kroszner (1999, p. 9) mentions it on passing in his paper on the
abrogation of the gold clauses. Edwards (2017a, p.19) refers to the letter in his discussion of the
Keynes was wrong on this point. George F. Warren, the architect of the gold buying program, expressly pointed
out in his book (With Frank A. Pearson) Prices (1933, p 128) that his approach had no relation, whatever, to the
quantity theory.
21

10

intellectual underpinnings of FDR’s dollar policy in 1933. Some authors, including Galbraith
(1984) and O’Connell (2016), mention the open letter as an early example of Keynes’s belief that
public works, financed by borrowing, would impact aggregate demand and employment
positively. None of these authors, however, attempt to evaluate Keynes’s views on policy
sequencing or the dollar during late 1933. 22
The letter is not mentioned in either of the two memoirs written by FDR’s adviser Raymond
Moley (1939, 1966). This is somewhat surprising, given that Moley interacted extensively with
Keynes during the London Monetary and Economic Conference of June-July 1933. In fact,
Keynes helped him put together a communiqué explaining FDR’s position regarding currency
values and the stabilization of the exchanges. 23 Rexford G. Tugwell, the only economist in the
advisory group known as the Brains Trust – a group that was led by Raymond Moley –, does not
mention the letter in his diaries. However, he dealt with it many years later (in 1970), in a
lengthy review article where he discusses a selection of letters exchanged between President
Roosevelt and Felix Frankfurter. According to Tugwell, these exchanges suggest that FDR was
not particularly impressed by Keynes’s recommendations; he thought that there was little new in
them. Tuwell (1970, p. 103) writes: “Roosevelt was less than enthusiastic about receiving from
Keynes the advice to do what he had already been doing for some time.”
James P. Warburg, another important presidential adviser during 1933, refers to the letter in his
memoirs published in 1934. He focuses exclusively on Keynes’s criticisms of FDR’s gold and
exchange rate policies. According to Warburg, “there was some mild flare-up of excitement
when on the last day of the year, J. Maynard Keynes… described the ‘gyrations of the dollar’
under the Government manipulation as ‘more like a gold standard on the booze’ than and ideally
managed currency.” Warburg then adds that Keynes characterized as “foolish” the idea “that
there is a mathematical relation between the price of gold and the price of other things.’” 24 For
Warburg this was an opportunity to settle a score with Professor George F. Warren, an old rival
and the intellectual father of the gold-buying program. Warburg comes back to Keynes’s open
letter in his second volume of memoirs, published in 1964. Chapter 16 is titled “Gold standard on
the booze.” However, in this 13-page chapter there is no reference to Keynes’s view on loan
expenditures, his distinction between “recovery” and “reform,” or his advice regarding the
sequencing of policies; the discussion deals mostly with the London Monetary and Economic
In his thorough volume on the discussions leading to the Bretton Woods conference Steil (2013) deals with many
of the interactions between Keynes and the Roosevelt administration – including his many memos to Secretary
Henry Morgenthau during World War II --, but he does not discuss in detail the NYT letter from December 1933. In
his monumental oeuvre on the gold standard, Eichengreen (1991) does not discuss Keynes open letter. The letter is
not mentioned in Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Temin (1976), or Meltzer (2003).
23
Journalist Walter Lippmann also worked on that communique.
24
Warburg (1934, p. 159).
22

11

Conference and Keynes’s views on the dollar, sterling, and the international monetary system
(Warburg 1964, p. 139-152).
Keynes’s open letter is not mentioned in Dean Acheson’s memoirs. This is a surprise, since as
Undersecretary of the Treasury Acheson was in charge of authorizing the gold-buying program
that Keynes criticizes in the letter. Moreover, Acheson thought that the second phase of the
program, launched on October 24 1933, was illegal, and went ahead with it only after receiving
written instructions from Will Woodin, the Secretary of the Treasury. 25 Herbert Feis, the only
professional economist who participated in the complete deliberations that led to the gold-buying
program and to the eventual official devaluation of the dollar in January 1934, does not mention
Keynes’s letter in his memoirs titled “1933: Characters in Crisis.” For him, the most important
event in December 1933 was that Prohibition came to an end. 26 Sir Frederick Leith Ross, a
Senior Adviser to the U.K.’s Treasury does not mention the letter in his extensive memoirs
published in 1968, where he discusses the negotiations with his American counterparts regarding
currencies and the stabilization of the exchanges (Leith-Ross 1968).
Henry Morgenthau Jr. replaced Dean Acheson as Undersecretary of the Treasury in November
1933, and was appointed Secretary on January 1 1934, one day after Keyes’s’ letter was
published. He served in that post until July 1945. During his work in the Roosevelt and Truman
administrations, Morgenthau kept detailed notes and an extensive diary, which has been an
invaluable source for historians trying to understand the policies of the New Deal. In these
diaries – which are kept in the Roosevelt Presidential Library and are now available on line –,
there is no reference to Keynes’s letter.
4. Keynes on Sequencing in 1933
4.1 Recovery vs Reform
Keynes’s discussion of sequencing is rather narrow, and deals with only two aspects of policy:
what he calls “recovery” and with “reform.” 27 Recovery referred to macroeconomic policies
aimed at generating higher aggregate demand, raising prices, and reducing unemployment; the
ultimate purpose of these policies was, of course, to end the Great Depression. Reform, on the
other hand, had to do with policies geared at changing structural aspects of the U.S. economy,
including efforts to rationalize resource allocation, regulate large conglomerates and trusts,
improve working conditions, and coordinate supply in the agricultural sector. Other goals of the
reform policies were to provide electricity to isolated rural communities, generate higher wages,
Acheson (1965).
Feis (1966, p. 323).
27
As above, all quotes are from the open letter as published in the New York Times, as reproduced in volume XXI
of the Collected Works. JMKXXI, (1982), p. 289-297.
25
26

12

rationalize the functioning of the banking system, and implement some form of indicative
planning. FDR advisers, and Brains Trust members Rexford G. Tugwell and Adolf A. Berle, had
advocated many of these reform measures during the presidential campaign. 28 In 1933, many of
these reform policies were implemented through a variety of legislation, including the National
Industrial Recovery Act and the Agricultural Adjustments Act.
In paragraph two of the open letter, Keynes wonders whether FDR and his advisers appreciate
that there is an optimal sequencing of policy. Keynes writes: “We wonder whether the order of
different urgencies is rightly understood, whether there is a confusion of aim, and whether some
of the advice you get is not crack-brained and queer.” 29 He then addresses the President directly,
and writes: “You are engaged on a double task, Recovery and Reform; – recovery from the
slump, and the passage of those business and social reforms which are long overdue.” In the third
paragraph Keynes presents his concrete recommendations on sequencing and speed: “For the
first [recovery], speed and quick results are essential. The second [reform] may be urgent too;
but haste will be injurious, and wisdom of long-range purpose is more necessary than immediate
achievement.”
For Keynes, the issue is mostly political. For him, as noted, it is fundamental that the Roosevelt
government does not fail in its experiments. He writes that if FDR’s policies are successful “new
and bolder methods will be tried everywhere, and we may date the first chapter of a new
economic era from your accession to office.” In contrast, he states, failure will mean that
“rational change will be gravely prejudiced throughout the world, leaving orthodoxy and
revolution to fight it out.” At the center of Keynes’s argument is the need for investors to regain
“confidence.” Confidence, in turn, will increase if the policies of the administration aimed at
recovery grow in credibility and reputation – or what Keynes labels “prestige.” Only then, will
FDR's experimental policies gain the full support of Congress. 30 Keynes writes (emphasis
added):
It will be through raising high the prestige of your administration by success in
short range Recovery, that you will have the driving force to accomplish longrange Reform. On the other hand, even wise and necessary Reform may, in some
respects, impede and complicate Recovery. For it will upset the confidence of the
Rexford Tugwell was a firm believer of the benefits of implementing some kind of planning in the United States.
For an analysis of the role played by the Brains Trust see Edwards (2017a). For a first person account see Tugwell
(1968).
29
Emphasis added.
30
It should be noted that as 1933 progressed, Roosevelt support in Congress, which at first had been
overwhelming, began to wane. In fact, he had to prolong his original "Hundred Days" to 116, in order to get the
legislature to approve what he considered to be his most important projects. See Moley (1939) for an insider’s
contemporary account of the first year of the Roosevelt administration.
28

13

business world and weaken their existing motives to action, before you have had
time to put other motives in their place. It may over-task your bureaucratic
machine, which the traditional individualism of the United States and the old
“spoils system” have left none too strong. And it will confuse the thought and aim
of yourself and your administration by giving you too much to think about all at
once.
From here Keynes goes on to say that, from the other side of the Atlantic, it appears to him that
during the first few months of the Administration, the relative importance given to the two
policies is mistaken. In the fourth paragraph of the open letter he writes (emphasis added):
[I’]m not clear, looking back over the last nine months, that the order of urgency
between measures of Recovery and measures of Reform has been duly observed,
or that the latter has not sometimes been mistaken for the former. In particular, I
cannot detect any material aid to recovery in N.I.R.A., though its social gains
have been large. The driving force which has been put behind the vast
administrative tasks set by this Act has seemed to represent a wrong choice in the
order of urgencies… That is my first reflection – that N.I.R.A., which is
essentially Reform and probably impedes Recovery, has been put across too
hastily, in the false guise as being part of the technique of Recovery.
He approached this problem, as he usually did, using the Marshallian supply and demand
apparatus. The challenge was to expand (aggregate) demand, and not to curtail supply. He
emphasized this point: restricting output was the wrong thing to do; a curtailed supply results in
higher prices, but also in reduced activity, incomes, and employment. In Keynes’s words
(paragraph six, emphasis added):
[R]ising prices caused by deliberately increasing prime costs or by restricting
output have a vastly inferior value to rising prices which are the natural result of
an increase in the nation's purchasing power.
The problem, Keynes clarifies in paragraph seven, are not the social goals of the policies of
reform. The issue is that an excessive and early emphasis on these goals may be misunderstood
by the population. He writes:
I do not mean to impugn the social justice and social expediency of the
redistribution of incomes aimed at by N.I.R.A. and by the various schemes for
agricultural restriction. The latter, in particular, I should strongly support in
principle. But too much emphasis on the remedial value of a higher price-level as
an object in itself may lead to serious misapprehension as to the part which prices

14

can play in the technique of recovery. The stimulation of output by increasing
aggregate purchasing power is the right way to get prices up; and not the other
way round.
4.2 The exchange rate as the key link
In the three full paragraphs strictly devoted to sequencing – paragraphs 2 through 4 –, Keynes
does not specify the mechanism through which the Administration’s policies were likely to affect
its “prestige,” and/or impact the degree of investors’ “confidence.” However, we can get some
light about his thinking from other passages in the letter, and, in particular, from his criticism of
FDR’s exchange rate and gold-related policies. For Keynes, exchange rate stability was an
important determinant of confidence. In paragraph 16 of the open letter he writes that an
excessively unstable currency “upsets confidence, hinders business decisions, occupies the
public attention in a measure far exceeding its real importance.”
By 1933 Keynes’s views on exchange rates and the international monetary system were already
moving in the direction of what would later become the “Keynes Plan” discussed at the Bretton
Woods Conference. 31 He continued to be critical of the traditional gold standard, but he was not
as scornful as he had once been. More specifically, the views on currencies presented in the 1933
pamphlet The means to prosperity, were quite different from those expressed a decade earlier in
in A tract on monetary reform, where he wrote what became a famous quote: “In truth, the gold
standard is already a barbarous relic… [I]n the modern world of paper currency and bank credit
there is no escape from a ‘managed’ currency, whether we wish it or not…” 32 In fact, in May
1933, a few weeks before the inauguration of the London Monetary and Economic Conference,
Keynes proposed a new international system based on gold and relatively rigid exchange rates.
What he had in mind, he wrote, was “a qualified return to the gold standard,” where exchange
rates would be stable, but could be changed if circumstances justified it.
From this perspective it is easy to understand Keynes’s criticism of FDR’s “gold buying”
initiative in the open letter. According to this program, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
(RFC) was allowed to purchase gold at arbitrary prices determined daily by the Secretary of the
Treasury and the President. 33 The program was the brainchild of George F. Warren, a professor
of agricultural economics at Cornell, who in a 1931 book (with Frank A. Pearson) concluded that
there was a strict one-to-one relation between the price of gold and commodity prices. If the
dollar was depreciated with respect to gold, the price of commodities would increase
On the two competing plans considered at Bretton Woods, see Steil (2013).
Keynes (1923), p. 170.
33
There were two phases for the gold buying program. Generally, the second phase, which started in late October,
is singled out as “the gold buying program.” In spite of some superficial similarities, the Warren view differed
significantly from Irving Fisher’s “compensated dollar” proposal. Warren and Pearson (1933), p. 94.
31
32

15

accordingly, and in a one-to-one fashion. On October 25, the first day of the gold buying
program, the RFC paid $31.36 per ounce of gold, 27 cents above the world price. During the
days that followed, arbitrary prices were set daily by the President. On November 9, for example,
the price was $33.15 per ounce, 10 cents higher than the international market price. On
November 15, an informed source stated that government had purchased modest amounts of gold
internationally. In mid-December, by the time Keynes penned his letter, the RFC was paying
$32.61 per ounce of gold. These unpredictable “gyrations” of the dollar caused consternation
among investors on both sides of the Atlantic. 34
Keynes thought that Warren’s theories were bogus and generated unnecessary noise in global
financial markets. In paragraph 12 of the open letter he provides a scathing criticism of the
principles behind the gold-buying program, without mentioning the Cornell professor:
It is… foolish… to believe that there is a mathematical relation between the price
of gold and the prices of other things. It is true that the value of the dollar in terms
of foreign currencies will affect the prices of those things which enter into
international trade. In so far as an overvaluation of the dollar is impeding the
freedom of domestic price-raising policies or disturbing the balance of payments
with foreign countries, it was advisable to depreciate. But exchange rate
depreciation should follow the success of your domestic price-raising policy as its
natural consequence, and should not be allowed to disturb the whole world by
preceding its justification at an entirely arbitrary pace.
In the same paragraph Keynes points out that excessive speculation in currency markets reduces
the degree of “confidence” in the administration, and makes more difficult business decisions:
In the field of gold-devaluation and exchange policy the time has come when
uncertainty should be ended. This game of blind man’s buff with exchange
speculators serves no useful purpose and is extremely undignified. It upsets
confidence, hinders business decisions, occupies the public attention in a measure
far exceeding its real importance, and is responsible both for the irritation and for
a certain lack of respect which exists abroad.
But Keynes wants the president – and the public, for that matter – to understand that his criticism
of the gold-buying program does not mean that he favors a return to the old gold, rigid standard.
In paragraph 13 he writes: “These criticisms do not mean that I have weakened in my advocacy
of a managed currency or in preferring stable prices to stable exchanges. The currency and

34

See, NYT, “Fluctuations surprise the capital,” November 10, 1933, p. 2

16

exchange policy of a country should be entirely subservient to the aim of raising output and
employment to the right level.”
In the final chapter of The means to prosperity Keynes makes clear that his views about the
international monetary system and exchange rates are fully consistent with expanding public
works through loan-expenditures. The issue, he points out, is urgent, as “we have the task of
putting at least 1,000,000 men back to work” (1933, p. 35). Achieving this goal, he states, is
possible through a combination of an expansion of public works, and an exchange rate system
that at the same time provides stability and frees central banks from their concern about “free
gold.” Although the NYT open letter does not go into every detail of his plan to move the most
important economies out of the Depression, it provides both a reaffirmation and an expansion of
the views presented in the 1933 pamphlet.
In early May 1934, Keynes and his wife Lydia sailed to the United States in the USS Olympic.
Columbia University had conferred on him an honorary degree, and the ceremony was to take
place in New York City on June 5. While in the U.S. Keynes had meetings with a number of
economists and policy makers, including Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr., and
Brains Trust member Rexford G. Tugwell. On Monday May 28, he finally saw President
Roosevelt for an hour at 5:15 PM. 35 According to Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins, the
meeting was not a success. In her memoirs she writes that Roosevelt told her, “I saw your friend
Keynes. He left a whole rigmarole of figures. He must be a mathematical rather than a political
economist.” Immediately following the meeting Keynes visited Perkins in her office, and after
stating that he admired Roosevelt’s actions, he cautiously added that he had “supposed the
President was more literate, economically speaking.” 36
5. Concluding remarks
To finish, it is interesting to compare briefly Keynes’s views on sequencing of policies with
those developed in the 1980s and 90s. At that time, and as a result of the debt crisis in Latin
America and of the collapse of the Soviet bloc, a large number of countries embarked on major
economic changes. These reforms were aimed at reducing inflation, stabilizing the public
accounts, opening up the economy to international competition, and deregulating goods and
factor markets. Within this context, a number of authors, both in academia and in the multilateral
institutions – the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund –, began to think about the
most appropriate order of reform and liberalization.

35
36

Skidelsky (1992, p. 506)
Perkins (1946), p. 225-226.

17

The question was whether these countries should proceed as fast as possible, making
simultaneous progress on all fronts, or if, on the contrary, there was a particularly appropriate
order of policy, where some goals were tackled first, and some postponed and/or pursued
gradually. According to the IMF and the World Bank, there were two particularly pressing
issues: the first one was whether macroeconomic stabilization should be pursued before
structural reforms were put in place. In many ways this was similar to the problem addressed by
Keynes in the open letter, except that in the 1990s the problems were high inflation and stifling
regulations, while in 1933 they were deflation and cutthroat competition. The second major
dilemma discussed in the 1980s and 90s had to do with the order of liberalization of the balance
of payments: was it convenient to open up the trade and capital accounts simultaneously, or was
it more appropriate to proceed step-by-step, and open trade before relaxing capital controls? This
particular question was not tackled by Keynes in the open letter.
Within a short period of time, a substantial literature developed on the subject of policy
dynamics, policy transition, and sequencing – see for example McKinnon (1982, 1993), Edwards
(1990), Krueger (1986), Mussa (1986), and Mundell (1995). Although none of the many authors
who wrote on the subject referenced the New York Times open letter, many of them followed an
approach that had a number of similarities to that developed by Keynes. In particular, most of
this literature emphasize the political economy angle, and argued that in order to be sustained
through time, it was fundamental that the reforms got supported by the public and voters.
Support, in turn, depended on the sequencing of policy. The appropriate order was the one that
generated “confidence” in the transformation program. As Keynes had done more than five
decades earlier, the exchange rate was considered to be the key variable in this process. A stable
and competitive real exchange rate was necessary for generating credibility; in contrast, a
volatile and overvalued currency would, more often than not, result in a failed reform process
Most modern authors argued that in countries with very high inflation and a situation of
“monetary overhang” – most nations the former Soviet bloc –, it was necessary to allow prices to
adjust quickly and in a once and for all fashion. This meant that macroeconomic stabilization had
to be pursued first, and very fast. Within this process it was important that central banks stopped
printing money to finance the government deficit. Thus, a market for government debt had to be
developed. An implication of this was that jointly with the price adjustment (or soon after)
interest rates had to be liberalized and allowed to reflect the true scarcity of funds. Once these
two policies were in place, scarcity and black markets would be eliminated and inflation would
abate, providing relief to the population and support to the reformist government.
The second point emphasized in the modern literature was that an early relaxation of capital
controls was likely to generate major dislocations in the foreign exchange market. In many cases
relaxing controls meant a sudden and very large inflow of capital. This, in turn, would trigger a

18

major appreciation of the real exchange rate. Speculation and a trade deficit would follow. At the
end, it was argued that situation would become unsustainable and a crisis would erupt. At that
point trade barriers would be imposed, and the reforms would be reverted. The practical point
was that the adequate order of policy called for a delayed and gradual relaxation of capital
controls. By emphasizing the key role of the exchange rate in programs of deep economic
transformation, literature of the 1980s and 1990s was remarkably Keynesian. 37

In later years the literature on sequencing moved in two directions: attempts were made to develop fully
optimizing general equilibrium models to analyze the welfare consequences of alternative orders of reform. Also,
DSGE models were used to simulate the effects on different variables – income, employment, and wages – of
alternative sequences.

37

19

References
Acheson, D. (1965). Morning and noon. Houghton Mifflin.
Ahamed, L. (2009). Lords of Finance: The bankers who broke the world. Random House.
Bloomfield, A. I. (1950). Capital Imports and the American Balance of Payments, 1934-39. A
Study in Abnormal International Capital Transfers. University of Chicago Press.
Dimand, R. W. (1994). “Irving Fisher's Debt–Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.” Review of
Social Economy, 52(1), 92-107.
Edwards, S. (1990). “The sequencing of economic reform: Analytical issues and lessons from
Latin American experiences.” The World Economy, 13(1), 1-14.
Edwards, S. (2107a), “Gold, the Brains Trust and Roosevelt,” History of Political Economy,
Winter.
Edwards, S. (2107b), “The London Monetary and Economic Conference of 1933 and the end of
the Great Depression,” Open Economies Review, July
Edwards, S. (2107c), “Keynes and the dollar in 1933” Financial History Review, December
Edwards, S. (2018), American Default: The untold story of FDR, the Supreme Court and the
battle over gold. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Eichengreen, B. (1992). Golden fetters. Oxford
Feis, H. (1966). Characters in Crisis. Boston, Toronto: Little1, Brown, and Company.
Felix, D. (1999). Keynes: A critical life (No. 208). ABC-CLIO.
Freedman, M. (1967). Roosevelt and Frankfurter: their correspondence, 1928-1945/annotated
by. Boston: Little, Brown, 1967.
Friedman, M., & Schwartz, A. J. (1963). A monetary history of the United States, 1867-1960.
Princeton University Press.
Galbraith, J. K. (1984). “Keynes, Roosevelt, and the complementary revolutions.” Challenge,
26(6), 4-8.
Harberger, A. (1986). “A primer on the Chilean economy.” Choksi and D. Papageorgiuous
(Eds.), Economic Liberalization in Developing Countries, Blackwell, Oxford.
Harrod, R. F. (1951). Life of John Maynard Keynes. Macmillan
Hausman, J., P. Rhode, and J. Wieland (2016). “Recovery from the Great Depression: The farm
channel in Spring 1933,” University of Michigan.

20

Keynes, J. M. (1923). A tract on monetary reform. Macmillan.
Keynes, J. M. (1930). A treatise on money. Macmillan.
Keynes, J. M. (1933). The means to prosperity. Macmillan.
Keynes, J. M. (1933). “From Keynes to Roosevelt: Our recovery plan assayed,” The New York
Times, January 31, 1933, p. 2 XX.
Keynes, J. M. (1982). Activities 1931-1939, World Crises and Policies in Britain and America,
Volume XXI of the Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes. JMK XXI. Moggridge
(ed), London, Macmillan and Cambridge University Press for the Royal Economic
Society.
Kindelberger, C. P., (1978). Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. Basic, New York.
Kroszner, R. (1999). Is it better to forgive than to receive?: Repudiation of the gold indexation
clause in long-term debt during the great depression. Center for Research in Security
Prices, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
Krueger A.O. (1986). “Problems of liberalization.” Choksi, A. M., & Papageorgiou, D. (Eds.).
Economic liberalization in developing countries. Blackwell.
Lash, J. P. (1975). From the diaries of Felix Frankfurter. New York: Norton.
Leith-Ross, F. (1968). Money talks: fifty years of international finance: the autobiography of Sir
Frederick Leith-Ross. Hutchinson
Markwell, D. J. (2000). Keynes and Australia. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia.
McKinnon, R. I. (1982). “The order of economic liberalization: lessons from Chile and
Argentina.” In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy (Vol. 17, pp. 159186). North-Holland.
McKinnon, R. I. (1993). The order of economic liberalization: Financial control in the transition
to a market economy. JHU Press.
Meltzer, A. H. (2003). A History of the Federal Reserve, Vol. 1 Chicago.
Moggridge, D. (1992). Maynard Keynes: an economist's biography. Routledge.
Moley, R. (1939). After seven years. Harper & Bros.
Moley, R. (1966). The First New Deal. Harcourt.
Morgenthau Jr., H. “Farm Credit Diary.” The Morgenthau Papers at the Roosevelt Presidential
Library.

21

Mundell, R. (1995). “Stabilization and liberalization policies in semi-open economies.” In S.
Edwards (Ed.), Capital Controls, Exchange Rate and Monetary Policy in the World
Economy.
Mussa, M. L. (1986). “The Adjustment Process and the Timing of Trade Liberalization.” In A.
Choksi and D. Papageorgiou, eds., Economic Liberalization in Developing Countries.
Oxford: Blackwell.
New York Times, The. Several issues.
O'Connell, J. (2016). “On Keynes on inflation and unemployment.” The European Journal of the
History of Economic Thought, 23(1), 82-101.
Pasvolsky, L. (1933). Current monetary issues. Brookings Institution
Perkins, F. (1946). The Roosevelt I Knew. New York: Viking.
Rauchway, E. (2015). The Money Makers: How Roosevelt and Keynes Ended the Depression,
Defeated Fascism, and Secured a Prosperous Peace. Basic Books.
Reinhart, C. M., & Rogoff, K. S. (2009). This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly.
Princeton University Press.
Roosevelt, F.D. (1938). Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Random House
Sachs, A. (1934), “National Recovery Administration policies and the problem of economic
planning,” In America’s Recovery Program, Edited by A.A. Berle et. al. Oxford
University Press, 1934.
Skidelsky, R. (1992). John Maynard Keynes. Vol. II: The Economist as Savior, 1920-1937.
Steil, B. (2013). The battle of Bretton Woods: John Maynard Keynes, Harry Dexter White, and
the making of a new world order. Princeton University Press.
Sumner, S. (1999). “The role of the gold standard in Keynesian monetary theory.” Economic
Inquiry, 37(3), 527-540.
Sumner, S. (2015). The Midas Paradox. Washington D.C.: Independent Institute
Temin, P. (1976). Did monetary forces cause the Great Depression?. New York: Norton.
Times, The (London), Several Issues
Tugwell, R. G. (1952, 1932-1935). The Diary of Rexford G. Tugwell: The New Deal, 1932-1935
Edited by M.C. Namorato (No. 136). Greenwood Pub Group
Tugwell, R. G. (1968). The Brains Trust. Viking Adult.

22

Tugwell, R. G. (1970). “Roosevelt and Frankfurter: An Essay Review.” Political Science
Quarterly, 85(1), 99-114.
Warburg, J. P. (1934). The money muddle. Knopf.
Warburg, J. P. (1964). The Long Road Home: The Autobiography of a Maverick. Doubleday.
Warren, G. F., & Pearson, F. A. (1931). Prices. Wiley
Warren, G. F., & Pearson, F. A. (1935). Gold and prices. Wiley

