                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS AND CHURCH CONTRIBUTIONS

                                     Daniel M. Hungerman
                                          Kevin Rinz
                                        Tim Weninger
                                       Chungeun Yoon

                                      Working Paper 24374
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24374


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2018




A special thanks to excellent research assistance from Kathleen Ryan and Eric Fein. Mackenzie
Jones and Mitchell Murphy also provided helpful assistance. This project was funded by the
FRSP program in the Office of Research at Notre Dame. The project was developed while
professor Hungerman was working on a project funded by the John Templeton Foundation, but
this paper was not funded by Templeton. The authors declare that they have no relevant or
material interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Daniel M. Hungerman, Kevin Rinz, Tim Weninger, and Chungeun Yoon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Political Campaigns and Church Contributions
Daniel M. Hungerman, Kevin Rinz, Tim Weninger, and Chungeun Yoon
NBER Working Paper No. 24374
March 2018
JEL No. D72,H41,Z12

                                           ABSTRACT

We combine a new dataset of weekly Catholic church donations with a new dataset of
presidential-election campaign stops to explore the impact of stops on donations. We find that
stops increase donations, with a campaign stop generating 2 percent more donations in the
following week. Our results suggest that this effect is of short duration. Further, it does not appear
to vary based on the political language used by the parish in its own church bulletins. However,
the effect does appear to vary based on the religiosity of the candidates themselves, with Catholic
candidates generating the largest increases.

Daniel M. Hungerman                               Tim Weninger
Department of Economics                           353 Fitzpatrick Hall
University of Notre Dame                          University of Notre Dame
3056 Jenkins-Nanovic Halls                        Notre Dame, IN 46556
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602                         tweninge@nd.edu
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu                                   Chungeun Yoon
                                                  3060 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
Kevin Rinz                                        University of Notre Dame
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Halls                        Notre Dame, IN 46556
University of Notre Dame                          cyoon1@nd.edu
Notre Dame, IN 46556
kjrinz@gmail.com
1.      Introduction

     The scale of US presidential campaigns has become dramatically larger than even a
generation ago; in the past 20 years expenditures on presidential campaigns have increased
nearly 5-fold.1 How do these campaigns impact individuals and communities? A large body
of scholarship has taken up this question. Work has especially focused on how campaigns
affect political participation (see Green and Schwam-Baird, 2016, for a recent review), but
scholars have also investigated whether campaigns affect communities’ social engagement
outside of political participation, with mixed conclusions (e.g., Rahn, Brehm, and Carlson,
2004; Banducci and Karp, 2017; Coleman and Manna, 2000).
     In this paper, we explore how the electoral process impacts pro-social behavior, and in
particular how campaign stops made by candidates impact religious donations. Some prior
work has considered the effects of campaign activity on donations, for example, Barton,
Castillo, and Petrie (2015) and Perez-Truglia and Cruces (2017). More generally, recent
work in economics has considered the importance of social context (such as “the power of the
ask”) in motivating giving (DellaVigna, List, Malmendier, 2012; Andreoni, Rao, Trachtman,
2017). We depart from this work by exploring an example of how social context created by
a political event (here, a campaign stop), affects non-political activity.
     Exploring religious activity is a natural extension of prior work in several ways. First,
religiosity remains an important form of social participation, with most Americans professing
a belief in God and attending worship with some frequency (Lipka, 2013, 2015), and with
religion continuing to make up by far the largest component of all charitable giving. Second,
religion appears to be an institution closely related to political participation. Individuals’
religiosity is an extremely strong predictor of a person’s likelihood to vote and their political
attitudes (Cohen-Zada, Margalit, and Rigbi, 2016; Chen and Lind, 2016); and some work
   1
     Using data from the Federal Election Committee, Galka (2016) reports the 2016 campaign involved $857
million in expenditures, while the 1996 campaign had $182 million, an increase of about 470%. Barton,
Castillo, and Petrie (2014) report that expenditures for the 2010 US federal election (presidential and non-
presidential) were nearly $4 billion.



                                                     1
(Gerber, Gruber, Hungerman, 2016) has concluded that the effect of religion on voting
behavior is causal.
       Further, religious activity is not only relevant for both charitable giving and political
participation, but it is also involves unique policy considerations. The relationship between
politicking and religiosity has come under renewed discussion in regards to the current presi-
dential administration’s proposed enforcement of the Johnson Amendment, which threatens
the tax-exempt status of churches if they endorse or oppose particular political candidates.
Religious groups’ enthusiasm for eliminating this amendment appears mixed, with some
“thrilled” by the idea but many religious groups opposing it (Goodstein and Sheer, 2017).
       This conflicted response mirrors the inherent uncertainty in whether campaign activity
could benefit churches. The implications of past work are not entirely clear: on the one
hand, if campaigns (for instance) promote tastes for social participation, or let individuals
acquire information or social contacts conducive to future religiosity, then campaign activity
could increase religious participation. On the other hand, as mentioned above, studies have
found mixed results (including small or zero effects) of campaigns on pro-social attitudes.
Campaigns could lower religious participation if, for example, individuals have limited time
for socially-focused activities and campaign participation “crowds out” religious participa-
tion.2 Moreover, recent studies have shown that other activities such as education, while
itself likely important for promoting social capital, may lower religious participation (Becker
and Woessman, 2017; Hungerman, 2014a; Cesur and Mocan, 2014; Mocan and Pogoreova,
2014). But in truth all of this work is tangential to our topic; we know of no extant work
that explores the issue we consider here.3
   2
     Even the authority Alexis de Tocqueville, whose extensive and nuanced writings often emphasized the
beneficial aspects of religion for democracy, warns that the democratic process could undermine certain
aspects of religious practices: “Another truth seems clear to me: religions must attend less to external
practices in democratic times than in all others.” He argues that during these times men “are naturally led
to attach only a secondary importance to the details of worship” (de Tocqueville, 2012; pg 750). Tocqueville’s
observation specifically concerns external practices or “small observances” of faith, and whether his argument
would apply to religious participation in the present day is an open question.
   3
     However, we do know of important work relating relating religious participation to electoral outcomes,
(e.g., Meyersson, 2014; Bhalotra, Cassan, Clots-Figueras, Iyer, 2014).



                                                      2
   This may in part be explained by data limitations. Churches and other congregations
typically do not report information to any federal census or survey. While well-known surveys
such as the General Social Survey ask individuals questions on their religiosity, the annual
periodicity and relatively small sample sizes of these surveys make them not ideal for our
topic. Further, perhaps surprisingly, we also know of no available dataset with detailed
information on national campaign activity even for the most recent presidential elections.
   We overcome these challenges by constructing two new datasets. First, we construct
a dataset of weekly church donations from a sample of hundreds of Catholic churches from
across the United States. This data was obtained from the weekly service bulletins published
by these churches on their websites over a period of several years. Importantly, along with
a church’s exact location, these bulletins almost always include weekly donations collected,
which we use as our measure of religious activity. Further, they include as a potential
datasource the text of the bulletin itself. Our data includes both donations made to each
parish and also a measure of the political content of the words in each bulletin. We discuss
this dataset more below.
   Using a wide variety of sources, we then construct a dataset of presidential-campaign stops
during the fall of 2015. Fortunately, the campaign featured a large number of candidates,
giving us a very high amount of variation in stops across communities and across time. Our
data includes all stops made by the top 11 candidates in the presidential race from September
1st, 2015, through December 31st of that year. Overall, we identify a total of 864 distinct
campaign stops, where we observe the location, exact date, and candidate at the stop.
   Of course, campaign stops are not randomly made but rather reflect (presumably) careful
strategic thinking by candidates and campaign managers. If certain communities are more
likely to get campaign stops than others, which is obviously true, then care should be taken
that differences in religious behavior observed in towns receiving campaign stops are driven
by the campaign stops and not the underlying characteristics of the towns. We exploit
the high-frequency and years-long availability of our data to non-parametrically control for


                                              3
differences between the observations that see a campaign stop and those that do not. We
find evidence that campaign stops tend to occur in communities with naturally lower levels
of donations, all else equal. This difference appears to be driven by cross sectional (rather
than temporal) variation, and to primarily be driven by differences across states, rather than
within them. We describe our methodology and these differences more below.
   Controlling for these differences, we find that a campaign stop made by a presidential
candidate leads to an increase in collections for nearby churches the following week. The
typical increase is moderately large: about 2% of total collected weekly revenue for each
campaign stop. The result does not appear to be driven by churches in any particular state.
We also look at the political language used within the church bulletins, but do not find
strong effects across parishes with differing political content (e.g., using words favored by
Democrats or Republicans) in their bulletins. However, we do find evidence that effects vary
by religiosity of the candidate, with Catholic candidates generating the largest increases in
donations.
   Our findings are relevant for past and future work in several ways. First, our results
support the conclusion that campaigns in the short-run promote social participation beyond
political participation. This matters for prior work on the effects of campaigns, and also for
work on how social contexts can affect charitable behavior. Most recent work in economics
in this latter area (Trachtman et al, 2015; Knutsson et al, 2013; Andreoni, Rao, Trachtman,
2017; DellaVigna, List, Malmendier, 2012) explores the costs individuals incur to avoid
solicitation. But our study considers how campaign activity affects donations to a non-
campaign charity, where the induced donations likely occur days afterwards and could easily
be avoided. Our findings suggest that future work should consider the importance of social
context in settings beyond those typically considered when studying “the power of the ask.”
That said, we note that the nature of our study does not allow us to identify what it is
about campaigns that increases donations, although we find evidence against some plausible
explanations suggested by prior work.


                                              4
       For example, we find little evidence that this effect endures. In this sense, our findings
do not fit the same conclusions as those reached by the excellent work of Madestam, Shoag,
Veuger, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2013). Their paper shows that attendance at a Tea Party
rally on Tax Day (April 15), 2009, had important impacts on social behavior. They con-
clude that the local, enduring effects from rallies fits Zuckerman’s (2005) “social logic of
politics” wherein the rallies’ effects depend upon social networks, mobilization, and/or habit
formation that lead to enduring effects over time. In contrast, our effects appear to be quite
short-lived and become imprecise and statistically insignificant in a matter of weeks. This
result also suggests that studies on campaign events and public-goods contributions (such
as DellaVigna, 2010, which looks at events in the 2008 presidential campaign and monthly
organ donations) should be sure to use sufficiently high-frequency data.
       Beyond this, our work makes several contributions to research on campaigns and on
church/state relations. First, while scholars as noted above have shown an interest in how
campaigns effect social capital, we do not know of any work that looks at religious partic-
ipation as an outcome; our novel focus on religion is useful to work on elections and social
outcomes given the critical role of churches in fostering social cohesion and important social
outcomes.4 Second, many prior studies have focused on campaigns and self-reported mea-
sures of trust, an outcome that is certainly quite important but one that may not accurately
reflect observed (rather than self-reported) outcomes. Third, we focus on an aspect of cam-
paigns that is quite well-known to citizens but is to our knowledge typically overlooked in
the vast elections literature: campaign stops. Fourth, we take both our bulletin data and
our campaign data as unique and potentially useful new resources that may be of interest
to scholars in the future.
       The next section discusses our bulletin and campaign data. Section 3 describes our
empirical methodology. Section 4 lays out results, and section 5 concludes.
   4
    Examples of the important social role played by churches include Frank and Iannaccone (2014), Bentzen
(2015), Dills and Hernandez-Julian (2014), Gill (2004), Hungerman (2014b), Pope, Price, and Lillard (2014),
Chen and Lind (2016); see Iyer, 2016 for a discussion.



                                                    5
2. Bulletin and Campaign Data

2.1 Bulletin Data

       Our bulletin data provides weekly information on church donations to a national sample
of Catholic churches, or parishes. The term parish, which will be used repeatedly in what
follows, refers to a local Catholic church as well as any related facilities, such as a school,
under the supervision of a particular pastor.
       We are aware of a small amount of research using weekly church data, most notably the
studies by Olson (2008) and by Iannaccone and Everton (2004); the former tracks Protestant
churches in one Midwestern city in 2004 and the latter tracks attendance at four churches
for several years in the 1990s and early 2000s. Moreover, while a large literature has focused
on the social importance of parishes, even annual Catholic data with financial information
is difficult to find in prior scholarship.5
       To construct our dataset, we first obtained a list of US Parish Web sites from www.
masstimes.org and www.thecatholicdirectory.com. From these lists we identified 11,322
URLs for US parishes and crawled their Web sites to a depth of 3, ie, we downloaded the
Parish’s homepage, visited all the links on the page, all of the links of links, and all of the
links-of-links-of-links. This process collected millions of Web pages but also videos, images,
and pdf documents. To keep from downloading enormous files we limited restricted files to
be less than 5MB in size, and discarded all non-pdf files. We ran this Web crawling process
once every four weeks through January 2016, at which point our server ran out of disk space
for storing documents. In total we collected 836,458 pdf documents comprising 947GBs.
Further, not all Web sites had pdfs, and not all pdfs collected from Web sites were church
bulletins. Non-bulletin files collected included general school/event forms, flyers, passages
   5
    Much of this literature has focused on the notably better outcomes produced by Catholic schools (Evans
and Schwab, 1995; Altonji, Elder, and Taber, 2005) and schools’ impacts on economic diversity (see section 5
of Black, and Sokoloff, 2006). Other work has considered the impact of parishes on charitable activity more
generally, such as Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2015). For a discussion of the challenges of obtaining Parish
financial data, see Hungerman, Rinz, and Frymark (2017).



                                                     6
from the Bible, and speeches from pastors. It is often easy for a person to distinguish
bulletins from non-bulletins, but harder for a machine to do so. We threw out pdfs that did
not contain the word ‘bulletin’ in the filename. This resulted in 79,560 parish bulletins.
       Figure 1 shows an example of a church bulletin. Names and contact information have
been redacted. The figure shows the first two pages (this bulletin was in total four pages).
As in this figure, most bulletins are weekly, contain parish address information, and contain
information on total donations. These are the key pieces of information we required for our
study. Bulletins often contain other interesting pieces of donation information, such as (here)
the weekly target collection amount. Other items frequently reported include the fraction
of money budgeted towards a particular project, such as a capital campaign, or the total
collected throughout the year to date. However, there is little uniformity in the reporting of
these other items across parishes, and so we focus on the total collected for all purposes by
the parish in a given week for our variable. Also, bulletins do not typically report attendance,
so that the total donations number we focus on could be driven by the number of people
attending worship changing, or by the same number of people changing how much they give.
We will not be able to separate these two behaviors.
       Collecting information from these bulletins presented some challenges. While easy to
view, the collection amount in Figure 1 is in a table that could be difficult to identify
as the object of interest using machine reading.6 To deal with these challenges, we hired
workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk (ie, turkers) to extract donation amounts and bulletin
metadata. Based on our available funding, we began with a random sample of about 1500
bulletins and asked 75 turkers to extract information from 20 bulletins each. Entries were
checked for accuracy by a research assistant prior to paying for data entry.7 From the initial
   6
     Note also that there could be two “dates” in the bulletin; the date the bulletin was published, and the
date the collection was taken, which typically is from the week before. Figure 1 shows the date of collection
but we have omitted the date of publication from the figure (which in this case was reported on page 3).
When writing our instructions for data extraction, we paid special care to explicitly clarify how date should
be recorded. We further subsequently checked entries to ensure that the “correct” date was entered. We
believe virtually all bulletins in our study do not confuse these dates.
   7
     We particularly thank our research assistant Kathleen Ryan for her work on this.



                                                     7
extraction effort we identified parish URLs with usable bulletins; we then crowdsourced all
bulletins found from these parish URLs.
       This left us with a “raw” dataset of 40,950 observations. We next dropped the following
observations: bulletins that did not report the amount of donations, that reported donations
from multiple parishes or from multiple locations within a single parish, and those that did
not report weekly donations. We then re-verified the location of each parish, the dates and
the donations in our data. We finally identified 712 unique parishes in 25,775 observations
between May 2008 and Jan 2016.8 For the main regression sample, we will (as discussed
more below) restrict our data to a date range from 2014 and September through December
of 2015 (but we report results from a larger range as well). This provides us with a dataset
of 10,187 observations with 549 unique parishes.
       Figure 2 shows the locations of parishes in our dataset. This sample includes 49 states,
excluding only Montana. It should be kept in mind that our results come from a sample
of all US parishes, and in particular from parishes that have websites (although almost all
parishes have websites). Further, as discussed below, for some estimates we focus on a subset
of 237 of these parishes, although we report results for the full sample as well. But whether
our results would extend to other religious faiths we cannot say.
       Table 1 shows some descriptive statistics by counties for (a) the entire United States, (b)
the 712 parishes in the data with usable bulletins and (c) the subsample of these parishes
observed in 2014 and the fall of 2015. The means are taken from the 2010 Decennial Census,
and (excepting the last row) are unweighted. Standard deviations are in brackets. The first
few rows show that the counties included in our sample are reasonably close to the average
county in the United States in terms of the percent white, Hispanic, under 18, or over 65. The
average county population of our sample is greater than the average population in the whole
U.S. This is unsurprising in that larger-population counties are more likely to have more
parishes and thus more likely to be sampled. The last row of means weights by population,
   8
     Our dataset is an unbalanced panel dataset; not all weeks within a date range are necessarily reported
for every parish.


                                                    8
thus comparing the population for the average individual in each type of county. Here the
differences are a bit closer, but again suggest that the average person in the parish-sample
counties lives in a more populous county than does the average person overall.
       We will also explore whether campaign effects vary by the political content in the bulletins
themselves. First, we converted the pdf bulletins to text files using “pdftotext” which is a
command line tool for Linux/Mac. Then, we searched each file for occurrences of highly
political words, as given in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010).9 Aside from being well-known,
Gentzkow and Shapiro’s list has the benefit of being produced independently of the current
project; lessening concerns that we selected words for study with an eye to procuring a
particular result. Out of 150 phrases used more often by Democrats and 150 phrases used
more often by Republicans as identified by Gentzkow and Shapiro, we identified 118 political
phrases in our bulletins in the full sample, 51 democratic and 67 republican. In the Appendix,
we give a list of the 10 most commonly observed democratic and republican phrases in our
bulletins.


2.2 Campaign Data

       Our goal is to see how weekly collections reported in church bulletins change when a
presidential candidate visits a community. Perhaps surprisingly, we know of no rigorous
effort that tracked and collated the campaign stops of presidential candidates in the most
recent election. Given this, we undertook our own collection effort.10
       The campaign featured a large number of prospective Republican candidates and rela-
tively few Democratic candidates. We focused on campaign stops made by any Republican
candidate that polled in the top 5 of the republican field during the time period of September
1, 2015 to December 31, 2015.11 On the Democratic side, only Hillary Clinton and Bernie
   9
     Gentzkow and Shapiro identify political words by examining the text of speeches given by congressional
Republicans and Democrats, identifying words that are frequently used by one party’s politicians but not
the other.
  10
     We specifically thank our research assistant Eric Fein for his effort here.
  11
     This was determined using the site realclearpolitics.com. Real Clear Politics compiles polling data from



                                                     9
Sanders were included as no other candidate drew significant polling numbers. In total, we
use nine Republican and two Democratic candidates.12 Here, the term “campaign stop”
typically refers to public events held by one of these 11 candidates: speeches, town hall
meetings, and meet and greet sessions.13
    As no single central repository of campaign stops exists, we instead used a wide variety
of sources to assemble our data. First, some regional news sources reported all stops in a
given area. The New England Cable News kept track of all campaign stops made in New
Hampshire, the Des Moines Register kept track of stops in Iowa, and the Governing Under
the Influence Website14 tracked all stops in both Iowa and New Hampshire. The South
Carolina Republican Party Website tracked stops in South Carolina, and the Reno Gazette-
Journal tracked campaign visits throughout Nevada. In a few instances we also consulted
Google News to verify the locations of a particular stop on a particular day.
    Next, for each candidate we also used information sources specific to that candidate’s
campaign to track events. Different campaigns reported their campaign stops in different
ways, and in a few cases a particular form of social media was most helpful: YouTube
(Trump), Instagram (Bush and Rubio), a campaign website (Clinton and Sanders), or Twit-
ter (Christie, Paul and Fiorina). We also made candidate-specific searches in search engines
and in some instances directly communicated with individuals working on campaigns to ver-
ify the details of a campaign stop. Our use of a variety of sources allowed us to cross check
our efforts with the regional cites above to verify the comprehensiveness of each individual
source.
    Our resultant campaign database, which is reported in its entirety in the Appendix,
contains 864 stops, covering 34 states and the District of Columbia. The first four states
8 sources including CNN, USA Today, Suffolk, Pew Research and Quinnipiac.
  12
     The Republican candidates included are Jeb Bush, Ben Carson, Chris Christie, Ted Cruz, Carly Fiorina,
John Kasich, Rand Paul, Marco Rubio, and Donald Trump.
  13
     Candidates also sometimes made stops at the homes of private citizens (for example, wealthy potential
donors). We typically did not include visits to private homes unless these visits included events that were
open to a large audience.
  14
     This is a non-partisan education project of the American Friends Service Committee (a Quaker Organi-
zation that promotes lasting peace with justice as a practical expression of faith in action).


                                                    10
to hold primaries or caucuses, all of which took place in February 2016, saw the most visits
from presidential candidates during the last four months of 2015. By far the most visited
states were Iowa and New Hampshire, with 262 and 326 events, respectively. South Carolina
(75) and Nevada (40) were the next most visited states. The places candidates visited most
outside of this group were the District of Columbia (20) and Florida (18). This raises the
issue of how the effect of campaign stops can best be studied methodologically. We turn to
that question next.



3. Methodology

       To motivate our methodology, suppose that parish donations could be described as:


 lngivepwc = α + βcampaignwc + γXc + δXw + ρw + φc + θp + f (Xc , Xw , µc , ρw ) + pwc (1)


where lngivepwc is the log of total donations made to parish p in week w in community c.
The variable campaignwc is a measure of campaign activity, such as the number of campaign
stops made in community c in the prior week. The matrices Xc and Xw represent observable
attributes of a community and week in the year that may be relevant for donations, such
as population characteristics (in Xc ) or an indicator for whether a certain week includes the
observance of a holiday (in Xw ), and the vectors γ and δ are coefficients. Beyond controlling
for the linear effects of observables, there may be unobserved determinants of church activity
across communities and at different times of the year, captured by the effects ρw and φc ,
as well as a fixed-effect and a time-varying residual for the parish, respectively denoted by
θp and pwc . The term f (Xc , Xw , µc , ρw ) represents the possibility that community and
week-of-the year characteristics, both observed and unobserved, could interact in complex
ways.15 If these interactions impact both religious donations and candidates’ decisions to
  15
    These interactions could further depend on parish characteristics φ in our methodology; this is omitted
from the function f in 1 for brevity.



                                                    11
visit, then in a regression of donations on campaign activity and the observables Xc and Xw ,
the coefficient β would be biased. Note that because of the f term, even with a full set of
fixed effects β could still be biased if f were not controlled for. But the functional form of
f is unknown.
   To address this concern, we take the 52-week difference of our data, so that outcomes in
a given week one year are subtracted from the same week the next year. Letting ∆ denote
the 52-week difference, equation 1 then becomes:


                           ∆lngivepwc = β∆campaignwc + ∆pwc                              (2)


where all other terms are differenced out, so that we can estimate β in a way that allows
for variation related to a given week, and to a given parish and community, and even to
potentially complex interactions between these variables. Equation 2 represents our baseline
estimation model, although we consider several extensions. These include a non-differenced
OLS estimation of 2, an estimation of 2 that allows for time trends, and non-differenced
fixed-effect estimation.
   While we take equation 2 as a strong starting point, we note several concerns that could
persist in its estimation. First, some “intermediate” time effects could be longer than a
week but shorter than a year in duration during the sample. For example, if a factory
opens 6 months after our first observation, and a candidate arrives 6 months later to tout
the factory’s successful start, and the factory raises the incomes (and hence donations) of
parish-goers, then the observed campaign effect could be driven in part by the factory. For
our analysis, we can further exploit the week-by-week variation in our data to see if campaign
stops especially matter in the weeks closest to the stop. Enduring anticipatory increases in
donations before a stop, or enduring increases after a stop, could raise the concern that
our estimates are driven by intermediate dynamic effects. (Although such results could also
fit certain depictions of how campaigns could impact religious behavior.) If our effects are



                                             12
strongest immediately before or after a campaign stop, however, it is evidence against this
sort of effect.
       A related concern is that there is an unobserved transitory effect on a certain week that
drives donations and campaigns. For example, perhaps a state fair is held in a given week,
and this both increases donations in a parish and increases the likelihood of a candidate
arriving.16 Since such events are, by assumption, never observed to the econometrician, we
cannot nor could we ever entirely rule out the possibility of their occurrence. In response
to this, we first note that a result of our analysis below is that the effects of campaigns
are short-lived, and this story would likely only strengthen this conclusion. Additionally,
several factors give us confidence that our results are not driven by this “state-fair” type of
story. First, our qualitative observation from constructing our campaign data is that most
campaign stops are not timed to coincide with other standalone events.17 Next, we observe
important differences in response to candidate characteristics, for example, as shown below,
Catholic candidates have stronger effects than non-Catholic candidates, for whom we often
get effects indistinguishable from zero, so that our results do not seem to be driven by a
general pattern wherein stops coincide with other phenomena. One could instead wonder
whether the candidates we observe driving our estimates ran their campaigns differently
than other candidates. We further note that we find similar estimates for candidates (in
particular, for Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump) whose entire campaign strategies appear
to have been extraordinarily different (e.g., Bloomberg News, 2016; Sheridan, 2016). Taken
together, the immediate and dynamic effects of campaign stops, the pattern of results ob-
  16
     Related to this point is the issue that campaign stops could affect donations “mechanically” if they are
held on Sundays (although plausibly this would work against the positive effect we find), as Sunday is a
key day for worship (and making donations) for many churchgoers. In fact, almost none of the campaign
stops happen on Sundays. Below we show results varying the temporal “distance” of the campaign stop to
worship.
  17
     We also attempted in a limited away to quantify this qualitative impression. Two of our campaign-stop
sources, the Des Moines Register and the New England Cable News, provided brief descriptions of the nature
of each campaign stop. While only for two states, these two sources include a large number of stops (over
500) and so we used their descriptions to identify stops that appeared to be held as part of a larger event
(e.g., a parade). The vast majority of events–over 80 percent–were not described as related to any other
event.



                                                     13
served across candidates and campaigns, and the qualitative nature of most campaign stops
work in combination to support the robustness of our results.
       To estimate equation 2, we need to combine our two datasets. In so doing, we define
campaign stops as close by if they occur within 25 miles of a given parish. The pattern
of results presented in our baseline estimates is not sensitive to this choice, though using
shorter distances does lead to larger point estimates.
       In combining our two datasets and employing the specification in equation 2, our esti-
mates will necessarily be driven by parishes with bulletins available 52 weeks apart that see
a campaign stop. Further, since our campaign data covers September through December
of 2015, but not the earlier months of 2015, we omit observations from the earlier months
of 2015 as we do not have campaign information. The resulting sample consists of 2,375
bulletins, from 237 parishes. The distribution of parishes in this sample is close to our
larger sample–in Appendix Figure 1, we replicate the map from Figure 1 using just these
237 parishes; the two figures are similar. We also can use a larger sample by checking our
results in non-52-week differenced data and we do so below.
       The total number of campaign stops in the baseline sample is 349. There are 60 parishes
in this sample that see at least one campaign stop, and a total of 142 parish/weeks in the
data where at least one campaign stop occurs. In weeks in which a campaign stop occurs, the
median number of nearby stops is 1, and the mean is about 2.45. The stops are reasonably
widespread, covering 20 states, including several events in states not typically regarded as
“critical” primary battlegrounds.18 We also observe a number of stops for almost all of
our different candidates.19 In the next section we discuss how these stops affect reported
  18
     The likelihood we observe a stop depends upon the likelihood of a stop as well as the likelihood that
we observe a parish in a community. States with observed stops include Arizona (1 stop), California (6),
Connecticut (1), Florida (1), Georgia (3), Iowa (9), Illinois (19), Indiana (1), Massachusetts (19), Maryland
(22), New Hampshire (155), New Jersey (23), New York (43), Ohio (2), Pennsylvania (3), South Carolina
(12), Tennessee (2), Texas (6), Virginia (15), and Wisconsin (6). We discuss below the sensitivity of our
results to dropping different states; our results are not driven by any one state.
  19
     An exception is Ben Carson; we only observe 4 stops by Carson in our matched data. We observe 38 for
Trump, 25 for Bush, 18 for Rubio, 11 for Cruz, 100 for Clinton, 54 for Sanders, 24 for Christie, 11 for Paul,
37 for Kasich, and 27 for Fiorina. Again, we discuss effects for different candidates more below.



                                                     14
donations.



4. Results

       Table 2 presents our baseline estimates. The dependent variable in the initial columns
is logged donations, the unit of observation is a parish bulletin (ie, a parish/week), the
specification is given by equation 2, and robust standard errors, clustered by city, are reported
in brackets. The sample includes all parish data from 2014 and from September through
December of 2015. The key dependent variable is the number of nearby campaign stops in
the week prior to the Sunday when donations were made.
       The coefficient suggests that, for each presidential campaign stop, donations increase by
about 2 percent. The mean collection amount in the sample is 10,760 so the implied effect
is a little over $200. As mentioned above, in weeks where a stop occurs the mean number
of stops is about 2.5, so in the average campaign-stop week a parish’s donations increase by
about 5 percent or $500, a moderate but non-trivial effect. As mentioned before, this effect
reflects both changes in the number of attenders and per-attender donation generosity.20
       The next column allows for a time trend by adding back the α constant to equation 2;
the results are essentially the same as before (we report more aggressive trend control results
momentarily). Column 3 simply uses a dummy variable for whether any campaign stop
occurred, rather than the number of stops, as the key regressor. The coefficient is slightly
larger in its implied effect. In Column 4, the dependent variable is now donations in levels,
rather than logs; the result is slightly smaller but nonetheless qualitatively similar to the
baseline estimate, suggesting that each campaign stop raises donations by about $130.
       In column 5, we report OLS results using non-differenced data. This regression returns
to using total campaign stops and using logged donations (although the results are similar
with levels donations). The estimates now are negative and significant. This indicates that
  20
    We also of course lack information on the number of worshippers involved in any way with a campaign
stop, so that we cannot interpret this result as a “treatment on the treated” style effect. In this analysis the
unit of observation is best understood as a parish, rather than an individual.

                                                      15
campaign stops are more likely to occur near parishes with below-average donation amounts,
but that this is driven by fixed differences in parish donations over time. Returning to the
specification used in column 2, in the final column we redo the estimate in column 2 but
now include all available years of data before 2014. (Redoing this estimate on the baseline
specification yields the same result.) Observations observed in 2013 are differenced off of
2012 bulletins, so that these new observations are taken from bulletins available online several
years after they were produced. There are relatively few such observations (854, raising the
total sample size to 3,229) and they may come from a non-random subsample of our parishes.
However, including these years does not alter our estimates.
       Table 2 thus suggests that campaign stops lead to higher donations at worship the fol-
lowing week. Table 3 produces a number of different robustness tests for these results. In
the first panel we redo the baseline estimate but show that the results are robust to dropping
Iowa and New Hampshire, the two states whose primaries receive outsize political attention
and who get a high number of campaign stops. As shown in the table, our results are sim-
ilar, and in fact slightly larger, if we drop these estimates. (The increase in the coefficient
would be consistent, e.g., with a “campaign fatigue” scenario for these states where the large
volume of campaigns diminishes the impact of the marginal campaign on donations.) In the
Appendix we present a histogram where we drop each state in our sample in turn; we find
that our results are not driven by any one state with nearly all estimates staying quite close
to our baseline 0.02 coefficient.
       In Panel B of Table 3, we include a variety of fixed-effect controls. (As our data is
differenced, these controls of course have a different interpretation than with non-differenced
data.) The results use all years of data to help in identifying the fixed effects separately.21
Even when including aggressive city, year, and month dummies, our result is qualitatively
close to before. (Note city and year controls would subsume the state and year controls in
column 2, and that the month effects are identified separately from year effects since we have
  21
    Results using the baseline sample are qualitatively similar, although smaller and less precise in columns
3 and 4.


                                                     16
multiple years.)
       In the last panel, we redo the specifications in panel B but now we report estimates from
non-differenced data. The first column shows a negative coefficient, which is unsurprising
given the OLS estimate shown in Table 2 earlier. Once a geographic fixed effect is included,
even a state fixed effect as in column 2, the coefficient becomes positive. The similarity
of column 1 to the earlier OLS, the change from column 1 to column 2, and the slightly
smaller effects in columns 3 and 4, indicate that (a) campaign stops happen in places with
naturally lower donations, that (b) the fixed component driving this lower donation amount
is geographical rather than temporal (else column 1 here would not be negative), and that (c)
this geographic variation is primarily across states, rather than within states (else the final
columns would be larger in size than column 2).22 Overall, the main takeaway from Table
3 is that the positive effect documented in the baseline is robust to a number of different
samples and specifications.
       All of these results have used campaign stops in the prior week as the key regressor.
While a week is a natural timespan to consider, Table 4 presents results using alternate
measures of time. The first row for comparison’s sake presents results using the prior week.
Row 2 uses stops from the past 5 days, row 3 uses 10, and row 4, 15. The first column uses
the standard sample, column 2 includes a trend control, and column 3 uses all years. In
all cases, the table shows a clear pattern: the strongest results are observed from stops in
the past 5 days, and the results grow steadily weaker as stops from further back in time are
added. This suggests that the effects of campaign stops diminish over time.
       Table 5 develops the possibility of dynamic effects of campaign stops further, here includ-
ing dummies for pre-stop and post-stop. For many observations, stops may occur several
weeks in a row; raising a conceptual question of how to handle, e.g., a bulletin observed two
weeks before a stop and two weeks after an earlier stop. The table takes several approaches
  22
    The smaller coefficients in the last two columns suggest that while states are negatively selected for
campaigns, communities within states are positively selected, else city effects would make the coefficients
larger still. Clearly, the negative-across-state effect dominates, so that when both effects are controlled for
the coefficient remains positive, unlike the OLS result.


                                                      17
in light of this issue. The first column reports coefficients on the lead number of campaign
stops in the weeks leading up to the first stop observed by a parish, and also reports coef-
ficients on the lag number of campaign stops in the weeks following the last campaign stop
observed by a parish; “in between” treatment observations are omitted from the sample. In
column 2, we include “in between” weeks and the coefficients now simply report the the lead
and lag number of campaign stops, e.g., the “four weeks before” coefficient is the coefficient
for a variable for observed campaign stops four weeks in the future. The difference in the
columns will be driven by the inclusion of “in between” observations in column 2. The last
column reports estimates from the column 1 specification, but now dummies rather than
campaign-stop counts are used. (Several coefficients match across these columns, that is
because there are a few weeks before the first campaign stop where all observed parishes will
see one stop the first week a campaign stop occurs.) For readability, here we use * markers
to denote standard statistical significance.
   The story told across the columns is similar: we consistently see a significant and positive
effect from “contemporaneous” campaign stops, where the “contemporaneous” week refers
to stops in the 7 days before a collection is taken (as defined in the earlier tables). There
are no statistically significant effects observed either before or after the week of a campaign
stop, and indeed several of the post-stop coefficients are negative. Some results are highly
imprecise, so that we cannot reject (for example) that the four-weeks-after coefficient in
column 1 equals the contemporaneous-coefficient value. But together the results in Table 5
fail to provide any evidence that campaign effects endure over time, and instead suggest that
our observed effects are short lived. This contrasts with the Tea-Party effects observed in
Madestam, Shoag, Veuger, and Yanagizawa-Drott (2013), who document strongly persistent
effects over time. We discuss this more in the conclusions.
   One might wonder whether the political leanings of a congregation, or of a candidate,
matter for these effects. We begin our investigation of this in Table 6. The three columns
of Table 6 shows results by the inferred political leaning of the parish, which we base,


                                               18
as described earlier, on whether a parish (a) uses a democratic word and never uses a
republican word (“democratic” parishes, for short) or ever uses a republican word and never
uses a democratic work (“republican” parishes).23 Overall, the first three columns show little
evidence that the appearance of politically-loaded language in a bulletin is related to how
donations respond to campaign stops.
       The last three columns redo this analysis but break apart campaign stops by the political
party of the candidate. Column 4 uses all stops; the coefficient is somewhat bigger for
democratic candidates but not significantly so. Turning to the last two columns, we again
fail to find any clear or compelling pattern for how political language in bulletins corresponds
to the affects of campaign stops. It is perhaps noteworthy that the republican parishes have a
positive coefficient for republican stops while democratic parishes have a negative coefficient,
but none of these coefficients is significant and we take this observation as suggestive at best.
       It is possible, however, that within political party some candidates have different effects
than others. Table 7 investigates this by reporting regressions (including a time trend, as
in column 2 of Table 2) where campaign stops are specific to a particular candidate. As
mentioned earlier, we observe several campaign stops for most candidates, allowing this
comparison across many politicians.24 The top panel in Table 7 begins with the eventual
nominees, Trump and Clinton. Although these candidates were markedly different in their
policy positions, demeanor, campaign strategies, and the details of many of their campaign
stops, both produce similar (and statistically insignificant) coefficients. The next three
candidates in the top panel (Christie, Rubio, Bush) report the largest coefficients of all
candidates, and in all three cases they are at least marginally significant.
       Do these three candidates have anything in common? Yes –they are all Catholic, and they
are the only Catholic candidates. The fact that the three Catholic candidates have the largest
  23
     We also considered results using alternate definitions of Democratic and Republican bulletins, such
as whether a parish ever uses a democratic word or ever uses a republican word. Those results are also
statistically insignificant.
  24
     Since Carson was only observed four times, we omit him from the table. The coefficient on Carson’s
stops is 0.248 [se = 0.005].



                                                  19
effects on Catholic donations suggests that, beyond particular political positions, campaign
themes, or secular characteristics, the religiosity of a candidate could matter particularly
for galvanizing religious activity. Returning the Johnson Amendment discussion mentioned
in the Introduction, Table 7 also suggests that allowing the promotion of political activity
within churches could particularly benefit faiths with a disproportionate share of political
candidates, at least in the short term.
   Overall the results of Tables 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 show that a campaign stop leads to
an immediate, moderately-sized, and short-lived increase in church donations the following
week. Political words in bulletins do not appear to strongly predict responses to campaign
stops (although this result is tempered by our smaller sample sizes), but we find that our
results are the strongest for Catholic candidates. We take these results are notable for both
future scholarship and policy; we turn to implications in the conclusion.



6. Conclusion

   Combining a new dataset of parish donation activity with a new dataset on presidential-
election campaign stops for the fall of 2015, this paper explores the impact of stops on
church donations. We find that stops increase donations, with each campaign stop leading
to 2 percent more donations in the following week. Our results suggest that this effect is of
short duration, does not appear to vary based on the political language used by the parish,
but does appear to vary based on the religiosity of the candidates themselves.
   As mentioned above, our results have several implications. First, they highlight the need
for further discussion of the dynamic effects of political activity on other forms of social cap-
ital. The dynamic effects identified here appear different than the strongly persistent effects
identified for Tea Party rallies in Madestam, Shoag, Veuger, and Yanagizawa-Drott’s work.
However, the rally they study was intended to foster a long-term political movement, while
the effect we identify is incidental to the campaign stop, so that the results are potentially



                                               20
harmonious. Our results do raise the possibility, however, that commonly-used outcomes
such as post-election surveys of self-reported trust in the government may quickly dissipate.
Whether they do, or instead endure, we cannot say but our results indicate that scholars
investigating the effects of campaigns in the future should take care to consider dynamic
effects.
    Next, our work suggests that policy changes to allow political activity within churches
could benefit some faiths more than others. Also, our results mirror at least some findings
showing that election activity can increase, at least in the short term, social capital, but
while prior findings often use self-reported measures we use donations collected by parishes.
Our results thus suggest that self-reported results, to the extent they match the findings
here, may reflect actual behavior.
    Our work also highlights the possibility that, with increasingly sophisticated campaigns
and the policy-driven potential for greater campaign activities within churches, candidates in
the future might more closely organize their campaign activity in conjunction with religious
observance. Whether religious endorsements would matter for candidates is unclear although
prior work (e.g., Garthwaite and Moore, 2012) has explored the potential importance of non-
political endorsements of candidates.
    Next, our results document the importance of social context in affecting giving, but differs
from most prior work in this area. Rather than studying how consumers avoid solicitations
to give, we study how one social event affects charitable activity days later (but not weeks
later). Our results suggest that further research is needed to understand the various ways that
social contexts can influence charitable giving. Future work could also refine the charitable
activities considered. Our results here cannot distinguish increased donations from greater
attendance versus greater donative generosity of churchgoers. Moreover, while donations
are obviously a critical aspect of religious life, one might wonder whether campaigns affect
other, more qualitative measures of inherent religiosity. This topic, as well as the above
implications, represent excellent areas for future work.


                                               21
References

[1] Altonji, Joseph, Todd Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection On Observed
   And Unobserved Variables: Assessing The Effectiveness Of Catholic Schools” Journal
   of Political Economy 113: 151-184.

[2] Andreoni, James, Justin Rao, Hannah Trachtman. 2017. “Avoiding the Ask: A Field
   Experiment on Altruism, Empathy, and Charitable Giving” Journal of Political Econ-
   omy 125: 625-653.

[3] Banducci, Susan, and Jeffrey Karp. 2003. “How Election Change the Way Citizens View
   the Political System: Campaigns, Media Effects and Electoral Outcomes in Comparative
   Perspective,” British Journal of Political Science 33(3) 443-467.

[4] Barton, Jared, Marco Castillo, and Ragan Petrie. 2016. “Negative Campaigning,
   Fundraising, and Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment,” Journal of Economic Behavior
   Organization 121: 99-113.

[5] Barton, Jared, Marco Castillo, and Ragan Petrie. 2013. “What Persuades voters? A
   Field Experiment on Political Campaigning,” The Economic Journal 124: F293-F325.

[6] Becker, Sascha and Markus Woessman, 2017. “Education and religious participation:
   city-level evidence from Germany’s secularization period 1890–1930” Journal of Eco-
   nomic Growth, March. 1-39.

[7] Bentzen, Jeanet. 2016. “Acts of God? Religiosity and Natural Disasters Across Subna-
   tional World Districts,” Working Paper.

[8] Bhalotra, Sonia, Guilhem Cassan, Irma Clots-Figueras, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2014. “Reli-
   gion, Politician Identity and Development Outcomes: Evidence from India,” Journal of
   Economic Behavior and Organization. 104, 4-17.



                                           22
 [9] Black, Sandra E., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2006. “Long-Term Trends in Schooling: The
    Rise and Decline (?) of Public Education in the United States.” in Hanushek and Welch
    (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 1. Elsevier.

[10] Bloomberg News. 2017. “Clinton and Trump Have Very Different Strategies for the
    Final Stretch,” Accessed May 10 2017 at https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2016-
    clinton-trump-campaign-strategies/

[11] Bottan, N. and Perez-Truglia, R. (2015), “Losing my Religion: The Effects of Reli-
    gious Scandals on Religious Participation and Charitable Giving,” Journal of Public
    Economics 129 106–119

[12] Cesur, Resul, and Naci Mocan. 2014. “Does Secular Education Impact Religiosity, Elec-
    toral Participation and the Propensity to Vote for Islamic Parties? Evidence from an
    Education Reform in a Muslim Country.” Working paper.

[13] Chen, Daniel, and Jo Thori Lind. 2016. “The Political Economy of Beliefs: Why Fiscal
    and Social Conservatives/Liberals (Sometimes) Come Hand-in-Hand.” Working paper.

[14] Cohen Zada, Danny, Yotam Margalit, and Oren Rigbi. 2016. “Does Religiosity Affect
    Support for Political Compromise?” International Economic Review 57(3) 1085-1106.

[15] Coleman, John, and Paul Manna. 2000. “Congressional Campaign Spending and the
    Quality of Democracy.” The Journal of Politics 62(3), 757-789.

[16] DellaVigna, Stefano. 2010. “The Obama Effect on Economic Outcomes: Evidence from
    Event Studies,” Working paper.

[17] DellaVigna, Stefano, John List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. “Testing for Altruism
    and Social Pressure in Charitable Giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1-54.

[18] Dills, Angela, and Hernandez-Julian. 2014. “Religiosity and State Welfare,” Journal of
    Economic Behavior & Organization 104: 37-51.

                                            23
[19] Enos, Ryan and Anthony Fowler. 2016. “Aggregate Effects of Large-Scale Campaigns
    on Voter Turnout,” Political Science Research and Methods 1-19.

[20] Evans, William N. and Robert M. Schwab. 1995. “Finishing High School and Starting
    College: Do Catholic Schools Make a Difference?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110:
    941-974.

[21] Franck, Raphael and Laurence Iannaccone. 2014. “Religious Decline in the 20th Century
    West: Testing Alternative Explanations,” Public Choice, 159(3): 385-414.

[22] Galka, Max. 2016. “How 2016 Compares to 56 Years of Presidential Campaign Spending,
    ” Huffington Post November 7, accessed May 10 2017 at http://www.huffingtonpost.
    com/entry/56-years-of-presidential-campaign-spending-how-2016_us_
    5820bf9ce4b0334571e09fc1

[23] Garthwaite, Craig, and Timothey Moore. 2012. “Can Celebrity Endorsements Affect
    Political Outcomes? Evidences from the 2008 US Democratic Presidential Primary,”
    The Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 29(2) 255-384.

[24] Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence
    from U.S. Daily Newspapers,” Econometrica 78(1): 35-71.

[25] Gerber, Alan, Jonathan Gruber, and Daniel Hungerman. “Does Church Attendance
    Cause People to Vote? Using Blue Laws’ Repeal to Estimate the Effect of Religiosity
    on Voter Turnout,” British Journal of Political Science, January (2016), 1-20

[26] Gill, Anthony. 2004. “State Welfare Spending and Religiosity A Cross-National Analy-
    sis,” Rationality and Society 16: 399-436.

[27] Goodstein, Laurie and Michael Shear. 2017. “Trump’s Order on Religious Liberty
    Pleases a Few, but Lets Down Many Conservatives” The New York Times, May 4.




                                            24
[28] Green, Donald, and Michael Schwam-Baird. 2016. “Mobilization, Participation, and
    American Democracy: a retrospective and Postscript.” Party Politics 22(2), 158-164.

[29] Hungerman, Daniel. 2014a. “The Effect of Education on Religion: Evidence from Com-
    pulsory Schooling Laws” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 104, 52-63

[30] Hungerman, Daniel. 2014b. “Do Religious Proscriptions Matter? Evidence from a
    Theory-Based Test,” Journal of Human Resources 49 (4) 1053-1093.

[31] Hungerman, Daniel, Kevin Rinz, and Jay Frymark. 2017. “Beyond the Classroom: the
    Implications of School Vouchers for Church Finances,” NBER working paper 23159.

[32] Iannaccone, Laurence, and Sean F. Everton. 2004. “Never on Sunny Days: Lessons from
    Weekly Attendance Counts,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 43(2) 191-207.

[33] Iyer, Sryia. 2016. “The New Economics of Religion,” The Journal of Economic Litera-
    ture, June, 395-441.
    Knutsson, Mikael, Peter Martinsson, and Conny Wollbrant. 2013. “Do People Avoid
    Opportunities to Donate? A Natural Field Experiment on Recycling and Charitable
    Giving,” Journal of Economic Behavior Organization 93:71-77.

[34] Lipka, Machael. 2013. “What Surveys Say about Worship Attendance–and Why Some
    Stay Home.” Pew Research Center Report.

[35] Lipka, Machael. 2015. “Americans Faith in God may be Eroding.” Pew Research Center
    Report.

[36] Madestam, Andreas, Daneil Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2013.
    “Do Political Protests Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement.” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 1633-1685.

[37] Mocan, Naci, and Luiza Pogorelova. 2014. ”Mandatory Schooling Laws and Formation
    of Beliefs: Education, Religion and Superstition,” NBER Working Paper No: 20557.

                                           25
[38] Meyersson, Erik. 2014. “Islamic Rule and the Empowerment of the Poor and Pious,”
    Econometrica 82(1), 229-269.

[39] Olson, Paul. 2008. “Any Given Sunday: Weekly Church Attendance in a Midwestern
    City,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 47(3), 443-461.

[40] Perez-Truglia, Ricardo, and Guillermo Cruces. 2017. “Partisan Interactions: Evidence
    from a Field Experiment in the United States” Journal of Political Economy 125(4):
    1208-1243.

[41] Pope, Bryson; Joseph Price and Dean Lillard. 2014. “The Impact of Religion on Youth
    Outcomes” Journal of Business Inquiry 13(1): 48-60.

[42] Rahn, Wendy, John Brehm, and Neil Carlson. 2004. “National Elections as Institu-
    tions for generating Social Capital,” in: Skoopol, Theda and Morris Fiorina (eds) Civic
    Engagement in American Democracy. Brookings Institution Press.

[43] Sheridan, Chris. 2016. “Why Donald Trump Draws Crowds, Hillary Clinton Doesn’t,”
    Aljazeera News, accessed May 10 2017 at http://www.aljazeera.com/blogs/
    americas/2016/11/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-rallies-161104233413813.
    html.

[44] Trachtman, Hannah, Andrew Steinkruger, Mackenzie Wood, Adam Wooster, James
    Andreoni, James Murphy, Justin Rao. 2015. “Fair Weather Avoidance: Unpacking the
    Costs and Benefits of ‘Avoiding the Ask’” Journal of the Economic Science Association
    1: 8-14.

[45] de Tocqueville, Alexis. 2012. Democracy in America Volume 2. Eduardo Nolla, ed.
    Liberty Fund Press, Indianapolis.

[46] Zuckerman, Alan. 2005. The Social Logic of Politics. Temple University Press.




                                            26
                                Figure 1: Sample Church Bulletin

 Church Name



                                                                 Collection



                                                      Location




The above shows the first two pages from a sample bulletin. Specific names and contact information have been redacted.
Figure 2:
                                         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                             Parishes with Usable   Parishes Observed in
                                                          Whole U.S.                 Data           2014 & Fall of 2015
Average % Population of Whites                              82.88                    79.68                  78.24
                                                           [16.85]                  [15.01]                [15.51]
Average % Population of Hispanics                             8.28                   11.05                  11.66
                                                            [13.19]                 [12.31]                [12.48]
Average % Population of Persons under 18 years               23.42                  23.57                  23.65
                                                             [3.38]                 [2.97]                 [2.97]
Average % Population of Persons 65 years and over            15.88                  13.93                  13.76
                                                             [4.19]                 [3.76]                 [3.55]
Average Population                                           98,233                 422,526                473,013
                                                            [312901]               [749225]               [813604]
Weighted Average Population                                1,094,601              1,747,700              1,868,129
                                                           [1891638]              [2334891]              [2402593]
Number of Counties                                           3,143                   396                     324
The source for Table 1 is 2010 U.S. Census Summary File 1, a 100 percent sample of the whole population of the U.S.,
provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. Standard deviations are presented in brackets below the means. In our sample, we
identified 396 unique counties where 712 parishes are located for the usable-data sample presented in Column 2 and 324
unique counties from 549 parishes for the main-period-of-study sample presented in Column 3. The White population here
refers to a person who marked only the White category on the questionnaire. The Hispanic population refers to a person of
Hispanic or Latino origins regardless of race. The averages are the (unweighted) average of each county's population
except for the final row, which is weighted by county's population.
                                            Table 2--Baseline Effects of Campaigns


                                                              Campaign           Levels
                           Baseline        Time Trend          Dummy           Collections           OLS             All Years
                              (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)
Campaign Stops              0.0204            0.0199            0.0845            126               -0.078             0.0213
                          [0.00291]         [0.00313]          [0.0425]           [32]             [0.0148]          [0.00325]
Differenced Data?            Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                 No                Yes
Trend Coefficient             No               Yes                No               No                 No                Yes
Dependent Variable           Logs              Logs              Logs            Levels              Logs               Logs
                          Count of          Count of        Campaign Stops       Count of          Count of          Count of
Key Regressor?
                       Campaign Stops    Campaign Stops        Dummy          Campaign Stops    Campaign Stops    Campaign Stops
All Years?                   No                No                  No                No               No                 Yes
The table shows regressions of weekly church collections, logged, on a count variable for the number of nearby political
campaigns in the prior week. Standard errors, clustered by city, are in brackets. The mean of the dependent variable is 10,797 and
the mean number of campaign stops is 0.14 and in a week with a campaign stop the mean number is about 2.5.
                                 Table 3--Alternate Specifications

Panel A: Dropping Iowa and New Hampshire
                                                                                         No New Hampshire &
                         From Table 2        No New Hampshire            No Iowa              No Iowa
                             (1)                   (2)                     (3)                  (4)
Campaign Stops               0.0204                0.0283                 0.0205                0.0294
                           [0.00291]              [0.0158]              [0.00297]              [0.0167]


Panel B: Alternate Controls
                                               Month & State           City & Year       Month, City & Year
                       Month Dummies            Dummies                 Dummies              Dummies
                              (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)
Campaign Stops               0.0176                 0.02                  0.0201                0.0173
                           [0.00301]             [0.00359]               [0.0115]              [0.0113]


Panel C: Alternate Controls on Undifferenced Data
                                           Month & State               City & Year       Month, City & Year
                     Month Dummies           Dummies                    Dummies              Dummies
                              (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)
Campaign Stops                 -0.0366                0.0543                   0.016                  0.015
                              [0.0194]               [0.0103]                [0.00925]              [0.00917]
The tables shows regressions of weekly church collections on a count variable for the number of nearby
political campaigns in the prior week. Standard errors, clustered by city, are in brackets. The first panel
shows results from the baseline regression in Table 2, dropping Iowa and/or New Hampshire. In panel B,
month, state, and year dummies are added (as the data is 52-week differenced, these variables have a different
interpretation than in levels data). In the final panel these specifications are repeated for data that is not
differenced.
                               Table 4--Alternate Durations for Campaigns

                                          2015-2014          2015-2014, with Trend All Years, with Trend
                                              (1)                      (2)                  (3)
Campaigns Stops                             0.0204                   0.0199               0.0213
                                          [0.00291]                [0.00313]            [0.00325]
Campaigns Stops-past 5 days                 0.0231                    0.0225                   0.0241
                                          [0.00319]                 [0.00335]                [0.00346]
Campaigns Stops--Past 10 days               0.0168                    0.0166                   0.0175
                                          [0.00182]                 [0.00204]                [0.00213]
Caompaigns Stops--past 15 days               0.0143                   0.0141                    0.0149
                                           [0.00122]                [0.00148]                 [0.00151]
The table shows regressions of weekly church collections on different count variables for the number of
nearby political campaigns in the prior week. Standard errors, clustered by city, are in brackets. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. Row 1 reports the basline results using total compaign stops in the
prior week.
             Table 5--Before and After Campaign Stops


                                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)
4 Weeks Before                   0.106              0.0185                0.106
                               [0.0852]            [0.0393]             [0.0852]

3 Weeks Before                 -0.00375            -0.00359             -0.00375
                               [0.0558]            [0.0338]             [0.0558]

2 Weeks Before                  -0.028              -0.0244              -0.028
                               [0.0582]            [0.0352]             [0.0582]

1 Week Before                   0.0431              0.0194               0.0353
                               [0.0374]            [0.0317]             [0.0398]

Campaign Stops                0.0167***           0.0107***             0.0845**
                              [0.00326]           [0.00376]             [0.0425]

1 Week After                    -0.0238             0.0223               0.0713
                               [0.0441]            [0.0326]             [0.0556]

2 Weeks After                   -0.0602             0.0432               0.0376
                               [0.0533]            [0.0481]              [0.108]

3 Weeks After                 -0.000434             0.0305               -0.0184
                               [0.0490]            [0.0368]             [0.0540]

4 Weeks After                  -0.00831             0.0148              -0.00178
                               [0.0643]            [0.0390]             [0.0558]
The first column reports the lead and lag number of campaign stops in the weeks
leading up to the first campaign stop observed by a parish and the weeks following
the last campaign stop observed. In column two, lead and lag number of campaign
stops are used for all weeks and all campaign stops, eg., the “four weeks before”
coefficient is the coefficient for a variable for observed campaign stops four weeks
in the future. The difference in the columns will be driven by the inclusion off “in
between” observations in column 2. The last column uses a set of dummies for the
weeks before the first campaign stop observed at a parish, and a set of dummies for
the weeks following the last campaign stop (rather than a variable for the number
of stops). For ease of interpretation, stars are included to denote 10 (*), 5(**), and
1 (***) percent significance.
                     Table 6--Effects by Political Words in Bulletins and Political Party of Candidate



                        All Bulletins      Democratic Bulletin    Republican Bulletin      All Bulletins      Democratic Bulletin    Republican Bulletin
                             (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                   (5)                    (6)
Campaign Stops             0.0204                -0.0315                0.0154                   -                     -                      -
                         [0.00291]              [0.0849]               [0.0102]
Democratic Stops              -                     -                      -                  0.0326               0.00136                 0.0168
                                                                                             [0.0189]              [0.141]                [0.0189]
Republican Stops              -                     -                      -                  0.0168                -0.069                 0.0125
                                                                                            [0.00286]              [0.0585]               [0.0157]
Observations                2,375                   180                   581                   2,375                  180                   581
In columns 1, 2, and 3, each coefficient is from a different regression where logged donations is th dependent variable. In each column, the sample
changes based on whether all bulletins are used (column 1), from parishes that use democratic words but never use republican words (2), or ever use
republican but never democratic (3). In the last three columns the regressions are repeated but now the coefficient on campaign stops is broken apart by
whether stops were made by a democratic candidate or republican candidate.
                                   Table 7--Results by Candidate


                         Trump            Clinton        Christie         Rubio             Bush
Campaign Stops           0.0329            0.05            0.16            0.122           0.0815
                        [0.0420]         [0.0305]       [0.00674]        [0.0750]        [0.00833]



                            Cruz         Sanders           Kasich            Paul          Fiorina
Campaign Stops             0.0319         0.0618           0.0544          0.00857         0.0394
                          [0.0385]       [0.0265]        [0.00607]        [0.0443]       [0.00654]
The table shows the effects of campaign stops on parish collections by specific candidate. Each
cell is from a separate regression. Results are differenced as in other tables and standard errors are
in brackets. The top panel includes the two eventual nominees, Trump (a Presbyterian), Clinton
(Methodist), the three Catholic candidates. The bottom panel includes other non-Catholic and
non-nominee candidates.
       Appendix Table 1: Political Phrases used Most Often in Bulletins

Rank     Democratic Words    Frequency       Republican Words Frequency
1        senior citizens        1150         boy scouts          1600
2        credit card             696         human life          1515
3        african american        296         ten commandments     236
4        low income              243         post office          215
5        poor people             140         third time           108
6        civil rights            107         stem cell            95
7        living in poverty       57          natural gas          78
8        million americans       36          embryonic stem       75
9        child labor             33          immigration reform   72
10       minimum wage            32          food program         68
                                                Appendix Table 2--Campaign Stops by Candidate, Date, and Location
Date           Trump                      Trump2           Bush                    Bush2                 Bush3           Rubio                      Rubio2                Rubio3           Date
    9/1/2015   Norwood, NH                                                                                               Carson City, NV            Fallon, NV            Yerrington, NV       9/1/2015
    9/2/2015                                                                                                             Oklahoma City, OK                                                     9/2/2015
    9/3/2015                                               Hampton, NH             Laconia, NH                           Chattenooga, TN                                                       9/3/2015
    9/4/2015                                                                                                                                                                                   9/4/2015
    9/5/2015                                                                                                             San Juan, Puerto Rico                                                 9/5/2015
    9/6/2015                                                                                                                                                                                   9/6/2015
    9/7/2015                                                                                                             Charleston, SC             Milford, NH                                9/7/2015
    9/8/2015                                                                                                             Hooksett, NH               Keene, NH                                  9/8/2015
    9/9/2015   Washington, DC                                                                                                                                                                  9/9/2015
  9/10/2015                                                Exeter, NH              Salem, NH                                                                                                 9/10/2015
  9/11/2015                                                Manohester, NH          Londonderry, NH                       Ankeny, IA                                                          9/11/2015
  9/12/2015    Boone, IA                                                                                                 Iowa City, IA              Ames, IA                                 9/12/2015
  9/13/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  9/13/2015
  9/14/2015    Dallas, TX                                                                                                                                                                    9/14/2015
  9/15/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  9/15/2015
  9/16/2015    Simi Valley, CA (Debate)                                                                                  Simi Valley, CA (Debate)                                            9/16/2015
  9/17/2015    Rochester, NH                                                                                                                                                                 9/17/2015
  9/18/2015                                                                                                              Mackinac Island, MI                                                 9/18/2015
  9/19/2015    Des Moines, IA                              Athens, GA                                                    Mackinac Island, MI                                                 9/19/2015
   9/20/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 9/20/2015
   9/21/2015                                               Mason City, IA                                                Atlanta, GA                                                         9/21/2015
  9/22/2015                                                Cedar Falls, IA         Cedar Rapids, IA                                                                                          9/22/2015
  9/23/2015    Columbia, SC                                Gladbrook, IA                                                                                                                     9/23/2015
  9/24/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  9/24/2015
  9/25/2015    Oklahoma City, OK          Washington, DC                                                                 Washington DC                                                       9/25/2015
  9/26/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  9/26/2015
  9/27/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  9/27/2015
  9/28/2015    New York, NY                                                                                              The Villages, FL                                                    9/28/2015
  9/29/2015                                                Portsmouth, NH                                                                                                                    9/29/2015
  9/30/2015    Keene, NH                                   Manchester, NH          Bedford, NH                                                                                               9/30/2015
  10/1/2015                                                                                                              Cedar Falls, IA                                                     10/1/2015
  10/2/2015                                                Greenville, SC                                                Dubuque, IA                                                         10/2/2015
  10/3/2015    Franklin, TN                                                                                                                                                                  10/3/2015
  10/4/2015                                                                                                              Dubuque, IA                                                         10/4/2015
  10/5/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  10/5/2015
  10/6/2015                                                Davenport, IA                                                 Bedford, NH                Manchester, NH                           10/6/2015
  10/7/2015    Waterloo, IA                                Oskaloosa, IA                                                 Wolfeboro, NH              Dover, NH                                10/7/2015
  10/8/2015                                                Indianola, IA                                                 Las Vegas, NV              Summerlin, NV                            10/8/2015
  10/9/2015                                                                                                              Las Vegas, NV              Enterprise, NV                           10/9/2015
 10/10/2015    Norcross, GA                                Knoxville, TN                                                 North Las Vegas, NV        Boulder City, NV                        10/10/2015
 10/11/2015    Knoxville, TN                                                                                                                                                                10/11/2015
 10/12/2015    Manchester, NH                                                                                                                                                               10/12/2015
 10/13/2015                                                Manchester, NH          Keene, NH                                                                                                10/13/2015
 10/14/2015    Richmond, VA                                Concord, NH             Lebanon, NH                           Derry, NH                  Porsmouth, NH                           10/14/2015
 10/15/2015                                                Concord, NH                                                   Philedelphia, PA           Pittsburg, PA                           10/15/2015
 10/16/2015    Tyngsborough, MA                                                                                          Salem, OH                                                          10/16/2015
 10/17/2015                                                Portsmouth, NH                                                Portsmouth, NH                                                     10/17/2015
 10/18/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 10/18/2015
 10/19/2015    Anderson, SC                                                                                                                                                                 10/19/2015
 10/20/2015                                                                                                              Salt Lake City, UT                                                 10/20/2015
 10/21/2015    Burlington, IA                              Reno, NV                North Las Vegas, NV                                                                                      10/21/2015
 10/22/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 10/22/2015
 10/23/2015    Miami, FL                                   Mount Pleasant, SC                                                                                                               10/23/2015
 10/24/2015    Jackson, FL                                                                                                                                                                  10/24/2015
 10/25/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 10/25/2015
 10/26/2015    Atkinson, NH                                                                                                                                                                 10/26/2015
 10/27/2015    Sioux City, IA                              El Dorado Springs, CO                                                                                                            10/27/2015
 10/28/2015    Boulder, CO (Debate)                        Boulder, CO (Debate)                                          Boulder, CO (Debate)                                               10/28/2015
 10/29/2015    Reno, NV                                    New London, NH          Portsmouth, NH                                                                                           10/29/2015
 10/30/2015                                                Portsmouth, NH                                                Orange City, IA            Sioux City, IA                          10/30/2015
 10/31/2015    Norfolk, VA                                 Des Moines, IA                                                Des Moines, IA             Mason City, IA                          10/31/2015
  11/1/2015                                                Wolfboro, NH                                                                                                                      11/1/2015
  11/2/2015                                                Orlando, FL                                                                                                                       11/2/2015
  11/3/2015    New York, NY                                Rye, NH                 Raymond, NH                                                                                               11/3/2015
  11/4/2015    Concord, NH                                 Manchester, NH          Hollis, NH            Wolfeboro, NH   Nashua, NH                 Manchester, NH                           11/4/2015
   11/5/2015                                               North Conway, NH        Somersworth, NH                       Concord, NH                                                         11/5/2015
  11/6/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  11/6/2015
  11/7/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  11/7/2015
  11/8/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  11/8/2015
  11/9/2015    Springfleild, IL                                                                                          Burlington, WI                                                      11/9/2015
 11/10/2015    Milwaukee, WI (Debate)                                                                                    Milwaukee, WI (Debate)                                             11/10/2015
 11/11/2015    Manchester, NH                              Johnston, IA            Atlantic, IA          Waukee, IA      Davenport, IA                                                      11/11/2015
 11/12/2015    Fort Dodge, IA                              Tuftonboro, NH                                                Columbia, SC                                                       11/12/2015
 11/13/2015    Orlando, FL                                 Franklin, NH            Orlando, FL                           Orlando, FL                                                        11/13/2015
 11/14/2015    Beaumont, TX                                                                                                                                                                 11/14/2015
 11/15/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 11/15/2015
 11/16/2015    Knoxville, TN                                                                                                                                                                11/16/2015
 11/17/2015                                                Florence, SC            Charleston, SC                                                                                           11/17/2015
 11/18/2015                                                Bedford, NH                                                                                                                      11/18/2015
 11/19/2015    Newton, IA                                  Manchester, NH          Londonderry, NH                                                                                          11/19/2015
 11/20/2015    Spartanburg, SC                                                                                           Des Moines, IA                                                     11/20/2015
 11/21/2015    Birmingham, AL                                                                                            Des Moines, IA                                                     11/21/2015
 11/22/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 11/22/2015
 11/23/2015    Columbus, OH                                                                                                                                                                 11/23/2015
 11/24/2015    Myrtle Beach, SC                            Gaffney, SC                                                                                                                      11/24/2015
 11/25/2015                                                                                                              Charleston, SC                                                     11/25/2015
 11/26/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 11/26/2015
 11/27/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 11/27/2015
 11/28/2015    Sarasota, FL                                Starkville, MS                                                                                                                   11/28/2015
 11/29/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 11/29/2015
 11/30/2015    Macon, GA                                   Goose Lake, IA                                                Laconia, NH                Rye, NH                                 11/30/2015
  12/1/2015    Waterville Valley, NH                       Waterloo, IA                                                  Guntersville, AL                                                     12/1/2015
  12/2/2015    Manassas, VA                                Goose Lake, IA                                                                                                                    12/2/2015
  12/3/2015    New York, NY                                Waterloo, IA            Newton, IA                                                                                                12/3/2015
  12/4/2015    Raleigh, NC                                 Dubuque, IA                                                   Greenland, NH              Concord, NH                              12/4/2015
  12/5/2015    Davenport, IA              Spencer, IA                                                                                                                                        12/5/2015
  12/6/2015                                                                                                                                                                                  12/6/2015
  12/7/2015    Mount Pleasant, SC                                                                                                                                                            12/7/2015
  12/8/2015                                                Hooksett, NH            Manchester, NH                                                                                            12/8/2015
  12/9/2015                                                Manchester, NH                                                                                                                    12/9/2015
 12/10/2015    Portsmouth, NH                              Milford, NH                                                   Ames, IA                   West Des Moines, IA                     12/10/2015
 12/11/2015    Des Moines, IA                                                                                            Iowa City, IA                                                      12/11/2015
 12/12/2015    Aiken, SC                                   Derry, NH                                                     Greenville, SC                                                     12/12/2015
 12/13/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 12/13/2015
 12/14/2015    Las Vegas, NV                                                                                             Green Valley, NV                                                   12/14/2015
 12/15/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 12/15/2015
 12/16/2015    Mesa, AZ                                                                                                  Ankeny, IA                 Manchester, NH                          12/16/2015
 12/17/2015                                                                                                              Knoxville, IA              Muscatine, IA                           12/17/2015
 12/18/2015                                                                                                              Dubuque, IA                                                        12/18/2015
 12/19/2015    Cedar Rapids, IA                            Exeter, NH              Contoocook, NH        Windham, NH     Spartanburg, SC            Anderson, SC                            12/19/2015
 12/20/2015                                                Nashua, NH                                                                                                                       12/20/2015
 12/21/2015    Grand Rapids, MI                            Alton, NH                                                     Bartlett, NH               Rochester, NH                           12/21/2015
 12/22/2015                                                Conway, MA              Berlin, NH            Littleton, NH   Berlin, NH                 North Conway, NH                        12/22/2015
 12/23/2015                                                                                                              Littleton, NH              Franklin, NH                            12/23/2015
 12/24/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 12/24/2015
 12/25/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 12/25/2015
 12/26/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 12/26/2015
 12/27/2015                                                                                                                                                                                 12/27/2015
 12/28/2015    Nashua, NH                                  Ocala, FL                                                                                                                        12/28/2015
 12/29/2015    Council Bluffs, IA                                                                                        Clinton, IA                Waterloo, IA                            12/29/2015
 12/30/2015    Hilton Head, SC                             Lexington, SC                                                 Newton, IA                                                         12/30/2015
 12/31/2015    Biloxi, MS                                                                                                                                                                   12/31/2015
              Appendix Table 2--Campaign Stops by Candidate, Date, and Location, Continued
Date          Cruz                  Cruz2                Clinton                 Clinton2               Clinton3              Clinton4           Date
   9/1/2015   Seabrook, NH          Concord, NH                                                                                                     9/1/2015
   9/2/2015   Houston, TX                                                                                                                           9/2/2015
   9/3/2015   Fort Worth, TX        Tyler, TX                                                                                                       9/3/2015
   9/4/2015                                              San Juan, Puerto Rico                                                                      9/4/2015
   9/5/2015                                              Portsmouth, NH                                                                             9/5/2015
   9/6/2015                                              Newton, IA                                                                                 9/6/2015
   9/7/2015                                              Cedar Rapids, IA                                                                           9/7/2015
   9/8/2015   Grayson, KY                                                                                                                           9/8/2015
   9/9/2015   Washington, DC                             Washington, DC                                                                             9/9/2015
  9/10/2015                                              Columbus, OH            Milwaukee, WI                                                     9/10/2015
  9/11/2015                                                                                                                                        9/11/2015
  9/12/2015                                                                                                                                        9/12/2015
  9/13/2015                                              Washington, DC                                                                            9/13/2015
  9/14/2015                                              Decorah, IA                                                                               9/14/2015
  9/15/2015                                                                                                                                        9/15/2015
  9/16/2015   Simi Valley, CA                            Staten Island, NY                                                                         9/16/2015
  9/17/2015                                              Nashua, NH              Laconia, NH            Concord, NH                                9/17/2015
  9/18/2015                                              Durham, NH              Portland, ME           Plymouth, NH                               9/18/2015
  9/19/2015   Des Moines, IA                             Manchester, NH                                                                            9/19/2015
  9/20/2015   Urbandale, IA                                                                                                                        9/20/2015
  9/21/2015                                              Baton Rouge, LA         Little Rock, AK                                                   9/21/2015
  9/22/2015                                              Des Moines, IA                                                                            9/22/2015
  9/23/2015                                                                                                                                        9/23/2015
  9/24/2015                                                                                                                                        9/24/2015
  9/25/2015   Washington, DC                                                                                                                       9/25/2015
  9/26/2015   Thompson, IA          Hampton, IA                                                                                                    9/26/2015
  9/27/2015   Urbandale, IA                              Los Angeles, CA                                                                           9/27/2015
  9/28/2015                                              San Francisco, CA                                                                         9/28/2015
  9/29/2015                                              Charlotte, NC                                                                             9/29/2015
  9/30/2015                                              New York, NY                                                                              9/30/2015
  10/1/2015                                              Belmont, MA             Boston, MA                                                        10/1/2015
  10/2/2015   Nashua, NH            Salem, NH            Davie, FL               North Palm Beach, FL   Fort Lauderdale, FL   Miami Beach, FL      10/2/2015
  10/3/2015   Hooksett, NH          Laconia, NH          Washington, DC                                                                            10/3/2015
  10/4/2015   Wolfeboro, NH                                                                                                                        10/4/2015
  10/5/2015   Kalamazoo, MI                              Manchester, NH                                                                            10/5/2015
  10/6/2015                                              Davenport, IA           Muscatine, IA                                                     10/6/2015
  10/7/2015                                              Mt. Vernon, IA          Council Bluffs, IA                                                10/7/2015
  10/8/2015                                              Washington, DC                                                                            10/8/2015
  10/9/2015   Nashua, NH                                 Washington, DC                                                                            10/9/2015
 10/10/2015                                                                                                                                       10/10/2015
 10/11/2015                                                                                                                                       10/11/2015
 10/12/2015                                                                                                                                       10/12/2015
 10/13/2015                                              Las Vegas, NV                                                                            10/13/2015
 10/14/2015                                              Las Vegas, NV                                                                            10/14/2015
 10/15/2015                                              San Antonio, TX         Houston, TX                                                      10/15/2015
 10/16/2015                                              Keene, NH               Nashua, NH                                                       10/16/2015
 10/17/2015   Contoocook, NH                             Birmingham, AL          Hoover, AL                                                       10/17/2015
 10/18/2015                                                                                                                                       10/18/2015
 10/19/2015                                                                                                                                       10/19/2015
 10/20/2015                                                                                                                                       10/20/2015
 10/21/2015                                                                                                                                       10/21/2015
 10/22/2015                                              Washington, DC                                                                           10/22/2015
 10/23/2015   Glenwood, IA          Council Bluffs, IA   Washington, DC          Alexandria, VA                                                   10/23/2015
 10/24/2015   Marshalltown, IA      Waterloo, IA         Des Moines, IA                                                                           10/24/2015
 10/25/2015                                              New York, NY                                                                             10/25/2015
 10/26/2015                                                                                                                                       10/26/2015
 10/27/2015                                              Morristown, NJ                                                                           10/27/2015
 10/28/2015   Boulder, CO                                Manchester, NH          Bartlett, NH           Meredith, NH                              10/28/2015
 10/29/2015                                              Berlin, NH              Littleton, NH                                                    10/29/2015
 10/30/2015                                              Atlanta, GA             Charleston, SC                                                   10/30/2015
 10/31/2015   Des Moines, IA        Akron, IA            Charleston, SC                                                                           10/31/2015
  11/1/2015                                                                                                                                        11/1/2015
  11/2/2015                                              Chicago, IL             Evanston, IL                                                      11/2/2015
  11/3/2015                                              Coralville, IA          Grinnell, IA                                                      11/3/2015
  11/4/2015                                              Sacramento, CA          Los Angeles, CA                                                   11/4/2015
  11/5/2015                                              Los Angeles, CA         St. Helena, CA                                                    11/5/2015
  11/6/2015   Des Moines, IA                             Rock Hill, SC                                                                             11/6/2015
  11/7/2015                                              Orangeburg, SC          Columbia, SC                                                      11/7/2015
  11/8/2015                                                                                                                                        11/8/2015
  11/9/2015                                              Windham, NH             Nashua, NH                                                        11/9/2015
 11/10/2015   Milwaukee, WI                              Derry, NH               Hanover, NH            Buffalo, NY                               11/10/2015
 11/11/2015   Kingston, NH                               New York, NY                                                                             11/11/2015
 11/12/2015   Concord, NH                                                                                                                         11/12/2015
 11/13/2015                                                                                                                                       11/13/2015
 11/14/2015   Greenville, SC                             Des Moines, IA                                                                           11/14/2015
 11/15/2015   Myrtle Beach, SC                           Ames, IA                                                                                 11/15/2015
 11/16/2015   Okatie, SC            Charleston, SC                                                                                                11/16/2015
 11/17/2015                                              Dallas, TX                                                                               11/17/2015
 11/18/2015                                                                                                                                       11/18/2015
 11/19/2015                                              New York, NY                                                                             11/19/2015
 11/20/2015   Des Moines, IA                             Louisville, KY          Memphis, TN            Nashville, TN                             11/20/2015
 11/21/2015   Clear Lake, IA                             Charleston, SC                                                                           11/21/2015
 11/22/2015                                              Clinton, IA                                                                              11/22/2015
 11/23/2015                                              Reno, NV                Carson City, NV                                                  11/23/2015
 11/24/2015                                              Boulder, CO             Denver, CO                                                       11/24/2015
 11/25/2015                                                                                                                                       11/25/2015
 11/26/2015                                                                                                                                       11/26/2015
 11/27/2015                                                                                                                                       11/27/2015
 11/28/2015   Creston, IA           Lamoni, IA                                                                                                    11/28/2015
 11/29/2015   Des Moines, IA        Bettendorf, IA       Boston, MA              Manchester, NH                                                   11/29/2015
 11/30/2015   Coralville, IA        Clinton, IA          Washington, DC          Chevy Chase, MD                                                  11/30/2015
  12/1/2015                                              Montgomery, AL          Miami Beach, FL                                                   12/1/2015
  12/2/2015                                              Orlando, FL             Thonotosassa, FL       Windermere, FL        Jacksonville, FL     12/2/2015
  12/3/2015                                              Nashua, NH              Manchester, NH         Dover, NH             Boston, MA           12/3/2015
  12/4/2015   Johnston, IA                               Sioux City, IA                                                                            12/4/2015
  12/5/2015   Des Moines, IA        Cedar Rapids, IA                                                                                               12/5/2015
  12/6/2015                                              Washington, DC          Alexandria, VA                                                    12/6/2015
  12/7/2015   Greenville, SC                             Washington, DC          Owings Mills, MD                                                  12/7/2015
  12/8/2015                                              Salem, NH                                                                                 12/8/2015
  12/9/2015                                              Waterloo, IA            Urbandale, IA                                                     12/9/2015
 12/10/2015                                              New York, NY                                                                             12/10/2015
 12/11/2015                                              Tulsa, OK               St. Louis, MO                                                    12/11/2015
 12/12/2015                                                                                                                                       12/12/2015
 12/13/2015                                                                                                                                       12/13/2015
 12/14/2015                                              Brooklyn, NY                                                                             12/14/2015
 12/15/2015                                              Minneapolis, MN                                                                          12/15/2015
 12/16/2015   Las Vegas, NV                              Omaha, NE               Iowa City, IA          Mason City, IA        New York, NY        12/16/2015
 12/17/2015   Summerlin South, NV                                                                                                                 12/17/2015
 12/18/2015                                                                                                                                       12/18/2015
 12/19/2015                                              New York, NY            Manchester, NH                                                   12/19/2015
 12/20/2015                                                                                                                                       12/20/2015
 12/21/2015                                                                                                                                       12/21/2015
 12/22/2015                                              Keota, IA                                                                                12/22/2015
 12/23/2015                                                                                                                                       12/23/2015
 12/24/2015                                                                                                                                       12/24/2015
 12/25/2015                                                                                                                                       12/25/2015
 12/26/2015                                                                                                                                       12/26/2015
 12/27/2015                                                                                                                                       12/27/2015
 12/28/2015                                                                                                                                       12/28/2015
 12/29/2015                                              Portsmouth, NH          Berlin, NH                                                       12/29/2015
 12/30/2015                                                                                                                                       12/30/2015
 12/31/2015                                                                                                                                       12/31/2015
                                                     Appendix Table 2--Campaign Stops by Candidate, Date, and Location, Continued
Date          Sanders               Sanders2            Sanders3              Sanders4             Christie              Christie2          Christie3        Paul                 Paul2             Paul3                 Paul4             Date
   9/1/2015                                                                                                                                                  Jefferson, NH        Berlin, NH        North Conway, NH                           9/1/2015
   9/2/2015                                                                                                                                                  Freedom, NH          Wolfboro, NH      Laconia, NH                                9/2/2015
   9/3/2015   Grinnell, IA          Ottuma, IA          West Burlington, IA                        Littleton, NH         Lancaster, NH      Berlin, NH       Manchester, NH                                                                    9/3/2015
   9/4/2015   Muscatine, IA         Cedar Rapids, IA                                               North Conway, NH      Contoocook, NH     Concord, NH                                                                                        9/4/2015
   9/5/2015   Altoona, IA                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9/5/2015
   9/6/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/6/2015
   9/7/2015   Manchester, NH        Amherst, NH         Milford, NH                                                                                                                                                                            9/7/2015
   9/8/2015                                                                                        Rye, NH                                                                                                                                     9/8/2015
   9/9/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/9/2015
  9/10/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/10/2015
  9/11/2015   Atlanta, GA                                                                                                                                    Indianola, IA        Ames, IA                                                    9/11/2015
  9/12/2015   Columbia, SC          Rockhill, SC                                                                                                             Marshalltown, IA     Nevada, IA        Ames, IA                                  9/12/2015
  9/13/2015   Greensboro, NC                                                                       Hampton, NH           Dover, NH                                                                                                            9/13/2015
  9/14/2015   Lynchburg, VA         Manassas, VA                                                   Manchester, NH                                                                                                                             9/14/2015
  9/15/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/15/2015
  9/16/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/16/2015
  9/17/2015                                                                                                                                                  Carson City, NV      Las Vegas, NV     Reno, NV              Ely, NV             9/17/2015
  9/18/2015   New York, NY                                                                                                                                   Henderson, NV                                                                    9/18/2015
  9/19/2015   Manchester, NH        Goffstown, NH                                                                                                                                                                                             9/19/2015
  9/20/2015   Seabrook, NH          Portsmouth, NH      Exeter, NH            Durham, NH                                                                                                                                                      9/20/2015
  9/21/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/21/2015
  9/22/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/22/2015
  9/23/2015                                                                                                                                                  Rock Hill, SC        Columbia, SC      Spartanburg, SC                           9/23/2015
  9/24/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/24/2015
  9/25/2015   Portsmouth, NH                                                                       Nashua, NH                                                Manchester, NH       Hudson, NH        Salem, NH                                 9/25/2015
  9/26/2015   Des Moines, IA        Newton, IA                                                     Loudon, NH            Concord, NH        Derry, NH        Henniker, NH         Brookline, NH                                               9/26/2015
  9/27/2015   Waukee, IA            Des Moines, IA      Fort Dodge, IA        Mason City                                                                                                                                                      9/27/2015
  9/28/2015   Chicago, IL                                                                          Alden, IA                                                                                                                                  9/28/2015
  9/29/2015                                                                                        Des Moines, IA                                                                                                                             9/29/2015
  9/30/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/30/2015
  10/1/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/1/2015
  10/2/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/2/2015
  10/3/2015   Springfield, MA       Boston, MA                                                                                                                                                                                                10/3/2015
  10/4/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/4/2015
  10/5/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/5/2015
  10/6/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/6/2015
  10/7/2015                                                                                        Hampstead, NH         Raymond, NH                                                                                                          10/7/2015
  10/8/2015                                                                                        Manchester, NH        Belmont, NH                                                                                                          10/8/2015
  10/9/2015   Tucson, AZ                                                                           Henniker, NH                                              Manchester, NH       Nashua, NH                                                  10/9/2015
 10/10/2015   Boulder, CO                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10/10/2015
 10/11/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/11/2015
 10/12/2015   Henderson, NV                                                                        Manchester, NH                                            Cedar Rapids, IA     Mt. Vernon, IA    Iowa City, IA                            10/12/2015
 10/13/2015   Las Vegas, NV                                                                                                                                  Davenport, IA        Dubuque, IA       West Des Moines, IA   Cedar Falls, IA    10/13/2015
 10/14/2015   Los Angeles, CA                                                                                                                                Sioux City, IA       Storm Lake, IA    Des Moines, IA                           10/14/2015
 10/15/2015                                                                                        Newport, NH                                                                                                                               10/15/2015
 10/16/2015                                                                                        Manchester, NH        Bedford, NH                         Manchester, NH                                                                  10/16/2015
 10/17/2015                                                                                                                                                  Hooksett, NH         Contoocook, NH    Ashland, NH                              10/17/2015
 10/18/2015   Iowa City, IA         Fort Madison, IA                                                                                                         Dalton, NH                                                                      10/18/2015
 10/19/2015   Oskaloosa, IA                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/19/2015
 10/20/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/20/2015
 10/21/2015                                                                                        Newton, IA            Des Moines, IA                                                                                                      10/21/2015
 10/22/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/22/2015
 10/23/2015   Washington, DC        Davenport, IA                                                                                                                                                                                            10/23/2015
 10/24/2015   Des Moines, IA                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10/24/2015
 10/25/2015   Des Moines, IA                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10/25/2015
 10/26/2015   New York, NY                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/26/2015
 10/27/2015   New York, NY                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/27/2015
 10/28/2015   Fairfax, VA           Washington, DC                                                                                                                                                                                           10/28/2015
 10/29/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/29/2015
 10/30/2015   Manchester, NH        Nashua, NH          Derry, NH                                  Council Bluffs, IA    Orange City, IA                     Des Moines, IA                                                                  10/30/2015
 10/31/2015   Concord, NH           Warner, NH          Lebanon, NH                                Des Moines, IA                                            Newton, IA           Des Moines, IA                                             10/31/2015
  11/1/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/1/2015
  11/2/2015                                                                                                                                                  Durham, NH                                                                       11/2/2015
  11/3/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/3/2015
  11/4/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/4/2015
  11/5/2015   Concord, NH                                                                          Nashua, NH            Somersworth, NH                                                                                                      11/5/2015
  11/6/2015   Rock Hill, SC                                                                        Concord, NH           Hanover, NH                         Spartanburg, Sc                                                                  11/6/2015
  11/7/2015   Rock Hill, SC         Columbia, SC        Aiken, SC                                  Plymouth, NH          Bedford, NH                                                                                                          11/7/2015
  11/8/2015   Las Vegas, NV                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/8/2015
  11/9/2015   Las Vegas, NV                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/9/2015
 11/10/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/10/2015
 11/11/2015   Lebanon, NH                                                                          Bettendorf, IA        Muscatine, IA      Coralville, IA   Council Bluffs, IA   Des Moines, IA    Ames, IA                                 11/11/2015
 11/12/2015                                                                                        Cedar Rapids, IA      Anamosa, IA        Robins, IA       Johnston, IA         Altoona, IA       Winterset, IA                            11/12/2015
 11/13/2015                                                                                        Cedar Falls, IA       Johnston, IA       Nevada, IA       Concord, NH          Somersworth, NH   Portsmouth, NH                           11/13/2015
 11/14/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/14/2015
 11/15/2015   Des Moines, IA        Indianola, IA                                                                                                            Des Moines, IA                                                                  11/15/2015
 11/16/2015   Cleveland, OH                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/16/2015
 11/17/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/17/2015
 11/18/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/18/2015
 11/19/2015   Washington, DC                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11/19/2015
 11/20/2015   Charleston, SC                                                                                                                                 Des Moines, IA                                                                  11/20/2015
 11/21/2015   Charleston, SC        Columbia, SC        Orangeburg, SC                             Stratham, NH          Windham, NH        Manchester, NH   Iowa City, IA                                                                   11/21/2015
 11/22/2015   St. Helena, SC        Savannah, GA                                                   Bedford, NH                                                                                                                               11/22/2015
 11/23/2015   Atlanta, GA                                                                                                                                                                                                                    11/23/2015
 11/24/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/24/2015
 11/25/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/25/2015
 11/26/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/26/2015
 11/27/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/27/2015
 11/28/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/28/2015
 11/29/2015   Manchester, NH                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11/29/2015
 11/30/2015                                                                                        Concord, NH           Loudon, NH                                                                                                          11/30/2015
  12/1/2015                                                                                        Londonderry, NH       Concord, NH                                                                                                          12/1/2015
  12/2/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/2/2015
  12/3/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/3/2015
  12/4/2015                                                                                        West Des Moines, IA   Jefferson, IA      Fort Dodge, IA   Waukee, IA           Fort Dodge, IA    Mason City, IA        Cedar Falls, IA     12/4/2015
  12/5/2015   Keene, NH             Plymouth, NH                                                   Mason City, IA        Iowa Falls, IA                      Waterloo, IA         Cedar Falls, IA   Cedar Rapids, IA                          12/5/2015
  12/6/2015   Washington, DC                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/6/2015
  12/7/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/7/2015
  12/8/2015   Baltimore, MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/8/2015
  12/9/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/9/2015
 12/10/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/10/2015
 12/11/2015                                                                                        Wolfeboro, NH                                             Keene, NH            Rindge, NH                                                 12/11/2015
 12/12/2015   Anamosa, IA           Clinton, IA         Dubuque, IA           Waterloo, IA         Weare, NH                                                 Nashua, NH           Concord, NH       Manchester, NH                           12/12/2015
 12/13/2015   Waterloo, IA          Mount Vernon, IA    Davenport, IA                                                                                                                                                                        12/13/2015
 12/14/2015   Nashua, NH            Hollis, NH                                                                                                                                                                                               12/14/2015
 12/15/2015   Rochester, NH         Hampton, NH         Dover, NH                                                                                                                                                                            12/15/2015
 12/16/2015   Washington, DC                                                                                                                                 Reno, NV             Las Vegas, NV                                              12/16/2015
 12/17/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/17/2015
 12/18/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/18/2015
 12/19/2015   Manchester, NH                                                                       Exeter, NH            Derry, NH          Bedford, NH                                                                                      12/19/2015
 12/20/2015                                                                                        Manchester, NH        Peterborough, NH                                                                                                    12/20/2015
 12/21/2015   Sioux City, IA                                                                       Hollis, NH            Pelham, NH         New London, NH                                                                                   12/21/2015
 12/22/2015   Storm Lake, IA        Carroll, IA         Harlan, IA            Council Bluffs, IA   Portsmouth, NH                                                                                                                            12/22/2015
 12/23/2015   Chicago, IL                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12/23/2015
 12/24/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/24/2015
 12/25/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/25/2015
 12/26/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/26/2015
 12/27/2015   Reno, NV                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12/27/2015
 12/28/2015   North Las Vegas, NV                                                                                                                                                                                                            12/28/2015
 12/29/2015   Muscatine, IA         Davenport, IA                                                  Muscatine, IA         Iowa City, IA                                                                                                       12/29/2015
 12/30/2015   Burlington, IA        Keokuk, IA          Ottumwa, IA                                                                                                                                                                          12/30/2015
 12/31/2015   Knoxville, IA         Des Moines, IA                                                                                                                                                                                           12/31/2015
                                                       Appendix Table 2--Campaign Stops by Candidate, Date, and Location, Continued
Date           Carson                Carson2                Carson3              Carson4          Kasich                   Kasich2                  Kasich3            Kasich4        Fiorina              Fiorina2              Fiorina3          Fiorina4 Date
    9/1/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/1/2015
    9/2/2015                                                                                      Henniker, NH             New London, NH           West Lebanon, NH                                                                                            9/2/2015
    9/3/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/3/2015
    9/4/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/4/2015
    9/5/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Amherst, NH          Manchester, NH        Sandown, NH                    9/5/2015
    9/6/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Derry, NH            Bedford, NH                                          9/6/2015
    9/7/2015                                                                                      Rye, NH                  Milford, NH              Salem, NH                         Concord, NH          Milford, NH           Salem, NH                      9/7/2015
    9/8/2015                                                                                      Concord, NH              Brookline, NH                                                                                                                        9/8/2015
    9/9/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/9/2015
   9/10/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/10/2015
   9/11/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/11/2015
   9/12/2015   Aiken, SC                                                                          Manchester, NH           Raymond, NH              Dover, NH          Stratham, NH   Chichester, NH       Stratham, NH          Dover, NH                     9/12/2015
   9/13/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Alton, NH            Pembroke, NH          Glen, NH                      9/13/2015
   9/14/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/14/2015
   9/15/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/15/2015
   9/16/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/16/2015
   9/17/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/17/2015
   9/18/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/18/2015
   9/19/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/19/2015
   9/20/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/20/2015
   9/21/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/21/2015
   9/22/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Charleston, SC       Myrtle Beach, SC                                    9/22/2015
   9/23/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Lexington, SC        Rock Hill, SC                                       9/23/2015
   9/24/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Spartanburg, SC                                                          9/24/2015
   9/25/2015                                                                                      Hilton Head Island, SC                                                              Davenport, IA        Dubuque, IA                                         9/25/2015
   9/26/2015                                                                                      Sioux City, IA           Council Bluffs, IA                                         Iowa City, IA        Arlington, IA                                       9/26/2015
   9/27/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/27/2015
   9/28/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/28/2015
   9/29/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/29/2015
   9/30/2015   Exeter, NH            Durham, NH             Portsmouth, NH       New Castle, NH   Davenport, IA            Cedar Rapids, IA                                                                                                                    9/30/2015
   10/1/2015   West Des Moines, IA                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10/1/2015
   10/2/2015   Des Moines, IA        Ankeny, IA                                                   Concord, NH              Goffstown, NH            Manchester, NH                    Aiken, SC            Mt Pleasant, SC                                     10/2/2015
   10/3/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Hooksett, NH         Hudson, NH            Portsmouth, NH                10/3/2015
   10/4/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Rye, NH              Windham, NH                                         10/4/2015
   10/5/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Manchester, NH       Nashua, NH            Bedford, NH                   10/5/2015
   10/6/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/6/2015
   10/7/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/7/2015
   10/8/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/8/2015
   10/9/2015                                                                                      Stratham, NH                                                                                                                                                 10/9/2015
 10/10/2015    Columbia, SC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/10/2015
 10/11/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/11/2015
 10/12/2015                                                                                       Manchester, NH                                                                                                                                             10/12/2015
 10/13/2015                                                                                       Bow, NH                  Tilton, NH               Littleton, NH                                                                                            10/13/2015
 10/14/2015                                                                                       Plymouth, NH             Tuftonboro, NH                                                                                                                    10/14/2015
 10/15/2015                                                                                       Nashua, NH                                                                          Spencer, IA          Windsor Heights, IA                               10/15/2015
 10/16/2015                                                                                                                                                                           Pleasant Hill, IA    Grinnell, IA                                      10/16/2015
 10/17/2015                                                                                                                                                                           Cedar Rapids, IA     Waterloo, IA          Monticello, IA              10/17/2015
 10/18/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/18/2015
 10/19/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/19/2015
 10/20/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/20/2015
 10/21/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/21/2015
 10/22/2015                                                                                       Hanover, NH              Newport, NH                                                                                                                       10/22/2015
 10/23/2015                                                                                       Manchester, NH           Milford, NH              Concord, NH                       Beaufort, SC         Hilton Head, SC                                   10/23/2015
 10/24/2015    Ames, IA              West Des Moines, IA    Waterloo, IA         Dubuque, IA                                                                                                                                                                 10/24/2015
 10/25/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/25/2015
 10/26/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/26/2015
 10/27/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/27/2015
 10/28/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/28/2015
 10/29/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10/29/2015
 10/30/2015                                                                                                                                                                           Orange City, IA                                                        10/30/2015
 10/31/2015                                                                                                                                                                           Sioux City, IA       Des Moines, IA        Indianola, IA               10/31/2015
   11/1/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Oskaloosa, IA                                                            11/1/2015
   11/2/2015                                                                                      Des Moines, IA                                                                      Oskaloosa, IA                                                            11/2/2015
   11/3/2015                                                                                      Dubuque, IA                                                                                                                                                  11/3/2015
   11/4/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/4/2015
   11/5/2015                                                                                      Durham, NH               Londonderry, NH                                            Concord, NH          Newport, NH                                         11/5/2015
   11/6/2015                                                                                      Concord, NH              Hopkinton, NH                                              Manchester, NH       Milford, NH           Dover, NH                     11/6/2015
   11/7/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Franklin, NH         Bedford, NH           Londonderry, NH               11/7/2015
   11/8/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/8/2015
   11/9/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/9/2015
 11/10/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/10/2015
 11/11/2015                                                                                       West Columbia, SC        Hilton Head Island, SC                                                                                                            11/11/2015
 11/12/2015                                                                                       Exeter, NH               Concord, NH                                                Onawa, IA            Harlan, IA                                        11/12/2015
 11/13/2015    Greenville, SC                                                                     Hudons, NH               Laconia, NH                                                Council Bluffs, IA   Corning, IA           Greenfield, IA              11/13/2015
 11/14/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/14/2015
 11/15/2015    Las Vegas, NV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11/15/2015
 11/16/2015    Green Valley, NV                                                                                                                                                       Plymouth, NH                                                           11/16/2015
 11/17/2015                                                                                                                                                                           Concord, NH                                                            11/17/2015
 11/18/2015                                                                                                                                                                           Henniker, NH         Keene, NH                                         11/18/2015
 11/19/2015    Columbia, SC                                                                       Spartanburg, SC          Charleston, SC                                                                                                                    11/19/2015
 11/20/2015    Concord, NH                                                                        Hollis, NH                                                                          Des Moines, IA                                                         11/20/2015
 11/21/2015    Des Moines, IA        Tipton, IA             Wilton, IA           Davenport, IA    Berlin, NH               Sanbornville, NH         Dover, NH                         Dike, IA                                                               11/21/2015
 11/22/2015                                                                                                                                                                           Wilton, IA                                                             11/22/2015
 11/23/2015    Pahrump, NV                                                                                                                                                            Des Moines, IA       Council Bluffs, IA    Sioux City, IA              11/23/2015
 11/24/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/24/2015
 11/25/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/25/2015
 11/26/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/26/2015
 11/27/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/27/2015
 11/28/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/28/2015
 11/29/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/29/2015
 11/30/2015                                                                                       Ames, IA                 Cedar Rapids, IA                                           Greenville, SC       Anderson, SC                                      11/30/2015
   12/1/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Columbia, SC         West Columbia, SC     Charleston, SC                12/1/2015
   12/2/2015   Rock Hill, SC         Spartanburg, SC                                                                                                                                                                                                           12/2/2015
   12/3/2015                                                                                      Salem, NH                                                                                                                                                    12/3/2015
   12/4/2015                                                                                      Manchester, NH           Lebanon, NH                                                                                                                         12/4/2015
   12/5/2015   Waterloo, IA          Cedar Rapids, IA                                             Claremont, NH            New London, NH                                             Cedar Rapids, IA                                                         12/5/2015
   12/6/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Coon Rapids, IA                                                          12/6/2015
   12/7/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Cedar Rapids, IA                                                         12/7/2015
   12/8/2015                                                                                      Myrtle Beach, SC                                                                    Des Moines, IA                                                           12/8/2015
   12/9/2015                                                                                                                                                                          Lebanon, NH                                                              12/9/2015
 12/10/2015                                                                                       Manchester, NH           Merrimack, NH                                              Concord, NH          Bedford, NH           Derry, NH                   12/10/2015
 12/11/2015    Burlington, IA        Moravia, IA                                                  Keene, NH                Peterborough, NH         Bedford, NH                       Manchester, NH       Nashua, NH            Exeter, NH                  12/11/2015
 12/12/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/12/2015
 12/13/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/13/2015
 12/14/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/14/2015
 12/15/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/15/2015
 12/16/2015    Elko, NV              Las Vegas, NV          Carson City, NV                       Ankeny, IA                                                                          Reno, NV                                                               12/16/2015
 12/17/2015    McGregor, IA          Mason City, IA                                               Waterloo, IA             Des Moines, IA                                                                                                                    12/17/2015
 12/18/2015    Storm Lake, IA        Orange City, IA        Sioux City, IA                                                                                                            Clinton, IA          Dubuque, IA           Davenport, IA               12/18/2015
 12/19/2015    Carroll, IA           Harlan, IA             Council Bluffs, IA                                                                                                        Burlington, IA       Washington, IA                                    12/19/2015
 12/20/2015    Nashua, NH                                                                         Manchester, NH           Portsmouth, NH                                                                                                                    12/20/2015
 12/21/2015    Manchester, NH        Concord, NH                                                  Greenland, NH            Rochester, NH            Concord, NH                       Mt. Pleasant, SC     Pawleys Island, SC                                12/21/2015
 12/22/2015    Summerville, SC                                                                                                                                                        Florence, SC                                                           12/22/2015
 12/23/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/23/2015
 12/24/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/24/2015
 12/25/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/25/2015
 12/26/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/26/2015
 12/27/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/27/2015
 12/28/2015                                                                                       Manchester, NH           Derry, NH                                                                                                                         12/28/2015
 12/29/2015                                                                                       Nashua, NH               Keene, NH                                                                                                                         12/29/2015
 12/30/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/30/2015
 12/31/2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/31/2015
Note: this list contains all recorded campaign including those not matched to our own sample of parish bulletins. There are multiple columns for candidates as candidates sometimes made more than one stop in a day.
Appendix Figure 1: Distribution of Parishes in Baseline Estimates
                  Appendix Figure 2: Results Dropping Each State, Except New Hampshire
20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
     .018-.0185     .0185-.019   .019-.0195   .0195-.020    .020-.0205    .0205-.021    .021-.0215    .0215-.022   .022-.0225

The figure presents a histogram of coefficients from a regression of church collections on campaigns with each state dropped.
All regressions difference data and include bulletins from 2014 and 2015 and include a constant. The y axis shows the
number of regressions that produced a campaign coefficient in a given bin. The baseline coefficient, including all states, is
0.0204. All coefficients from this exercise are statistically significant. Results dropping New Hampshire are reported in
Table 3 and produce a coefficient of 0.0273, which would be to the right of the above picture.
