NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHORT-RUN PAIN, LONG-RUN GAIN? RECESSIONS AND TECHNOLOGICAL
TRANSFORMATION
Alexandr Kopytov
Nikolai Roussanov
Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel
Working Paper 24373
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24373
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018

We thank Henry Siu (discussant), Sevin Yeltekin (editor), seminar participants at Columbia,
Wharton, and conference participants at the Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference on Public
Policy, for which this paper was prepared. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Alexandr Kopytov, Nikolai Roussanov, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain? Recessions and Technological Transformation
Alexandr Kopytov, Nikolai Roussanov, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel
NBER Working Paper No. 24373
March 2018
JEL No. E24,E25,E3
ABSTRACT
Recent empirical evidence suggests that job polarization associated with skill-biased
technological change accelerated during the Great Recession. We use a standard neoclassical
growth framework to analyze how business cycle fluctuations interact with the long-run transition
towards a skill-intensive technology. In the model, since adopting the new technology disrupts
production, firms prefer to do so in recessions, when profits are low. Similarly, workers also tend
to learn new skills during downturns. As a result, recessions are deeper during periods of
technological transition, but they also speed up adoption of the new technology. We document
evidence for these mechanisms in the data. Our calibrated model is able to match both the longrun downward trend in routine employment and the dramatic impact of the Great Recession. We
also show that even in the absence of the Great Recession the routine employment share would
have reached the observed level by the year 2012.
Alexandr Kopytov
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School, Finance Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
akopytov@wharton.upenn.edu
Nikolai Roussanov
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School, Finance Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu

Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel
Cornell University
Department of Economics
Uris Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853
mathtd@gmail.com

1

Introduction

In recent decades, rapid advances in information technology, electronics and robotics have made
many jobs associated with relatively simple and repetitive tasks obsolete, as they can now be easily
performed by machines. While these routine jobs have been disappearing, employment in nonroutine cognitive occupations (e.g., programmers or financial analysts) and non-routine manual
jobs (mainly in low-skill services), has been increasing. Both of these types of occupations are
associated with tasks that have proved harder to automate, at least thus far.1
In a recent contribution, Jaimovich and Siu (2015) (JS hereafter) have shown that this job polarization process accelerates during recessions. Over the last thirty years, employment in routine
occupations experienced significant drops during economic downturns and, unlike for other types
of jobs, these drops were not followed by recoveries once the recessions ended. Strikingly, 88% of
job losses in routine occupations since the mid-1980s happened during the three downturns that
occurred over this span of time. In contrast, non-routine jobs experienced only small declines
during these recessions, and rapidly recovered afterwards. Importantly, these patterns began during the mid-1980s, when the pace of innovation in automation technologies accelerated (e.g., see
Eden and Gaggl, 2016). In prior decades, routine employment bounced back quickly as economy
recovered.
We build a quantitative model to better understand these patterns, and to evaluate their importance for macroeconomic fluctuations and technology adoption. In the model, consumption
goods are produced using manual services and intermediates. Guided by the data, we assume that
the manual services employs low-skill workers to perform non-routine manual tasks. Production
of intermediates, in contrast, is more complex and requires a combination of non-routine cognitive tasks, performed by high-skill workers, and routine tasks, performed by low-skill workers,
similarly to Autor and Dorn (2013). While only one technology is available to produce manual
services, firms can choose either an “old” or a “new” technology to produce intermediates. The
new technology is more skill-intensive than the old one, and it becomes better over time due to
continued improvements in information technologies and automation (Autor, Levy, and Murnane,
2003). As a result, firms progressively switch from the old to the new technology, and non-routine
cognitive employment goes up as a result. Moreover, since manual services and intermediates are
complements, non-routine manual employment also increases. The slow improvement in the pro1

For more on job polarization see Acemoglu (1999), Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), Goos and Manning
(2007), Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2014) among others.

1

ductivity of the new technology therefore generates patterns of job polarization similar to those
visible in the data.
Adopting the new technology is costly, both in terms of factors of production that must be used
to reorganize the firm, but also in terms of the profits that are lost during the reorganization. As
a result, firms in our model prefer to adopt the new technology during recessions, when factors
of production are cheap and the loss in foregone profits is minimized. Recessions are also periods
of skill acquisition by the workers. Since wages are depressed, low-skill workers take advantage of
the low opportunity costs to acquire the new skills which will be in high demand once the firms
begin using the new technology towards the end of the recession. Together, the adoption of new
technology by firms and the acquisition of skills by workers take resources away from production
during downturns and, as a result, amplify the effect of negative business cycle shocks. At the same
time, this short-run pain creates long-lasting value in the form of a better production technology
and a higher skill level.
The patterns of technology adoption and skill acquisition generated by the model have support
in the data. The evidence is particularly telling during the Great Recession. Indeed, while the
recession is accompanied by a decline in routine employment, post-secondary education enrollment
increases markedly over the same period. At the same time, while aggregate investment fell
massively, investment in new equipment and software technology was mostly unaffected or slowed
down only slightly. International shipment of industrial robots increased sharply as the recession
ended.
We calibrate the economy to match standard real business cycle moments and the overall increase
in the employment share of non-routine cognitive workers. Importantly, for a reasonable level
of complementarity between intermediates and manual services, the model is able to explain the
recent growth in the employment share of non-routine manual labor, as well as the decline in
routine manual jobs. We demonstrate that by feeding into our model a large negative TFP
shock that corresponds to the Great Recession in both its magnitude and its timing (relative to
the process of technological transition), we can largely account for the sharp drop in the share of
routine workers in the labor force that occurred between 2008 and 2010. We also show that even in
the counterfactual scenario in which the economy does not suffer the Great Recession the smooth
process of technological transition still delivers the employment share of routine manual workers
that is observed empirically in 2012. Thus, while the Great Recession may have accelerated the
process of job polarization, it does not seem to have contributed substantially to its long-term
trend.
2

Literature Review

We model technological progress as involving a change in the production function, reminiscent of
the general purpose technology literature (e.g., Helpman, 1998). We also assume that the new
technology is relatively more high-skill-intensive, similar to Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1998)
and Goldin and Katz (1998). Relatedly, Buera, Kaboski, and Rogerson (2015) also hypothesize
that the share of high-skill labor in production function has increased as a result of the recent
technological change. An alternative approach would be to use the notion of capital-skill complementarity, as proposed by Griliches (1969) and Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull, and Violante (2000).
There, technological progress makes capital equipment more productive and cheaper, causing
increase in demand for the high skill.
In our model, technology adoption requires both time and resources. In this regard, it is similar to Jovanovic and Macdonald (1994), Andolfatto and MacDonald (1998) and, especially, to
Greenwood and Yorukoglu (1997) who assume that high-skill labor is essential to adopt new
technologies.
In a “pit stop” model of technology adoption, which is reminiscent of the Schumpeterian view of
recessions, periods of depressed economic activity are used by firms to reorganize production or
invest in organizational capital (e.g., Hall, 1991 Cooper and Haltiwanger, 1993, Aghion and SaintPaul, 1998, and Caballero and Engel, 1999).2 Recently, these ideas have been brought to explain
anemic employment recoveries following the three latest recessions (van Rens, 2004, Koenders and
Rogerson, 2005, and Berger, 2012).
We model training in the spirit of real business cycle models augmented with human capital
accumulation as in Perli and Sakellaris (1998) and DeJong and Ingram (2001). As a result, in our
model investment in human capital also increases during recessions. Counter-cyclical investment
in education is a well-established fact in the empirical literature (see, among many others, Dellas
and Sakellaris, 2003, Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo, 2015, and Barr and Turner, 2015).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses recent empirical evidence
on the interaction between routine-biased technological change and recessions. Section 3 describes
the model. We calibrate the model in Section 4. Section 5 contains quantitative exercises. Section
6 concludes.
2

Schumpeter (1934) considers recessions as “industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizes the economic
structure from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one”. Caballero and Hammour
(1994) study how the process of creative destruction interacts with business cycles.

3

2

Empirical evidence

In this section, we discuss empirical evidence about interaction between recent downturns and the
speed of job polarization. We then show that some forms of investment in skill-complementary
capital (e.g., software and information processing equipment), are only mildly pro-cyclical, in
contrast with very pro-cyclical investment in structures. We use this evidence to help motivate
our model, in which adoption of a new skill-intensive technology requires reorganization of the
firm that disrupts production and is therefore more attractive during periods of low opportunity
costs. At the same time, workers use recessions to invest in their human capital in order to satisfy
the increasing demand for skill, which results in accelerated job polarization.
A large empirical literature documents that job polarization, induced by routine-biased technological change, was accelerated by recent recessions. Hershbein and Kahn (2016) show that demand
for high-skill workers rises in metropolitan statistical areas with lower employment growth. This
“upskilling” effect is long lasting and does not disappear even when then labor market recovers.
Moreover, firms that upskill more actively also invest more. Anghel, De la Rica, and Lacuesta
(2014) document that the Great Recession sped up job polarization in Spain. Zhang (2015) finds
that during crises firms intensive in routine labor reduce routine employment and invest more
in machines. Using a panel of Spanish manufacturing firms, Aguirregabiria and Alonso-Borrego
(2001) show that firms’ decisions to reorganize production is counter-cyclical and lead to a significant shift in occupation structure towards white-collar jobs.
Most relevant for our purpose, JS argue that the three recent recessions affected routine and
non-routine workers in a dramatically different way.3 They show that routine employment generally drops more during recessions than non-routine employment. In addition, the three recent
recessions are accompanied by no recovery in routine employment at all. Since the 1980s, per
capita routine employment has been falling, not only as a fraction of total employment, but also
in absolute terms. JS therefore refer to the mid 1980s as the start of the job polarization era.
The job polarization era is also marked by an overall drop in labor force participation and an
increase in post-secondary education enrollment. As shown in Figure 1, labor force participation
has been declining since the end of 1990s. Recessions appear to be important drivers of this decline.
3

Using FRED data, JS define routine occupations as “sales and related occupations”, “office and administrative
support occupations”, “production occupations”, “transportation and material moving occupations”, “construction and extraction occupations”, and “installation, maintenance, and repair occupations”. Non-routine cognitive
occupations include “management, business, and financial operations occupations”, “professional and related occupations”. “Service occupations” are non-routine manual. We use their classification in our numerical analysis.
See their paper for more details about classification and robustness.

4

In particular, labor force participation fell from 66% to 63% following the Great Recession. At
the same time, post-secondary education enrollment was almost flat from the mid 1970s up to
mid 1990s, but increased afterwards, with a pronounced spike around the Great Recession.4,5 In
our model, both the decreasing labor force participation and the increasing education enrollment
are driven by the adoption of the skill-intensive technology.
(a) Labor force participation rate

(b) Post-secondary education enrollment ratio

Figure 1: Labor force participation rate (from FRED) and post-secondary education enrollment ratio. Postsecondary education enrollment ratio is defined as total fall enrollment in degree-granting institutions (from National Center for Education Statistics) over civilian noninstitutional population (from FRED).

Besides this differential impact on the different skill categories of labor, recessions also have diverging effects on different types of investment. For example, a pronounced persistent decline in
private investment that happened in the aftermath of the Great Recession is to a large extent
driven by an unprecedented drop in residential investment. In contrast, as shown in Figure 2,
investment in intellectual property, such as software and R&D, as well as industrial and information processing equipment, tools that are used by skill-intensive firms, experienced a much
smaller drop and recovered rapidly (see also Brynjolfsson and McAfee). In Appendix A we also
show that world-wide shipments of industrial robots experienced a sharp increase immediately
after the Great Recession.
(a) Private nonresidential investment by type

(b) Private equipment investment by type

Figure 2: Log real per capita private investment by type (from NIPA Tables). The series are normalized to 0 in
1985.
4

Correlation between the labor force participation and the post-secondary enrollment ratio seems to change
sign around the start of the job polarization era. Between 1963 and 1984 the correlation is 0.84, while between
1985 and 2014 it is −0.63.
5
It is worth noticing that enrolled in post-secondary institutions do not necessarily complete their education.
Thus, the dynamics of post-secondary enrollment and completion ratios might be different.

5

3

Model

Time is discrete and goes on forever, t = {0, 1, . . . }. The economy is populated by a representative
household that consists of a unit measure of workers. A worker is either low-skill or high-skill, and
a low-skill worker can become high-skill through training. On the production side, a final good
is produced with two kinds of inputs. The first one is “manual services” which can be produced
using low-skill labor in non-routine manual tasks. The second input is “intermediates” which can
be produced by combining capital and the two types of labor.6
Intermediates can be produced using one of two different technologies: an old technology that
is low-skill intensive and a new technology that is high-skill intensive. All firms begin in period
t = 0 by using the old technology and, as the productivity of the new technology slowly improves,
progressively switch to it. Adopting the new technology requires capital and high-skill labor, and
the firm must stop production while the workplace is being reorganized. Below we describe the
agents in greater detail.

3.1

Representative household

The representative household values final consumption goods using a constant relative risk aversion utility function with coefficient γ and discounts future utility at a rate b. The household
consists of a unit mass of atomistic workers, each endowed with one unit of labor. A fraction h
of them are high-skill and the remaining u = 1 − h are low-skill.7 Low-skill workers can either
work in production (up ), in which case they earn a wage wu , or go to school as students (us ) in
order to be trained and eventually become high-skill workers. While in training, low-skill workers
are out of the labor force. High-skill workers are always employed, either in production (hp ) for
a wage wh , or in schools as teachers (hs ). The household also owns the capital stock k and either
uses it to train workers (ks ) or rents it out to firms for production (kp ) at a rate r.
Each period, the abilities of a fraction δh of high-skill workers are rendered obsolete and they
6

Our definition of two different inputs is similar to Autor and Dorn (2013). It distinguishes between two
broad types of tasks implemented by low-skill workers. Routine occupations required to produce intermediates are
relatively easy to automate or offshore (e.g., secretaries, paralegals, laborers). Non-routine manual occupations in
manual services, such as janitors or barbers, are not.
7
Our definition of high skill is related to ability to implement non-routine cognitive tasks and not directly
to education level. Although the two are doubtlessly positively correlated, they are not the same (see JS for a
discussion). Nevertheless, as discussed in Section 4, we use post-secondary education data for our calibration
purposes.

6

become low-skill. The dynamics of the mass of high-skill workers is
h0 = (1 − δh )h + φ(ks , hs , us ), h0 ∈ [0, 1],

(1)

where φ(k, h, u) is the training technology. As in Perli and Sakellaris (1998), we assume that
φ(k, h, u) = sk βs (µs hρs + (1 − µs )uρs )

1−βs
ρs

,

where βs is the capital intensity of the training sector, µs is the high-skill intensity and ρs relates
to the elasticity of substitution between high-skill and low-skill workers (teachers and students).
The household owns the firms and receives their profits Π every period. It also invests in new
2
capital subject to quadratic adjustment costs ϕ(i, k) = χ2 ki − δk k. Capital depreciates at a
rate δk , so that its law of motion is
k 0 = (1 − δk )k + i.

(2)

Denoting by Ω the aggregate state of the economy (which will be fully described later), the
dynamic problem of the household is
W (h, k, Ω) = 0 max
0

h ,k ,hs ,hp ,
us ,up ,ks ,kp

c1−γ
+ b E [W (h0 , k 0 , Ω0 ) |Ω]
1−γ

(3)

subject to the budget constraint
c + i + ϕ(i, k) = wh (Ω) · hp + wu (Ω) · up + r(Ω) · kp + Π(Ω),
and the laws of motion (1) for high-skill workers and (2) for capital and to an aggregate law of
motion Ω0 = G(Ω) for Ω.

3.2
3.2.1

Firms and technologies
Final goods producer

There is a competitive industry that produces the final consumption good by combining intermediates (from both old and new firms) with manual services. We normalize the price of the final

7

good to 1. The static problem of a firm in this industry is
max

yi,n ;yi,o ;yms

ez

h

θ
θ
+ yi,o
yi,n

 θ


+ yms

i 1

− Po (Ω)yi,o − Pn (Ω)yi,n − Ps (Ω)yms ,

(4)

where yi,n is the amount of intermediates produced with the new technology, yi,o is the amount of
intermediates produced with the old technology and yms is the input flow from manual services.8
In the spirit of the endogenous growth models a-la Romer (1990) and Grossman and Helpman
(1991), we assume that the new technology allows intermediate firms to produce a potentially
different variety of goods, implying imperfect substitutability between the two (θ < 1). This
assumption captures the fact that new labor-saving technologies often do not fully replace the
products of old technologies. While digital sound has become much more wide-spread than its
analog counterpart, demand for LPs is still nontrivial, as some music connoisseurs prefer the latter.
Locally-grown organic foods are not fully substituted away by genetically modified products.
Importantly, however, we show in Appendix B that our results generally extend to the case of
perfect substitutability, θ = 1.
Aggregate total factor productivity z follows an AR(1) process such that
z 0 = ρz + σz 0z , where z ∼ iid N (0, 1).

3.2.2

Intermediates producers

There is a unit mass of atomistic intermediates producers. These firms can operate using either
the old or the new technology (and therefore are referred to as old and new firms), which we index
by j = {o, n}. They combine capital k, high-skill labor h and low-skill labor u using the following
production function

α
Fj (Aj , h, u, k) = Aj k β (hµj u1−µj )1−β , j = {o, n}
where β is capital intensity, Aj is total factor productivity, µj captures the skill intensity of the
production function, and α < 1 is the decreasing returns to scale parameter. We use πj to denote
8
We implicitly assume that the share parameters in the CES aggregators in (4) are equal to 1. This is without
loss of generality given our calibration of the relative productivities of the three technologies.

8

the profits of a firm operating technology j so that
πj (Ω) = max Pj (Ω)Fj (Aj , h, u, k) − wh (Ω) · h − wu (Ω) · u − r(Ω) · k,
h,u,k

where Pj (Ω) is price of intermediates of type j.
The old and the new technology differ in two ways. First, the new technology is relatively
more high-skill-intensive than the old one (µn > µo ). Second, their productivities are different
(An 6= Ao ). At t = 0 the new technology is not available (An = 0) and all agents consider its
arrival as a zero probability event. All firms are using the old technology. Over time, technological
progress favors the new technology such that An grows faster than Ao . This induces firms to
switch from the old to the new technology. Since the new technology is more high-skill intensive,
technological adoption increases the demand for high-skill workers, which puts upward pressure
on their wages. As a result, more low-skill workers enter the training process and the overall skill
level in the economy increases. Without loss of generality, in what follows we assume that Ao = 1.
Switching from the old to new technology is costly and risky. A firm that attempts to switch
does not produce during the current period and successfully acquires the new technology with
probability ξ(h, k), ξ ∈ [0, 1), ξhh , ξkk < 0 < ξh , ξk .9 A firm can increase its odds of successful
adoption by hiring more high-skill workers h or by renting more capital k.10 Following Andolfatto
and MacDonald (1998), we assume that
ξ(k, h) = 1 − exp(−ηk βa h1−βa ).

Since a new firm never switches back to the old technology, its value is simply
Vn (Ω) = πn (Ω) + E [M (Ω, Ω0 )Vn (Ω0 )|Ω] ,

(5)

where M (Ω, Ω0 ) is the stochastic discount factor of the representative household.
In contrast, an old firm must decide each period whether to attempt a technology switch or to
9

We assume that the technology adoption has a probabilistic nature to capture, in a tractable way, that the
adoption process might be longer than one period of the model, which is taken to be one year. Brynjolfsson,
Malone, Gurbaxani, and Kambil (1994) and Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003) find that it takes several years for a firm
to fully adopt computer technology.
10
The importance of high-skill labor (e.g., management and IT consultants) for technology adoption is emphasized by Nelson and Phelps (1966) and Greenwood and Yorukoglu (1997).

9

produce with its current technology. As a result, its value is


a
p
Vo (Ω) = max Vo (Ω); Vo (Ω) ,

(6)

where the value of production is
Vop (Ω) = πo (Ω) + E [M (Ω, Ω0 )Vo (Ω0 )|Ω] ,
and the value of attempting to adopt the new technology is
Voa (Ω)



= max − wh (Ω)h − r(Ω)k + ξ(h, k) E [M (Ω, Ω0 )Vn (Ω0 )|Ω]
h,k

0
0
+ (1 − ξ(h, k)) E [M (Ω, Ω )Vo (Ω )|Ω] .

In what follows, we denote the masses of producing new and old firms by mn and mo , respectively.
The remaining fraction, 1 − mn − mo , are in the adoption process and are therefore not producing.

3.2.3

Manual services producer

There is a competitive representative firm producing manual services using low-skill workers. As
in Autor and Dorn (2013), its production function is Fms (u) = Ams u such that it maximizes
max Pms (Ω)Fms (u) − wu (Ω)u,
u

(7)

where Pms (Ω) is the price of services.

3.3

Competitive equilibrium

The set of aggregate state variables Ω contains the aggregate capital stock K, the mass of highskill workers H, the mass of firms producing intermediates which operate the new technology mn ,
the productivity of the new technology An and the productivity of the final goods producer z.
We are ready to define a competitive equilibrium in this economy.

Definition 1 A recursive competitive equilibrium is a collection of value functions for the firms
Vo , Vop ,Vos ,Vn and for the household W , and their associated optimal decisions; a collection of
10

prices wh , wu , r, Po , Pn , Pms and aggregate laws of motion G, such that

1. the value functions and the optimal decisions solve problems 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7;
2. the markets for high-skill and low-skill labor and the market for capital clear:
Hp = mn hn + mo ho + (1 − mn − mo )ha ,
Up = mn un + mo uo + Ums ,
Kp = mn kn + mo ko + (1 − mn − mo )ka ,
H = Hp + Hs ,
U = Up + Us ,
1 = H + U,
K = Kp + Ks ,
where hj , uj , kj , j ∈ {o, n} denote the demand for high-skill labor, low-skill labor and capital,
respectively, of old and new firms; ha , ka denote the demand for high-skill labor and capital
of firms adopting the new technology; Ums is the demand for low-skill labor of the manual
services representative producer; Hs , Us , Ks denote respectively the amounts of high-skill
labor, low-skill labor and capital used in the training process;
3. the law of motion G is consistent with individual decisions.

4

Parametrization

We parametrize the model to match features of the United States economy since the middle of
the 1980s, the beginning of the job polarization era. One period is one year. Below, we explain
how the parameters are picked and Table 1 summarizes their values.
Business cycle shocks
The persistence and the standard deviation of the business cycle shocks, ρz and σz , are set to
match the first order autocorrelation and the volatility of HP-filtered real GDP per capita.11 We
find ρz = 0.85 and σz = 0.025. The persistence value is close to what is normally used in the
11

We match the moments of the initial steady state of the economy with their data counterparts between 1947
and 1985. Recall that the job polarization era, associated in our model with the arrival of the new technology,
started around the mid 1980s, as argued by JS.

11

RBC literature (Cooley and Prescott, 1995). The standard deviation σz is somewhat larger than
usual values. Since, in the model, there is no labor-leisure choice, larger fluctuations in exogenous
productivity are necessary to match aggregate output volatility.12
Parameter
Business cycle shock
Aggregate shock persistence
Volatility of aggregate shock
Preferences
Risk aversion
Time discounting

Value

Source/Target

ρz = 0.85
σz = 0.025
γ = 1.0
b = 0.96

Autocorrelation of output
Volatility of output
Log utility
4% annual interest rate

Production sector
DRS parameter
Share of capital
Share of H in old technology
Share of H in new technology
EoS between new and old goods
EoS between goods and services
Productivity of manual services
Physical capital depreciation
Adjustment cost parameter

α = 0.9
β = 0.3
µo = 0.45
µn = 0.83
1
1−θ = 4
1
1− = 0.167
Ams = 5.91
δk = 0.1
χ = 0.25

Basu and Fernald (1997)
Average labor share
Routine employment in 1985
C-S dispersion in routine wage share
Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003)
Buera, Kaboski, and Rogerson (2015)
Non-routine manual employment in 1985
10% annually
Investment volatility

Schooling/training
Share of capital
EoS between H and U
Share of H in education
Constant
High skill depreciation

βs = 0.1
1
1−ρs = 0.5
µs = 0.0076
s = 0.248
δh = 0.05

Perli and Sakellaris (1998)
Perli and Sakellaris (1998)
Student-teacher ratio
Post-secondary enrollment in 1985
Heckman (1976)

Technology adoption
Capital share
Ease of adoption

βa = 0.3
η = 1.5

Technological progress
Initial impact
Final value
Length

Same as in production sector
Expected adoption lag is 3 years

A0n = 0.1
Ān = 1.5
Tf inish − Tstart = 75

Trends in non-routine cognitive, non-routine
manual and routine employment shares

Table 1: Parametrization.

Preferences
The time discount rate b is set to 0.96, which implies a 4% annual interest rate. We set the risk
aversion γ to 1.
Production sector
The returns to scale parameter for firms producing intermediates is set to α = 0.9, consistent with
12

As discussed in Footnote 18, we solve the model assuming perfect foresight. All shocks are therefore completely
unanticipated and the value of σz does not affect the impulse response functions directly. The value of σz does
however matter for the calibration of other parameters of the model.

12

the estimates of Basu and Fernald (1997). The capital share parameter is β = 0.3, consistent with
aggregate data. The share of high-skill labor in the old production technology is set to µo = 0.45
to match the fraction of routine employment in total employment at the beginning of the job
polarization era. For the new technology, we set µn = 0.83 in order to match the cross-sectional
dispersion in routine wage share in the total wage bill across intermediates producing firms to the
value found by Zhang (2015).13 The elasticity of substitution between the new and old goods in
the production of consumption goods is 4, so that θ = 0.75, close to the estimates of Hsieh and
Klenow (2014) and Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003). The elasticity of substitution
between intermediates and manual services is 0.167, which implies  = −5, in line with estimates
of Buera and Kaboski (2009) and Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2013). Productivity of
manual services is set to Ams = 5.91 in order to match the employment share of non-routine
manual labor in 1985. Physical capital depreciates at the rate of δk = 0.1. The adjustment cost
parameter is set to χ = 0.25 to match the volatility of private investment.
Training
The calibration of the training technology is not straightforward. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no empirical estimates of an aggregate training function that combines low and high-skill
labor together with physical capital. Closest to our paper in this regard, Perli and Sakellaris
(1998) consider an RBC economy with a human capital sector. Their human capital production
technology is similar to ours and we therefore set the capital share to βs = 0.1 and the elasticity
of substitution between high and low-skill labor to

1
1−ρs

= 0.5. The latter value implies that high

and low-skill labor are strong complements in the training sector. We set the relative weight of
high-skill labor µs = 0.0076 in order to roughly match the teacher-student ratio in post-secondary
education.14 The productivity s = 0.248 is set to match the number of low-skill agents in the
training process Us in the initial steady state to the fraction of the civilian noninstitutional
population in post-secondary education in 1985. Finally, the skill depreciation rate is set to
δh = 0.05.15
13

Zhang (2015) sorts firms based on this characteristic and finds that the spread between the highest and the
lowest quantiles is 0.37. In our model, there exists a trivial cross-section of firms among intermediates producers,
with old firms having a higher routine wage share. µn = 0.83 implies that the difference in the routine wage share
between new and old firms is close to 0.37. This value stays almost constant along the transition path.
14
According to the National Center for Education Statistics, this ratio was slightly below 6% in the 1980s and
s
has increased up to 7.6% by the 2010s. We set µr so that in the initial steady state H
Us = 0.07. Due to absence
of reliable data, we ignore other forms of training besides higher education. However, as argued by Perli and
Sakellaris (1998), higher education is responsible for up to 90% of total investment in human capital.
15
In the model δh can be interpreted as the retiring rate, which is currently around 3% in the USA. One can
assume that every period a fraction δh of the total labor force L̄ retires and is immediately replaced by low-skill
workers. At the same time, δh should include the rate of skill obsolescence. A literature estimates the depreciation
rate of human capital. Despite a large variation, δh = 0.05 is close to what is normally found (Heckman, 1976 and

13

Technology adoption
An old firm attempting to adopt the new technology is successful with probability ξ(k, h) =
1 − exp(−ηk βa h1−βa ). As for the earlier production technology, we set the capital intensity to
βa = 0.3. The parameter η > 0 governs the importance of capital and high-skill labor for the
technology adoption. If η is large, then only a few workers and small amounts of capital are
required to get the transition probability close to its maximum level of 1. On the contrary, a
small value of η implies a large demand for high-skill labor and capital among adopting firms.
Thus, smaller η’s are associated with larger adoption costs. We set η = 1.5. Along the transition
path, the resulting probability of successful technology adoption is around 0.33.16
Technological progress
The decision of the firms whether to adopt the new technology or not depends on the gap between
Ao and An . We therefore normalize Ao = 1 and focus on the evolution of An (t) which we
parametrize as follows

An (t) =




0,





A0

 n

+ (Ān −




Ā ,
n

t < Tstart ,
1 − exp
A0n )



Tstart −t
Tf inish −Tstart

1 − exp(−1)


, t ∈ [Tstart , Tf inish ],
t > Tf inish ,

where Tstart denotes the arrival of the new technology (the mid 1980s in our case, corresponding
to the start of the job polarization era in JS). Upon arrival, its productivity is A0n and it increases
over time until it reaches Ān > A0n by at t = Tf inish .
The shape of the An (t) process is inspired by the general purposes technology (GPT) literature
(e.g., Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995). The initial impact of the new technology A0n can be
modest. Later on, a sequence of smaller innovations enhance the productivity of the new technology. As a result, the technology reaches its peak Ān after a (potentially long) lag Tf inish − Tstart .
This is typical of GPTs (Helpman, 1998), including the ICT (Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2005).
In our baseline analysis, we set A0n = 0.1, Ān = 1.5, Tf inish − Tstart = 75.17 These parameters are
Mincer and Ofek, 1982).
16
Consistent with this number, Brynjolfsson, Malone, Gurbaxani, and Kambil (1994) and Brynjolfsson and Hitt
(2003) find that it normally takes several years for a firm to fully adopt computer technology.
17
GPTs are known to become fully productive only after a significant lag. For example, David (1990) argues
that electricity delivered a major economic boost only in the 1920s, 40 years after the first generating station came
into being. Crafts (2004) finds a lag of almost 100 years for the steam related technologies. Using asset prices,
Ward (2015) predicts that it will take around 50 years for the IT to be fully absorbed by the economy.

14

chosen to match the trend in the non-routine cognitive employment share reasonably well. Our
choice of Ān and Tf inish − Tstart is not unique to achieve this. A longer/shorter progress with
a higher/lower terminal value can match the same series. Since the goal of the paper is not to
predict when the growth of An (t) will stop, we do not take a strong stand on precise values of
Ān and Tf inish − Tstart . Importantly, our results on interactions of routine-biased technological
change with business cycles are unchanged if we simultaneously vary Tf inish − Tstart and Ān to
match the observed non-routine cognitive employment share.

5

Numerical results

This section presents our main numerical results.18 Section 5.1 explains the economic forces at
work. In Section 5.1.1, we discuss the transition from the old steady state to the new one created
by the arrival of the new technology. Section 5.1.2 describes the differential impacts of business
cycles on the economy in the pre- and during transition periods. Finally, Section 5.2 investigates
how recessions interact with the adoption of the new technology.

5.1
5.1.1

Economic forces at work
Transition paths

We begin by investigating how the arrival of the new technology affects the economy without
business cycle shocks. The path for the exogenous process An is shown in Figure 3. The initial
shock is small, representing the idea that a new fundamental technology is hardly productive right
after its arrival. As the new technology gradually becomes better, An increases and reaches its
steady-state level after 75 years.
Figure 4 shows how the introduction of the new technology affects the technology acquisition
decision of the firms and the occupational choices decision of the workers. We see that, over
time, firms adopt the new technology as its productivity increases (left panel).19 Since the new
18

Since the competitive economy is efficient, we solve the problem of a social planner that maximizes the welfare
of the representative household. Given the complexity of the economy, we solve the model using a perfect foresight
approach. In particular, we assume that all business cycle shocks are completely unexpected. To verify the validity
of this approach, we have also solved a simpler version of the fully stochastic model globally. The perfect foresight
approach does not matter much for the predictions of the model but significantly decreases the complexity of the
computations. We further address impacts of recession anticipation in Appendix C.
19
In principle, the mass of old firms is never zero in the terminal steady state due to imperfect substitutability

15

Figure 3: The productivity An (t) of the new technology.

technology is relatively more skill-intensive, low-skill workers respond accordingly and start to
train to acquire new skill (right panel). As a result, routine manual employment (low-skill workers
employed in the intermediates production) declines.
Since the two inputs in the final consumption bundle are complementary, when productivity of
intermediates go up, it is optimal also to increase output manual services. Consequently, low-skill
employment in manual services increases gradually (the yellow dot-dashed curve in the right-hand
panel of Figure 4). As we can see, the model is able to generate job polarization and, as we discuss
in more details in Section 5.2, it does a fairly good job in explaining these patterns quantitatively.
(b) Workers

(a) Firms

Figure 4: Transition upon arrival of the new technology.

Figure 5 illustrates other aspects of the technology adoption process. The top-left panel shows
how the production of consumption goods Yf evolves over time. Despite the positive technological
surprise at t = 0, Yf does not respond immediately. For roughly 15 years Yf is almost unchanged
and starts to grow only afterwards. This is due to the GPT nature of the new technology. The
adoption of such a technology requires significant investment in reorganization of the workplace
and in the accumulation of the required production factors.20 This is illustrated by the top-right
between the new and old technologies. It however becomes very close to zero if Ān  Ao . For our choice of
parameter, the mass of old firms in the final steady state is 0.34. The transition is largely finished in 100 periods
after the arrival of the new technology.
20
This is reminiscent of the infamous Solow productivity paradox. Due to large reorganization costs, the new
technology starts to produce a sizable impact on the economy after a long lag. These reorganization costs are
likely to be mismeasured in the GDP calculations to a large extent. See also Brynjolfsson (1993).

16

and bottom panels of Figure 5. The top-right panel shows the ratio of total adoption costs Ya
to final output Yf . We use two measures of Ya . The first measure, Ya,1 , includes capital and
high-skill labor rents in the training and adoption technologies. The second measure, Ya,2 , also
takes into account forgone profits due to firms being in the restructuring stage.
Ya,1 = wh (Ha + Hs ) + r(Ka + Ks ),
Ya,2 = Ya,1 +

∂Yf
(m̄ − mn − mo ).
∂mo

The calibration implies that Ya,1 becomes as high as 2.70% of Yf around year 30. Around the
same time, unmeasured reorganization investment, captured in our model by foregone output due
to old firms going through the adoption process, account for about 0.28% of Yf . Notice that in
the new steady state adoption costs are higher than in the initial steady state (1.43% vs 0.98%).
In the new steady state, the number of high-skill workers is higher and more training is therefore
required.
The bottom panel of Figure 5 further illustrates that the period after the arrival of the technology
is marked by a diversion of resources away from the production of final good. The total mass of
active firms and the overall number of workers in the production sector are shrinking for around
30 years (the yellow dot-dashed and red dashed lines, respectively). High-skill labor is required
for the firms’ reorganization and training of low-skill workers. At the same time, low-skill workers
start to train in larger numbers, which contributes to a drop in the labor force participation (the
blue solid line) and to an increase in school enrollment.21 These two phenomena have been visible
in the U.S. data for the last two decades.
In particular, the model predicts that the labor force participation drops by around 4 p.p. between
1985 and 2017, which is comparable to the number observed in the data (Figure 1, left panel).
The model predicts a steady decline in the labor force participation, while in the data it was
growing until the late 1990s and plummeted afterwards. Since the paper abstracts from several
important aspects (e.g., labor force participation among women, which was increasing until the
late 1990s), it cannot match the whole dynamics of the series.
Over the same period, the model-implied school enrollment ratio increased from 6.9% in 1985 up
to 10.2% in 2014. This is larger than in the data, where the ratio increased from 6.9% up to 8.2%
(Figure 1, right panel). There are two reasons why the model-implied increase is higher. First, in
the model, schooling represents all types of training, including on-the-job training and various job
21

Recall that in the model the only labor force non-participants are low-skill workers in schools Us .

17

(b) Adoption cost to output,

(a) Output, Yf

Ya
Yf

(c) Resource allocation

Figure 5: Top-left panel shows output of the final good sector Yf . Top-right panel shows two measures of adoption
costs Ya (see text) as a fraction of the final good sector production Yf . The bottom panel illustrates how the
allocation of resources vary over time.

training programs, while the data counterpart takes into account only formal higher education.
Second, in the model all workers are either employed or in schools, and a decrease in the number
of employed low-skill workers necessarily leads to an increase in the number of employed high-skill
workers (with a time lag). This approach misses a recent increase in non-employment among lowskill workers (Cortes, Jaimovich, Nekarda, and Siu, 2014 and Cortes, Jaimovich, and Siu, 2016)
that is unrelated to education.22 Demographic changes, such as population aging, might also play
a role (Autor and Dorn, 2009).
In the model, job polarization is driven by two main forces. First, the number of low-skill workers
goes down along the transition path. As a result, the supply of routine workers diminishes.
Second, at each point in time, the propensity of a low-skill worker to take a routine job (i.e., a
job in an old or a new intermediates producing firm) goes down. On the one hand, she is more
likely to attend school. Conditional on not attending school, on the other hand, she is more likely
to do a manual services job. Formally, the routine employment R can be written as
R = U (1 − psc − pnrm ),
where U is the total supply of low-skill workers in the economy, psc and pnrm are the probabilities
that a low-skill worker is in the training process or employed in manual services. Change in
22

Aguiar, Bils, Charles, and Hurst (2017) emphasize the importance of video games and other recreational
computer activities in reducing the labor supply of young males.

18

routine employment ∆R therefore can be decomposed into a composition and a propensity effect,
∆R = ∆U (1 − psc − pnrm ) − U ∆(psc + pnrm ) − ∆U ∆(psc + pnrm ) .
|
{z
} |
{z
} |
{z
}
Composition

Propensity

Interaction

Table 2 presents the decomposition of the overall decline in R between changes in U , psc and pnrm .
R1989

R

50.47%

R2014

38.61%

∆R

−11.86%

Composition

−5.18%

Propensity
Schooling

NRM

−3.96%

−3.49%

Interaction

0.76%

Table 2: Model-implied change in routine employment R between 1989 and 2014. The years are chosen as in
Cortes, Jaimovich, and Siu (2016).

The model implies that both the composition and the propensity effects are important for job
polarization, with the latter force being more significant. This is consistent with the micro evidence
provided by Cortes, Jaimovich, Nekarda, and Siu (2014) and Cortes, Jaimovich, and Siu (2016).

5.1.2

Business cycles

We now compare the responses of the economy to business cycle shocks before and after the
introduction of the new technology. We investigate this question by first shocking the economy
with an adverse z shock along the transition path. We consider a large 2.5 standard deviation z
shock happening 23 years after the new technology arrival. Assuming that the technology arrived
around 1985, the timing and the magnitude of the recession in the model corresponds to the Great
Recession in the data. We then compare the outcome of this first experiment with the response
of the economy to the same shock before the new technology was available.23
The results are shown in Figure 6. We see that before, the arrival of the new technology, the
training of workers is counter-cyclical (the red dashed curves in panels (f)-(h)), as is typical of
RBC models with human capital (e.g., Perli and Sakellaris, 1998). The intuition is straightforward.
During recessions, workers are relatively inefficient in production and the economy therefore uses
these periods to accumulate human capital.
23

The arrival of the new technology changes the structure of the production technology. In general, this can
affect the economy’s response to business cycle shocks by itself. We verify that our results are driven by the
interaction between the adoption decisions and the business cycle rather than by a different production technology.
In Appendix D we consider the impulse response functions to the same z shock in the new steady state when the
economy as fully transitioned. We find that the responses are much closer to their pre-transition counterparts than
to the ones observed along the transition path.

19

This process is however amplified along the transition path for two reasons. In addition to the
mechanism highlighted above, the household understands that, since firms also use the recession
to adopt the new technology, the future demand for high-skill workers will increase. Economic
downturns are therefore a perfect period to train the workforce for this increased demand. The
second reason is that training and adoption are intensive in different factors, namely low and
high-skill labor, which complement each other in the intermediates production. When firms
start to adopt the new technology in recessions, they demand high-skill labor. This decreases the
marginal productivity of low-skill workers who are in production and some of them therefore move
into training. It turns out that the training-adoption complementarity is the main driver behind
the additional investment in human capital that we observe during the recession. As discussed
in Appendix E, when η is high and adoption does not require much resources, counter-cyclical
reallocation of low-skill labor towards training is much closer to the pre-transition case.
In sum, an adverse productivity shock to the final good sector leads to a more active reallocation
of factors during the technological transition than before the arrival of the new technology. In
particular, panels (g) and (h) show that training is now absorbing more resources. Reallocation
towards adopting firms (panel (i)), which is completely absent in the initial steady state, is
responsible for roughly half of the additional drop in the total production employment (panel
(f)).
Panels (j)-(l) of Figure 6 illustrate the production and adoption decisions of the firms. Since the
technology change requires a temporary halt in production, it is more attractive during economic
downturns when profits are lower. Panel (k) shows that the mass of old firms drops by 3.5 p.p.
as a result of the negative z shock. This drop leads to a lagged increase in the mass of firms
operating the new technology, as shown in panel (j).
The counter-cyclical adoption and training incentives are mitigated by the consumption smoothing
motives of the representative household. However, this effect turns out to be relatively small for
conventional values of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
As a result of the increased technological adoption and additional workers training triggered by the
recession, the drops in output, consumption and investment are all significantly more pronounced
during the technological transition than before the arrival of the technology (panels (b)-(d) in
Figure 6).24
24
In Appendix F we verify that recessions during technological transitions are still deeper, even after adjusting
the output measure for training and adoption costs.

20

(a) Productivity, z

(b) Output, Yf

(d) Investment, I

(e) Capital, K

(g) L-S in training, Us

(h) H-S in training, Hs

(i) H-S in adoption, Ha

(j) New firms, mn

(k) Old firms, mo

(l) Active firms, mn + mo

(c) Consumption, C

(f) Production empl, Hp + Up

Figure 6: IRFs to a negative z shock. Graphs are plotted relative to no z-shock scenario.

5.2

Routine-biased technological change and the Great Recession

We now investigate whether the model can rationalize both the long-run trend in the employment
shares induced by routine-biased technological change and the importance of recessions in generating job polarization. We use the same definitions and data sources as JS. Particularly, non-routine
cognitive/non-routine manual/routine jobs in their definition correspond to high-skill/low-skill
manual services/low-skill intermediates jobs in the model. Figure 7 shows the results.
We consider the impact of a negative 2.5 standard deviation z shock 23 years after the technology
arrival for the model-implied employment shares. Again, given our timing, this shock corresponds

21

(a) Non-routine cognitive employment share

(b) Non-routine manual employment share

(c) Routine employment share

Figure 7: Employment shares by type of jobs. Definitions are from JS. Smooth blue lines show the series adjusted
for seasonality with a 13-term Henderson filter (Henderson, 1916).

to the Great Recession in the data.25 The top panel of the figure shows the employment share of
high-skill (model) versus non-routine cognitive (data) workers. Since the technological progress favors the high-skill-intensive technology, the corresponding employment share is gradually growing.
The recession induces more active training, resulting in an upward shift of the curve. Similarly,
the employment share of low-skill workers in intermediates producing firms (bottom panel) is
declining and discontinuously jumps down during the downturn. Finally, low-skill services employment share (middle panel) stays almost constant for the first 15 years. Since intermediates
25

The size of the shock is picked in order to match an almost 10% drop in output during the Great Recession
(Fajgelbaum, Schaal, and Taschereau-Dumouchel, 2017).

22

and manual services are strong complements, during the initial transition stage, when the intermediates output is barely changed, it is optimal not to increase the manual services output as
well. Later on, low-skill employment starts to grow.26
Recent empirical evidence (e.g., JS and Hershbein and Kahn, 2016) emphasizes the acceleration
of the routine employment loss during the Great Recession. Figure 8 takes a closer look at this
phenomenon. In the data, the routine employment share dropped by 1.90 p.p. between 2007Q4
and 2008Q4.27 Thus, 15% of the overall drop observed between January of 1985 and April of 2017
happened during only 1 year, or 3% of the total time span. In the model, a 2.5 standard deviation
negative z shock implies a drop of 1.43 p.p., or nearly 75% of what is observed in the data. In the
absence of the z shock, the model-implied routine employment share would have declined by only
0.61 p.p. because of the gradual transition between the steady states. The model is therefore able
to replicate a substantial fraction of the routine employment loss during the Great Recession.
Routine employment share: Impact of the Great Recession

Figure 8: Routine employment share (defined as in JS) around the Great Recession. Red dashed line shows
the model-implied path holding z at the steady state level. The smooth blue line shows the series adjusted for
seasonality with a 13-term Henderson filter (Henderson, 1916).

Overall, Figures 7 and 8 show that the model can match several important aspects of the job
polarization phenomenon. First, the model is able to replicate the steady decline, since at least
the start of the job polarization era, of the fraction of routine workers while, at the same time,
replicating the increase in both non-routine cognitive and manual jobs. To do so, the model relies
only on changes in the An process and on the complementarity between intermediates and manual
services. Second, the model is also able to generate the acceleration of the job polarization process
26
The model does not match the increase of the non-routine manual employment share during the Great Recession. A negative TFP surprise induces reallocation of high-skill workers towards adoption and teaching. As a
result, the intermediates production drops. Due to complementarity between intermediates and manual services,
the marginal productivity of low-skill manual service workers declines as well and the planner therefore moves
them to training.
27
We consider 1 year after the start of the Great Recession, since in our model we approximate the Great
Recession by 1 large negative z shock.

23

during recessions and, specifically, during the Great Recession. The counter-cyclical restructuring
incentives are responsible for these rapid movements during economic downturns.

6

Concluding remarks

In this paper, we analyze the interaction between routine-biased technological change and business
cycles. Since economic downturns are periods of low opportunity costs, they are used by firms
to optimize their production technology and by workers to adjust their skill set to a changing
economic environment. Restructuring incentives are enhanced during technological transitions,
associated with higher than usual demand for new skills. As a result, recessions during transitions
are marked by a sizable scarcity of factors in the final good production. At the same time, routinebiased technological change is accelerated, consistent with the recent empirical evidence.
The paper provides a theoretical rationale for two major features of job polarization. First, the
fraction of routine workers has been declining since at least the mid 1980s, while both non-routine
cognitive and non-routine manual employment shares have been growing. Second, job polarization
is concentrated in recessions. In our model, a gradual technology adoption generates the trend,
while large downturns speed up the transition due to counter-cyclical restructuring incentives.
The model can be extended along several important directions. First, we assume that lowskill workers can switch between routine and non-routine manual jobs without any frictions.
Although costs of training for a manual services job are presumably much smaller than for a
non-routine cognitive one, they are not zero. A more detailed modelling of occupation choice
might help to explain an increase in the non-routine manual employment share during the Great
Recession. Particularly, time to train for a manual services job is likely to make this process
counter-cyclical. A model implied non-routine manual employment share should exhibit an uptick
during downturns.
Furthermore, as discussed in Section 5.1.1, one could allow workers to permanently stay out
of labor force, for example, by introducing a home production sector. It would be interesting
to investigate, both theoretically and empirically, how routine-biased technological change and
recessions along the transition path affect labor adjustments along this margin. Another potential
direction would be to enrich the model with a labor-leisure choice. If the value of leisure is affected
by new technologies, as suggested by Aguiar, Bils, Charles, and Hurst (2017), then the model
could rationalize declining labor force participation, as well as job polarization.
24

References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alternative Theory
and Some Evidence”, American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (5), 1259–1278.
Aghion, Philippe and Gilles Saint-Paul, “Virtues of Bad Times: Interaction Between Productivity Growth and Economic Fluctuations”, Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1998, 2, 322–344.
Aguiar, Mark, Marl Bils, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Erik Hurst, “Leisure Luxuries and
the Labor Supply of Young Men”, Working Paper, 2017.
Aguirregabiria, Victor and Cesar Alonso-Borrego, “Occupational Structure, Technological
Innovation, and Reorganization of Production”, Labour Economics, 2001, 8 (1), 43–73.
Andolfatto, David and Glenn M. MacDonald, “Technology Diffusion and Aggregate Dynamics”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 1998, 1 (2), 338–370.
Anghel, Brindusa, Sara De la Rica, and Aitor Lacuesta, “The Impact of the Great Recession
on Employment Polarization in Spain”, SERIEs, 2014, 5, 143–171.
Autor, David H. and David Dorn, “This Job is “Getting Old”: Measuring Changes in Job
Opportunities Using Occupational Age Structure”, American Economic Review: Papers &
Proceedings, 2009, 99 (2), 45–51.
Autor, David H. and David Dorn, “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization
of the US Labor Market”, The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1553–1597.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane, “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003,
118 (4), 1279–1333.
Barr, Andrew and Sarah Turner, “Out of Work and Into School: Labor Market Policies
and College Enrollment during the Great Recession”, Journal of Public Economics, 2015, 124,
63–73.
Basu, Susanto and John G. Fernald, “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
Implications”, Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105 (2), 249–283.
Berger, David, “Countercyclical Restructuring and Jobless Recoveries”, Working Paper, 2012.

25

Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum,
“Plants and Productivity in International Trade”, The American Economic Review, 2003,
93 (4), 1268–1290.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Manuel Trajtenberg, “General Purpose Technologies ‘Engines
of Growth’ ?”, Journal of Econometrics, 1995, 65, 83–108.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, “The Productivity Paradox of Information Technology”, Communications
of the ACM, 1993, 36 (12), 66–77.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin M. Hitt, “Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence”,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (4), 793–808.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Thomas W. Malone, Vijay Gurbaxani, and Ajit Kambil, “Does
Information Technology Lead to Smaller Firms?”, Management Science, 1994, 40 (12), 1628–
1644.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee, Race Against The Machine: How The Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and The Economy, Brynjolfsson and McAfee .
Buera, Francisco J. and Joseph P. Kaboski, “Can Traditional Theories of Structural Change
Fit the Data?”, Journal of European Economic Association, 2009, 7 (2/3), 469–477.
Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Richard Rogerson, “Skill Biased Structural
Change”, Working Paper, 2015.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, “Explaining Investment Dynamics in
U.S. Manufacturing: A Generalized (S,s) Approach”, Econometrica, 1999, 67 (4), 783–826.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Mohamad L. Hammour, “The Cleansing Effect of Recessions”,
American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (5), 1350–1368.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew Notowidigdo, “Housing Booms and
Busts, Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendence”, Working Paper, 2015.
Cooley, Thomas F. and Edward C. Prescott, “Economic Growth and Business Cycles”, in
“Frontiers of Business Cycle Research”, 1995.
Cooper, Russell and John Haltiwanger, “The Aggregate Implications of Machine Replacement: Theory and Evidence”, American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (3), 360–382.
26

Cortes, Guido Matias, Nir Jaimovich, Christopher J. Nekarda, and Henry E. Siu, “The
Micro and Macro of Disappearing Routine Jobs: A Flows Approach”, Working Paper, 2014.
Cortes, Guido Matias, Nir Jaimovich, and Henry E. Siu, “Disappearing Routine Jobs:
Who, How, and Why?”, Working Paper, 2016.
Crafts, Nicholas, “Steam as a General Purpose Technology: A Growth Accounting”, The Economic Journal, 2004, 114 (495), 338–351.
David, Paul A., “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern
Productivity Paradox”, The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 1990, 80 (2),
355–361.
DeJong, David N. and Beth F. Ingram, “The Cyclical Behavior of Skill Acquisition”, Review
of Economic Dynamics, 2001, 4, 536–561.
Dellas, Harris and Plutarchos Sakellaris, “On the Cyclicality of Schooling: Theory and
Evidence”, Oxford Economic Papers, 2003, 55 (1), 148–172.
Eden, Maya and Paul Gaggl, “On the Welfare Implications of Automation”, Working Paper,
2016.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel, “Uncertainty Traps”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1641–1692.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity”,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113 (3), 693–732.
Goos, Maarten and Alan Manning, “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work
in Britain”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2007, 89 (1), 118–133.
Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons, “Explaining Job Polarization:
Routine-Biased Technological Change and Offshoring”, The American Economic Review, 2014,
104 (8), 2509–2526.
Greenwood, Jeremy and Mehmet Yorukoglu, “1974”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
on Public Policy, 1997, 46, 49–95.
Griliches, Zvi, “Capital-Skill Complementarity”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1969,
51 (4), 465–468.

27

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, “Quality Ladders and Product Cycles”, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106 (2), 557–586.
Hall, Robert E., “Recessions as Reorganizations”, NBER Macro Annual Conference, 1991.
Heckman, James J., “A Life-Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and Consumption”, Journal
of Political Economy, 1976, 84 (4), S11–S44.
Heckman, James J, Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber, “Explaining Rising Wage
Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with
Heterogeneous Agents”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 1998, 1, 1–58.
Helpman, Elhanan, General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, MIT Press 1998.
Henderson, Robert, “Note on Graduation by Adjusted Average”, Transactions of the Actuarial
Society of America, 1916, 17, 43–48.
Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and Akos Valentinyi, “Growth and Structural
Transformation”, Working Paper, 2013.
Hershbein, Brad and Lisa B. Kahn, “Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Technological
Change?”, Working Paper, 2016.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “The Life-Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico”, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1035–1084.
Jaimovich, Nir and Henry E. Siu, “Job Polarization and Jobless Recoveries”, Working Paper,
2015.
Jovanovic, Boyan and Glenn M. Macdonald, “Competitive Diffusion”, Journal of Political
Economy, 1994, 102 (1), 24–52.
Jovanovic, Boyan and Peter L. Rousseau, “General Purpose Technologies”, in “Handbook
of Economic Growth”, 2005.
Koenders, Kathryn and Richard Rogerson, “Organizational Dynamics Over the Business
Cycle: A View on Jobless Recoveries”, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis Review, 2005, 87 (4),
555–579.
Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante,
“Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis”, Econometrica,
2000, 68 (5), 1029–1053.
28

Mincer, Jacob and Haim Ofek, “Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation and Restoration of
Human Capital”, The Journal of Human Resources, 1982, 17 (1), 3–24.
Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps, “Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion,
and Economic Growth”, The American Economic Review, 1966, 56 (1), 69–75.
Perli, Roberto and Plutarchos Sakellaris, “Human Capital Formation and Business Cycle
Persistence”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 1998, 42 (1), 67–92.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change”, Journal of Political Economy, 1990,
98 (5), S71–S102.
Schumpeter, Joseph A., Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, New York: Harper & Row
1934.
van Rens, Thijs, “Organizational Capital and Employment Fluctuations”, Working Paper, 2004.
Ward, Colin, “Is the IT Revolution Over? An Asset Pricing View”, Working Paper, 2015.
Zhang, Miao Ben, “Labor-Technology Substitution: Implications for Asset Pricing”, Working
Paper, 2015.

29

Appendix

A

Industrial robots

Figure A1 shows the worldwide shipment of industrial robots. After a temporary drop in 2009, the
series recovered quickly and has been growing at a faster rate afterwards. The model interprets
this data as an increase in technology adoption in the aftermath of the recession.
Worldwide shipment of industrial robots

Figure A1: Data source: International Federation of Robotics.

B

Substitutability between new and old technologies

In the main text, we assume that the new and old technologies produce imperfectly substitutable
varieties, with elasticity of substitution of

1
1−θ

= 4. In this Appendix, we consider the case of

perfect substitutability between the varieties so that θ = 1. If we kept all other parameters besides
θ at the same values, the transition between the technologies would be much more concentrated
in time. When new and old intermediates are perfect substitutes, it is optimal for firms to adopt
the new technology only when its productivity An becomes very close to Ao . On the other hand,
when An grows slightly above Ao , old firms massively adopt the new technology. In order to
generate gradual transition paths, we have to either significantly increase the adoption costs or
to reparametrize the An (t) process. Since the model already features a nontrivial adoption lag of
several years, we take the second approach.
We set A0n = 1.0015 and Ān = 1.0184 and keep Tf inish − Tstart = 75 years. The left column of
Figure A2 depicts the employment shares under this parametrization. The model can still match
the non-routine cognitive and routine employment shares, it now fails to deliver a pronounced
30

Only An growing

An and Ao growing

(a1) Non-routine cognitive employment share

(a2) Non-routine cognitive employment share

(b1) Non-routine manual employment share

(b2) Non-routine manual employment share

(c1) Routine employment share

(c2) Routine employment share

Figure A2: Employment shares by type of jobs: θ = 1. The left column shows the series when only An grows. The
right column shows the series when both An and Ao grow, with the former one at a faster pace.

increase in the non-routine manual employment share however. In the main text, employment
in manual services grows since a change in An leads to a significant boost in the production of
intermediates. Since the two inputs are strong complements in the final consumption bundle,
low-skill labor optimally flows to manual services. When θ = 1, only a small increment in An is
required to initiate the transition. Intermediates output barely changes. As a result, employment
in manual services goes up only marginally.
In order to generate an increase in the non-routine manual employment share, the model can be
extended by assuming that the productivity of the old technology also grows, although at a slower
pace then the productivity of the new technology. To do so we assume that there is a common
term Ai (t) to both processes so that the productivity of the old and new technology are Ai (t) and
Ai (t)An (t). We keep the An (t) process the same as before and parametrize the Ai (t) process in

31

the same spirit,

Ai (t) =




1,






t < Tstart ,
1 − exp

1 + (Āi − 1)






Ā ,
i



Tstart −t
Tf inish −Tstart



1 − exp(−1)

, t ∈ [Tstart , Tf inish ],
t > Tf inish .

We set Āi = 1.23.
The employment shares are depicted in the right column of Figure A2. Not surprisingly, now the
model can generate an increase in the non-routine manual employment share. The dynamics of
the non-routine cognitive and routine employment shares move downwards slightly. When overall
productivity of intermediates Ai goes up, low-skill labor is reallocated towards manual services.
Fewer low-skill workers are employed in intermediates, which pushes down the routine employment
share. Since low and high-skill labor are complements in the intermediates production, it is
optimal to decrease the number of high-skill workers as well. As a result, the non-routine cognitive
employment share moves downwards.
(a) Productivity, z

(b) Output, Yf

(c) Production empl, Hp + Up

(d) L-S in training, Us

(e) H-S in adoption, Ha

(f) New firms, mn

Figure A3: IRFs to a negative z shock. Graphs are plotted relative to no z shock scenarios.

The interaction of the technological transition with recessions does not change qualitatively when
θ = 1. Figure A3 shows the impulse response functions to the same z shock for θ = 0.75 (benchmark) and θ = 1. With perfect substitutability, downturns induce more technology adoption.
When θ = 1, new and old firms produce the same good and profits of old firms does not depend
much on the mass of producing old firms mo . In case of imperfect substitutability, old firms
produce their own variety. When some of them halt their production and try to adopt the new
32

technology, profits of the remaining old firms increase substantially. Accelerated adoption for
θ = 1 requires additional high-skill workers and capital. Since high and low-skill labor are complements in the production process, more low-skill workers choose to train. As a result, output
drops by 12% on impact (with θ = 0.75 the drop is about 10% for the same shock).

C

Expectations and business cycles

In the main text, we analyze the impact of unanticipated z shocks on the economy. Since reorganization is counter-cyclical in our model, the anticipation of recessions can affect the agents’
behavior in an important way. Being aware of a possible downturn in the future, old firms are
likely to postpone technology adoption and low-skill workers to defer training until bad times.
In order to investigate the importance of this anticipation channel, we do the following exercise.
Assume that in 2003, 5 years before the Great Recession, all agents in the economy learn that a
regular recession will happen in 2008. Particularly, z is going to drop by 0.55 standard deviations
with certainty, which will lead to a 2% drop in output, an average GDP decline for postwar US
recessions. In 2008, recession indeed happens; however, it is much worse than expected (z drops
by 2.5 standard deviations instead).
(a) Productivity, z

(b) Output, Yf

(c) Production empl, Hp + Up

(d) L-S in training, Us

(e) H-S in adoption, Ha

(f) New firms, mn

Figure A4: IRFs to a negative z shock. Graphs are plotted relative to no z shock scenarios. In case of expected
shocks, in period -5 the agents learn that at period 0 a regular recession is going to happen

Figure A4 compares the results of this exercise with the benchmark case when shocks are completely unanticipated. In response to a negative news shock, the economy experiences a mild

33

boom.1 A future recession incentivizes old firms to postpone technology adoption until then.
Consistently, low-skill workers decrease school attainment. Reorganization needs are therefore
elevated by the time of a negative z surprise. When a worse than expected recession happens,
training and adoption go up to a larger extent than in the benchmark case. Output declines more.
Anticipation of recessions amplifies counter-criticality of training and technology adoption. However, the results of our exercise suggest that this channel plays a secondary role. Moreover, we
make an extreme assumption that all agents in the economy know about a future negative z shock
with certainty. The exercise is therefore likely to provide an upper bound on the strength of the
anticipation effect.

D

Business cycles in the new steady state
(a) Productivity, z

(b) Output, Yf

(c) Production empl, Hp + Up

(d) L-S in training, Us

(e) H-S in adoption, Ha

(f) New firms, mn

Figure A5: IRFs to a negative z shock. Graphs are plotted relative to no z shock scenarios.

In the model, the arrival of the new technology is associated with a change in the production
function. This can affect the economy’s responses to business cycle shocks by itself. In this
Appendix, we compare the impulse responses to the same 2.5 standard deviation negative z shock
in three scenarios. In the first case, the economy is the initial steady state; in the second case,
the economy is in transition; in the third case, the economy is in the new steady state.2 The
results are given in Figure A5. When the economy is in a steady state (either new or old), the
1

As in Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009), investment adjustment costs might overturn this result and generate a
recession in response to a negative news shock.
2
For the latter case, we assume that the technology is fully absorbed, so the masses of new and old firms are
constant.

34

only amplification mechanism is the reallocation of labor from production to training. It turns
out that this channel is weaker in the new steady state than in the old one. The economy in
transition is marked by an other reallocation dimension (towards the adoption process), which
generates a substantial additional drop in the final good production.

E

Training-adoption complementarity

In the model, the training of the workers and the adoption of the new technology tend to happen
simultaneously. Besides both being attractive in periods of low opportunity costs, and hence
counter-cyclical, these activities might comove for two additional reasons. First, technology adoption leads to elevated demand for high skill since the new technology is skill-intensive, while
training increases the supply of high-skill workers. Second, the adoption process is intensive
in high-skill labor, while training mainly requires students, i.e. low-skill workers. Since the two
types of labor are complements in the intermediates production, it is optimal to reallocate low-skill
workers to training and high-skill workers to adoption synchronously.
(a) Productivity, z

(b) Output, Yf

(c) Production empl, Hp + Up

(d) L-S in training, Us

(e) H-S in adoption, Ha

(f) New firms, mn

Figure A6: IRFs to a negative z shock. Graphs are plotted relative to no z shock scenarios.

In order to investigate the quantitative importance of these two mechanisms, we vary the ease
of adoption of the technology (parameter η).3 The results, shown in Figure A6, suggest that the
second channel plays a dominant role. For a small η = 0.1, technological change requires a lot
of resources. In recessions, many high-skill workers are needed to satisfy the elevated demand
by adopting firms. For such a low η, the mass of new firms responds only slightly to the shock.
3

For all three values of η we reparametrize the An (t) process to match the dynamics of the employment shares.

35

Nevertheless, the reallocation of low-skill labor towards training is substantial. On the contrary,
when η = 10, adoption requires only a few high-skill workers. As a result, the mass of new firms
increases substantially in this case. However, investment in training is smaller than for η = 1.5
and η = 10.
We conclude that two main forces contribute to the additional amplification of negative z shocks
during the technological transition. Being counter-cyclical, adoption induces reallocation of highskill labor. This further depresses the marginal productivity of low-skill workers in production,
given that the two types of labor complement each other there. Low-skill labor therefore transitions into training.

F

Different output measures
(a) Yf

(b) Yadj,1

(c) Yadj,2

Figure A7: Impact of a negative z shock on output, measured in three different ways.

Our main measure of output is the the total production of the final good product Yf . In this
Appendix, we adjust this measure by taking into account the elevated reorganization and training
costs due to the reallocation of high-skill labor and capital towards training and adoption,
Yadj,1 = Yf + wh Hs + rKs ,
Yadj,2 = Yf + wh (Ha + Hs ) + r(Ka + Ks ),
and repeat the same exercise as in Section 5.1.2.4 The results are given in Figure A7.
The same z shock always leads to a larger drop in aggregate output for the economy in transition,
even if the output measure is adjusted for adoption and training. The remaining difference is due
to two channels. First, adoption requires not only high-skill labor and capital but also the mass of
4

It is not clear whether output adjusted in this way makes the model closer to reality. In the data investment
in human and organizational capital might be largely mismeasured, as pointed out by, for example, Brynjolfsson
and McAfee (2014).

36

firms itself as a production factor, so ideally output measures should be adjusted for that as well.
Second, training adjustment do not account for elevated opportunity costs of low-skill students.

37

References: Appendix
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and
Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies, WW Norton & Company 2014.
Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo, “Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?”,
The American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1097–1118.

38

