                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




IS THERE A ROLE FOR PATENTS IN THE FINANCING OF NEW INNOVATIVE FIRMS?

                                     Bronwyn H. Hall

                                    Working Paper 24370
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w24370


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2018, revised July 2018




The current version of the paper has benefitted from comments by the Editor (Franco Malerba)
and two anonymous referees. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Bronwyn H. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Is There a Role for Patents in the Financing of New Innovative Firms?
Bronwyn H. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 24370
March 2018, Revised July 2018
JEL No. G24,G32,L26,O34

                                           ABSTRACT

It is argued by many that one of the benefits of the patent system is that it creates a property right
to invention that enables firms to obtain financing for the development of that invention. In this
paper, I review the reasons why ownership of knowledge assets might be useful in attracting
finance and then survey the empirical evidence on patent ownership and its impact on the ability
of firms to obtain further financing at different stages of their development, both starting up and
after becoming established. Studies that attempt to separately identify the role of patent rights and
the underlying quality of the associated innovation(s) will be emphasized, although these are
rather rare.


Bronwyn H. Hall
University of California at Berkeley
123 Tamalpais Road
Berkeley, CA 94708
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                            May 2018



1. Introduction
The question of whether patents are effective as inducements to innovative activity
goes back to at least Fritz Machlup’s and Edith Penrose’s well known comments on
the patent system in the 1950s:

       “If national patent laws did not exist, it would be difficult to make a
       conclusive case for introducing them; but the fact that they do exist
       shifts the burden of proof and it is equally difficult to make a really
       conclusive case for abolishing them.” (Penrose 1951)

       “If we did not have a patent system, it would be irresponsible, on the
       basis of our present knowledge of its economic consequences, to
       recommend instituting one. But since we have had a patent system for
       a long time, it would be irresponsible, on the basis of our present
       knowledge, to recommend abolishing it.” (Machlup 1958)

It is probably safe to say that our overall assessment of the costs and benefits of the
patent system today has not advanced much beyond these statements, although we
have much greater knowledge about the details of its operation and the sectors in
which it is more or less beneficial for innovation.1

In addition to the general argument in favor of patents as a way to incentivize
innovation by allowing patent owners to exclude those who free‐ride on their
investments, an additional related argument is that patents are especially useful for
new entrepreneurial firms, which have few assets and difficulty signaling their
potential to investors. In this article, I survey the limited empirical evidence on the
effectiveness of patents in this role, and then discuss the possible negative aspects of
this use of patents.

Entrepreneurs are rarely wealthy enough to finance the investment in their ideas
that would be necessary to bring them to the market. Therefore they are compelled
to turn to external sources of finance, be they angel investors, venture capitalists,
banks, or even private equity. Traditionally, the cost of funds for investment in a
startup or other new venture could be reduced by the availability of some salvage
value for the asset thus created. However, unlike the case of tangible investment,
investment in new ideas and inventions does not automatically create property
rights for the resulting assets in most cases. In addition, such intangible assets may
be harder for investors to evaluate, especially ex ante. Hall (2002, 2009) has a fuller
discussion of these issues.



                                           2
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                        May 2018



Many have pointed out that patents, by creating property rights to the knowledge
assets thus created, may be able to lower the cost of finance for investment in ideas.
There are at least three distinct ways that obtaining a patent (or patents) on an
invention could reduce the cost of financing its development:

   1. Patents can improve the expected profitability of the project, given their role
      in increasing the appropriability of the returns.
   2. Patents, especially if granted, provide an external signal about the quality of
      the entrepreneur’s invention(s).
   3. A patent or patents on the idea or knowledge asset may increase the salvage
      value of an enterprise if it fails and exits. Although failure raises some
      question about the value of the associated patents, there is plenty of evidence
      on failing firms that attempt to exploit their patent portfolio when they exit a
      line of business (some recent examples: Ericsson, Motorola, and Nokia)

Hottenrott et al. (2015) provide some support to this idea as it relates to established
firms. Using a sample of approximately 1000 Flemish firms, they find that the
ownership of patents reduces the sensitivity of R&D investment to working capital
for small and medium‐sized enterprises (SMEs), but not for large ones (more than
50 employees). They also find that the citations to these patents have no impact on
the relationship, which suggests that patents are important by themselves rather
than as proxies for the underlying quality of the invention. However, the number of
patents with significant citations is very small, so the latter finding is not very
robust.

In this paper I focus on firms for which patents might be expected to be most salient:
new entrepreneurial firms in high to medium technology sectors. Economists and
legal scholars have recently begun to look at the relationship between patenting,
obtaining funding (especially venture capital (VC) funding) and subsequent firm
outcomes empirically.2 Studying these questions is challenging both because the
data frequently has to be hand‐collected, and also because the same identification
problem that affects studies of patent valuation also affects these studies. That is,
when a positive effect of patenting is observed, without careful control for the
underlying quality of the invention, we cannot tell whether the effect is due to
invention quality or the patent right itself (Hottenrott et al. 2015; Hoenig and
Henkel 2015).3 I discuss this issue further after presenting the existing research.

The paper begins with a brief overview of the theory behind the use of patents or
other IP to help in financing startups. This is followed by the two main sections that


                                           3
B. H. Hall                       Patents and financing                          May 2018



review the empirical literature on the subject: 1) the role of patents in the financing
and performance of technology startups; 2) the functioning of the market that
determines the salvage value of patented technology in the case of firm failure or
exit from a line of business. The final section concludes with a discussion of what
has been learned and some suggestions for further research.


2. Theoretical considerations
Suppose an inventor possesses an idea with the potential to earn profits π>0.
However there is uncertainty about success, which is characterized as a simple
probability α, 0<α<1, such that E[V] = απ, where V is the value of the project to the
potential investor. If the invention is patented before further development, the
investor can retrieve a salvage value 0<S<π in the case of failure, by selling or
enforcing the patent.4 In this case, E[V] = απ + (1‐α)S > απ. So one obvious reason
that an investor might prefer a patented idea to a similar unpatented idea is the
possibility of limiting losses in case of failure.

Another reason why patenting might be valuable is that it increases profitability
because it makes the returns to commercialization of the idea easier to appropriate,
leading to a π’=π+x>π. Now E[V] = απ + αx + (1‐α)S, which is larger than απ for two
reasons: αx from increased profitability and (1‐α)S from the salvage value.

Now assume that the inventor/entrepreneur cannot fully inform the investor of the
quality of his idea or his own quality. In this case he may patent in order to signal
quality (Spence 1973) as well as for the usual appropriability and salvage value
reasons. Spence considers a market with numerous potential employees (in this
case, entrepreneurs) of varying productivity who do not enter the market very
often, so reputation‐building is not worthwhile.5 The potential employer (venture
capitalist) cannot discern the quality of their projects accurately, although the
entrepreneurs are better informed. He shows that in this case, if there is a signal
whose acquisition cost is negatively correlated with quality or productivity, a
number of equilibria may result. One of these equilibria involves high quality types
obtaining the signal, while low quality types will find it too costly to obtain. This
allows the high quality types to “signal” their quality to the VCs and obtain financing.

Cho and Kreps (1987) show that the so‐called “separating” equilibrium of this game
is preferred under their intuitive criterion and the criteria of Riley (1979) and Banks
and Sobel (1987). Applying this model here requires assuming that obtaining
patent(s) is only feasible if the project is of a sufficiently high technical quality. Then


                                            4
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                        May 2018



the presence of patent filings acts as a signal to the potential investor of the
technical quality of the idea. Empirically, of course, there will be many other factors
that influence the investor decision, so the prediction is that among a range of
startups and controlling for the project and entrepreneur characteristics, those with
patent applications or grants will be more likely to obtain external finance, in
particular, venture finance.

Conti et al. (2013) present a variation of Spence’s (1974) “productive” signaling
model that is specific to the patent‐financing setting. In this context, “productive”
signaling refers to the idea that the patent has two functions: as a pure signal of
invention quality and also to increase the returns obtained from the invention
(make it appropriable). These authors assume that the cost of patenting to the
entrepreneur is inversely related to invention quality and that patents confer
appropriability (and are therefore productive). The potential external investor both
enhances the profitability of the invention and takes a share of the profits. They
show that there is a unique separating, signaling equilibrium where quality
signaling increases in the number of patents, and that it is optimal for the
entrepreneur to file for more patents than in the symmetric information case. In
addition, they show that if inventors and investors are heterogeneous in quality, the
signaling equilibrium will match them positively. That is, high quality inventions
will be funded by investors that have more to contribute to the value of the
entrepreneurial firm.


3. Empirical evidence on patents, startup financing, and
   performance
This section of the paper explores the empirical evidence on three questions related
to the role of patent in the success or failure of new innovative firms: 1) Does
patenting help them to obtain financing?; 2) In turn, does financing (specifically
venture capital funds) help them to obtain patents?; and 3) Are patents associated
with better performance? Tables A‐1 to A‐3 in the appendix summarize the
empirical papers I review. Table A‐1 contains papers that relate patenting to
financing, whereas Table A‐2 contains papers that relate VC financing to prior
patenting. One reason for including both sets of papers in this review is to highlight
the undoubted empirical fact that patenting and VC funding are correlated when one
looks across firms. Almost all of these papers find positive correlation in the cross
section. To unravel any causal relationship between the two requires a more
nuanced examination of the data. Most authors rely on the timing of the activity:



                                           5
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                        May 2018



that is, whether patent filings precede funding rounds or follow them. A few attempt
to use more sophisticated controls. Table A‐3 contains the few papers that look at
subsequent firm growth and survival to financing for new or small innovative firms.

The research described in these papers covers both the United States and Europe as
well as a range of technology sectors: software, semiconductors, biotechnology,
nanotechnology, and the internet. The years covered are roughly 1985 to the near
present, during a period when the patent system and patenting strategy in some of
the sectors, notably software and the internet, evolved (Fink et al. 2016; Hall 2005;
Hall and MacGarvie 2010). The firm samples are drawn in a variety of ways. Some
consist only of patenters, but the majority includes non‐patenting firms, while some
contain only VC‐backed firms, and others include firms that do not obtain VC
funding as well. Thus noncomparability of the results sometimes makes it difficult to
draw overall conclusions.

Looking across all the studies, the most striking result at first glance is how few of
the firms apply for patents, even in these relatively technology‐intensive sectors.6
Table 1 shows the shares of patenting firms for the studies which contained this
information. When looking at the table, it is important to keep in mind that the
samples on which the shares are based are very non‐comparable: some are for VC‐
back firms only, some for all firms, some for grants and the remainder for
applications, and so forth. The table is provided merely to give a broad indication of
the patenting activity in the studies considered here. With the exception of the
Israeli firms studied by Greenberg (2013) and Conti et al. (2013), in no case do more
than half the firms have at least one patent application during the period of study.
Also shown in the table is the fact that firms in life science and biotechnology areas
are somewhat more likely to patent than those in computer technology, especially
software, as considerable survey evidence has shown (Graham et al. 2009; Cohen et
al. 2000). Given the evidence discussed below on the positive association between
patenting and firm outcomes, the relatively low patent rates are a bit surprising. Of
course, there may be considerable variation in the entrepreneur’s or, less often, the
VC’s understanding or appreciation of the patent system.7

Alternatively, it may be that the firm had no inventions for which patent protection
would be appropriate. This latter argument does suggest that patents are to some
extent proxying for quality in these regressions. Graham et al. (2009) surveyed
entrepreneurs in the biotechnology and software sectors, finding that reasons for
not patenting ranged from cost of obtaining and enforcing a patent and the
availability of trade secret protection (especially in software) to fear of disclosing


                                           6
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                       May 2018



too much information publicly (in biotechnology). Slightly fewer respondents
indicated that the invention was viewed as not patentable. These authors emphasize
that patenting depends strongly on both the specific technology and the industry of
the firm, even for technology startups.

3.1 Impact of patenting on obtaining finance
Although startups as a whole use a broad range of financing methods (Coleman et al.
2014), startups in technology‐intensive sectors are more likely to use venture
capital financing, at least in the United States and some other developed countries.
Thus much of the research on the patenting‐finance relationship that I survey below
has focused on the venture capital channel. An important but still VC‐related
exception is Hochberg et al. (2017), who use the security interests recorded at the
US Patent and Trademark Office to identify VC‐funded firms that have secured their
loans using patent assets. They find that the size of the firm’s patent portfolio, but
not its quality (measured by citations), predicts the likelihood that the firm has debt
secured by patent(s). In addition, this type of debt is much more likely when the
particular patent market (measured by technology) is more liquid and less likely if
the patents appear to be very firm‐specific.

Sichelman and Graham (2010) investigate the patent‐financing relationship using
the previously mentioned Graham et al. (2009) survey of startup and early stage
companies in the biotechnology, medical device, and software sectors conducted in
2008. Both companies and expert investors rated financing and improving exit
valuation as moderately to very important motives for obtaining patents, more so
for biotechnology and medical devices. Interviews with semiconductor
manufacturers reported in Ziedonis and Hall (2001) suggested that obtaining
financing for startups is the main advantage they see in the patent system, rather
than protecting the intangible assets of existing firms. In contrast, managers and IP
professionals in this sector saw patenting by existing firms as a necessary cost
induced by the threat of litigation and the need to cross license in response.

Turning to the direct empirical evidence, both Haeussler et al. (2014) and Farre‐
Mensa et al. (2016) say yes, patents are helpful for obtaining funding. The former
paper studies UK and German biotechnology startups and finds that not only does
filing for an EP patent increase the probability of obtaining VC funding, but
information revealed during the examination process also influence that probability.
The share of X/Y references (threatening novelty) and delays in publishing the
search report are negative for VC funding. Opposition to the patent by others
increases the hazard of obtaining funding. The authors argue that because the


                                          7
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                        May 2018



presence of opposition could be both negative (because it is a threat to the patent
validity) and positive (suggesting that the invention is valuable), the positive finding
means that it is the underlying quality of the invention that is driving VC funding,
rather than the simple existence of a patent. Similarly, Engel and Keilbach (2004)
examine early stage funding of German startups and find that filing a patent at the
German patent office before foundation of the firm strongly predicts later VC
involvement with the startup.

Cockburn and MacGarvie use a different approach, one based on narrowly defined
markets. They have data on a number of narrow software markets (e.g., fax
software, ATM software, tax software, etc.), some of which were in areas where
patents were not issued prior to 1995 (the date of the key software patent decisions
such as Alappat) or 1998 (the date of the State Street decision on business method
patents).8,9 They find that in the markets characterized by having large numbers of
patents, not having patents delays both VC funding and IPOs, and that this effect is
stronger post‐1995 (pure software) or 1998 (business methods) for firms in
technologies affected by these key court decisions.

Baum and Silverman (2004) ask whether the contribution of venture capitalists is to
pick winners, or to assist in developing the startup subsequent to financing it. To do
this, they assemble a sample of ~200 Canadian biotechnology startups, not all of
which received VC or other funding. They find that characteristics valued for
funding are highly correlated with subsequent performance, suggesting that the VCs
are good at choosing startups. They also find that the VCs influence the startups
after funding by changing the management team once the firm has been chosen.
Patent applications have a highly significant impact on the amount of money raised.
However, patent grants have less impact, conditioning on applications. This finding
is not uncommon – given the high effective grant rate at the USPTO (Quillen et al.
2003; Cotropia and Quillen 2017), the additional information from the grant may
not add much, contrary to the Farre‐Mensa et al. findings. However, it does call into
question the role of the patent office in certifying the invention quality.

Conti, Thursby, and Rothaermel (2013) focus on the different startup characteristics
demanded by VC and angel funders. They use startups that participated in Georgia
Institute of Technology’s incubator, the majority of which were IT‐based. The paper
is notable in that they test for and find joint endogeneity between patenting and the
initial funding by friends and family, leading them to use instrumental variable
estimation to estimate the patenting‐funding relationship. They find that
contemporaneous US patent applications strongly predict the presence and amount


                                           8
B. H. Hall                       Patents and financing                        May 2018



of VC funding, but have less impact on the amount of angel financing obtained. In
contrast, angel financing depends on the initial friends and family funding amounts.
This result highlights the particular nature of VC funding, which does seem to prefer
startups that rely on proprietary knowledge.

The previously mentioned Conti, Thursby, and Thursby (2013) paper applied their
theoretical signaling model to a sample of 787 Israeli startup firms that had an IPO,
were acquired, or failed during the 2000‐2011 period. Of the 1968 investors in these
firms, about 20 per cent were venture capitalists, with the rest being private
investors (37 per cent), and other investing companies (private equity, pension,
insurance, etc.). However, the VC investors were far more likely to have invested in
multiple startups so they form a larger share of the total financing (there are
involved in approximately half of the startups). Unlike the other papers reviewed
here, Conti et al. estimate a simultaneous model where the number of patent grants
obtained between rounds of financing is regressed on the amount of funding raised
and the number of new investors, both instrumented by characteristics of the US
venture capital market during the three years preceding the round. They test for
endogeneity and fail to reject its presence in all but the very first round of financing.
That is, patenting and the obtaining of new money/investors are simultaneously
determined.10 They do find that obtaining new VC investors is related to the change
in patent grants between rounds, whereas obtaining new private investors is not.
Thus they have evidence that the signaling function of patents is more important for
obtaining VC finance than for the other types of finance.

Several of the papers condition on being a VC‐financed firm. For these samples of
firms, the question asked is whether larger amounts or more rounds are financed if
the firm has a patent. The earliest paper using this approach is Lerner (1994), who
examined VC‐backed US biotechnology startups, finding a valuation elasticity of 0.5
with respect to US patent grants. Hsu and Ziedonis (2008) use a sample of VC‐
backed semiconductor firms and fixed effects models to examine the changes in
valuation before each round of financing as a function of the firm’s patent
application stock. The use of fixed effects means that they control for the average
quality of the startup, but not for any information about quality revealed in the
course of its progress. They do find that the stock of patent applications increases
valuation, especially in the early rounds and when the firm’s founders have no prior
IPO experience, or when the firm is not financed by a “prominent” VC. The inference
is that the patents are serving as a signal of quality when other signals are not
available. It is noteworthy that Hsu and Ziedonis found noisier estimates when they



                                           9
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                        May 2018



used patent grants, as though the grants were not adding as much information,
unlike in the Farre‐Mensa et al. (2016) sample.

Munari and Toschi (2015) ask whether the amount of VC funding received by nano‐
technology firms in the first round is related to their patent application holdings.
The answer is yes. Interestingly, VCs that specialize in nano‐technology only care
about nano patents (as indicated by the EPO with a special class, Y01N)11, while
generalists value patent scope as indicated by the number of associated patent
classes. This suggests that generalist VCs may be focusing on inventions that have
more broad‐based applications of nano technology, as one might have expected.

Like Hsu and Ziedonis (2008) and Munari and Toschi (2015), Mann and Sager
(2005) focus on venture‐backed firms, this time in software. Again, they find that
total investment in these firms is related to patents, this time to the number of
granted patents (although the grant itself apparently does not matter, at least for the
first round of financing). They also find that the number of financing rounds and the
survival of the firm are positively associated with patents.

An interesting finding in Greenberg (2013) is that Israeli firms that have gone
through at least two rounds of VC funding are much more likely to have patents than
startups in the other papers reviewed here (see Table 1). The paper confirms that
patent applications are associated with higher valuations at each round of funding,
except for firms in the software sector. The elasticity of value with respect to US
patenting varies across sectors, from 0.08 (insignificant) in software to 0.71 in life
sciences, a result that agrees approximately with that of Lerner (1994) for the US. As
before in Conti et al. (2013), in the presence of patent applications, patent grants do
not matter for valuation.

Using VC‐backed US biotechnology startups, Hoenen et al. (2014) are able to show
that the impact of patent filings declines after the first funding round, and that
grants matter only if applications are excluded. They also find that the usual
measures of patent quality (subsequent citations or family size) are not as
important. A distinct feature of this paper is that they control for selection into VC
funding using a comparable sample of SBIR (Small Business Innovation Research)
funded startups and show that sample selection does not affect their results. The
equations for the choice of VC funding and its amount are negatively correlated, but
not very significantly. They do not include patent filings in the VC selection equation,
and the patent grants prior to the first round are insignificant in this equation.




                                          10
B. H. Hall                       Patents and financing                        May 2018



Further exploration might be warranted, to see if filings affect the VC dummy as well
as its amount.

A completely different approach to this question is taken by Hoenig and Henkel
(2015), who survey a large number of venture capitalists to elicit their choices
among projects with varying degrees of uncertainty, patenting, team experience,
and alliances. They use conjoint analysis to determine that possession of a patent
application or grant makes the project more likely to be chosen for funding, but that
this likelihood is not higher when the technology quality is unknown. They interpret
this result to mean that the signaling aspect of patents is unimportant compared to
their role as property rights to the technology.

An important paper by Feldman (2014) reports on the results of a survey of venture
capitalists and their portfolio companies. Among other questions, they were asked
whether they agreed with the statement “as a venture capitalist, I consider the
potential for selling patents to patent assertion entities if the companies fail.” 65 per
cent disagreed with this statement, implying that the potential salvage value of the
IP associated with the companies they fund does not influence their investment
decisions. Of course, this leaves the 18 per cent who agreed with the statement (17
per cent were neutral), so at least some VCs do care about salvage value.12

A number of conclusions emerge from this collection of papers. First, it is clear that
Venture Capitalists prefer to fund firms that have patent applications underway,
even if they are not yet granted. Although informative on its own, the grant does not
add a great deal in the presence of applications, largely because the applications
happen earlier, and also because the grant probability is quite high, at least in the
US, which the majority of these papers studied. However, this conclusion is
tempered by the fact that Farre‐Mensa et al. (2016) found that within patent filing
firms, the grant of a patent does improve their subsequent growth as well as their
access to VC funding. Second, there is evidence in a few of these papers that VC
funding is more sensitive to patenting in the earlier rounds, when the degree of
asymmetric information would presumably be greatest. An exception to this is Conti
et al. (2013), whose analysis is slightly different, in that they use the reverse
regression with instruments to look at the question. Third, the papers are rather
inconclusive about the reasons that patents and VC funding are related: some
emphasize the relationship of patents to the underlying quality of the firm’s
inventions, while others see the patents as pure signals. Still others emphasize the
contribution of the patent grant to appropriability such as Hoenig and Henkel
(2015), who use direct survey data to conclude that the associated proprietary right


                                           11
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                       May 2018



is the important thing for investors, as well as the aforementioned Farre‐Mensa et
al. (2016).

3.2 Impact of VC finance on patenting
A few of these papers also looked at the impact of receiving VC financing on
subsequent patenting (shown in Appendix Table A‐2). The majority find only a weak
or even negative association with VC involvement or the level of financing,
controlling for prior patenting. Engel and Keilbach (2004) compare German VC‐
backed firms with a control group of non‐VC‐backed firms matched on industry
,founding year, size, and patenting at founding time, finding that the VC‐backed
firms have slightly more patents than the control group on average (about one half a
patent difference).

As part of their analysis of Canadian venture‐backed biotechnology firms, Baum and
Silverman (2004) looked also at the relationship between new patent applications
and grants and prior VC funding, finding no relationship in the presence of past
patenting. Using a very large sample of 22,000 US VC‐backed firms 1976‐2005, Cao
and Hsu (2011) find a small negative impact of the first round of VC funding on
patenting, controlling for patenting prior to the first round, which is highly
correlated with patenting after the first round, as suggested earlier.

Using industry‐year data for the U. S., Kortum and Lerner (2000) do find that VC‐
funded firms patent more, controlling for industry and year. But they do not include
controls for patenting prior to receiving funding in this comparison. So their results
are not inconsistent with those above. Thus, as discussed in the previous section,
patenting is associated with receiving VC funding, but there is little evidence that
funding itself provides a further boost to patent filing. This may be as expected,
since patents are generally applied for relatively early in the research and
development process, and the purpose of obtaining the funding may be to facilitate
development of the invention(s) thus protected. It is probably also worth noting
again that patent counts are a coarse measure of inventive activity, and most of the
information they convey about firms in cross‐sectional, making it difficult to tease
out any detailed changes in behavior over time.

3.3 Patenting and startup performance
A related question of interest is whether the patenting that is associated with
obtaining financing has positive longer term consequences for the startup. A few
studies have examined this issue. Farre‐Mensa et al. (2016) use only firms that have
filed for their first patent and show that obtaining a grant leads to subsequent firm


                                          12
B. H. Hall                       Patents and financing                        May 2018



growth and innovation, and that delay in examination reduces these outcomes.
Their paper is unusual in that they have a plausible instrument for the patent grant,
which is the examiner‐specific prior granting probability. This is unrelated to
anything about the current invention other than possibly its technological field
(which is controlled for), but clearly related to the grant probability for the patent
under consideration. That is, patent examiners have idiosyncratic grant
probabilities. This paper provides support for the idea that external patent office
validation and the existence of a patent (as opposed to a patent application) are
what matter for subsequent performance.

Helmers and Rogers (2011) look at a sample of UK SMEs in high and medium
technology industries. Controlling for sample selection due to exit, they find that
both 5‐year growth and survival increase if the firm has applied for either a UK or
EP patent. Growth increases about 26‐27 percent per annum given a patent, which
is a large number. In contrast, Hall et al. (2013) using a similar sample of UK firms,
but one that includes all firm sizes and sectors, finds that employment growth is
insignificantly related to patent ownership, although the coefficient is positive. The
difference in these results highlights the fact that for SMEs, patents may serve as a
more important signal of the future than they do for large firms.

Wagner and Cockburn (2010) focus on a sample of internet‐related firms that had
an IPO on NASDAQ in the 1998‐2001 period. This is a period when many internet
firms failed (two‐thirds of their sample were delisted by 2005). They find survival
associated with having patents, but not with having business method patents,
although there are relatively few such patents and the confidence interval is
correspondingly large. The usual quality measures (citations, family size, and
international applications) did not have much impact on survival, except for a
suggestion that having a patent with a large number of cites appeared to increase
the probability that the firm was acquired.

The limited evidence summarized here does suggest a positive association between
patenting and survival/growth, although the samples vary (UK vs. US; SME vs
startups vs. all sizes; firms with patent applications vs. all firms). In addition, only
the Farre‐Mensa et al. paper makes any claim to be a truly causal study. So there is
room for further research targeted directly at the question of whether patents
benefit innovative startups in any way other than via the financing channel.




                                           13
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                        May 2018



4. Empirical evidence on salvage value
Realizing salvage value from the patents owned by a failing or exiting enterprise
requires a functioning patent market. But does one exist? A number of analysts have
critiqued the fact that the secrecy with which most patent trades and licensing takes
place as preventing the emergence of a robust transparent marketplace. See, for
example, Lemley and Myhrvold (2007), who argue forcefully that the development
of a market would by facilitated by publication of patent assignment and license
terms. Interestingly, although these authors believe transparency would reduce the
potential for patent hold‐up, Burstein (2015) sounds a cautionary note on patent
markets, suggesting that a liquid patent market could lead to more patents rather
than more innovation.

A useful lens with which to view the development of a patent market is that
provided by Gans and Stern (2010). These authors confront Roth’s (2007) pre‐
conditions for an effective market with insights from the market for ideas or
technology. They argue the following: 1) that the market for ideas is not thick
because ideas are complementary to assets possibly held by others; 2) that ideas,
although non‐rival in use, may be rival in value leading to inefficient bilateral
bargaining and congestion; 3) that because the user/buyer can reproduce the ideas
once known, the market is not safe, as also pointed out by Anton and Yao (2002). All
of these features may make a market in ideas/inventions difficult to develop. Gans
and Stern go on to discuss the potential for enforceable intellectual property rights
to mitigate these problems, concluding that although they may make auctions
possible and the market safe, they do not help much with the complementarity
problem and may undermine market thickness via enhanced opportunities for hold‐
up.

In spite of the potential problems in developing an efficient and well‐functioning
market for patents, the trend today is toward greater trading of these assets,
whether via auction‐based platforms such as Ocean Tomo, patent brokers, patent
pools associated with standards, or simply bilateral cross‐licensing. The growth of
these activities is undoubtedly related to the increased importance of digital and
internet‐based technologies, which are complex and require interfacing with
technologies developed by others. In the next section of the paper I look at the
operation of these markets for patents during the recent past, focusing on the cases
where the patents have their origin in a firm that is going bankrupt or is exiting the
particular market for which the patents are relevant. Because many patent
transactions are secret or even if their existence is known, pricing is rarely reported,



                                          14
B. H. Hall                       Patents and financing                        May 2018



the picture I obtain here is necessarily only a somewhat partial and hazy one. In
addition, with the important exception of Serrano and Ziedonis (2018), existing
research tends to identify large firm exit and patent sale rather than patent sale
from failed startups.

4.1 The market for patents
Several extreme examples of value realization by large exiting firms exist and have
been well‐publicized. I give some examples in Table 2. The sellers are either
bankrupt (Modu and Nortel), or exiting a particular line of business (IBM, Kodak), or
simply in need of funds (Motorola Mobility). For example, Techcrunch reports that
the funds from Google will go towards payment of Modu’s creditors and ex‐Modu
employees.13 The buyers in all these cases are the technology behemoths, who
typically purchase these patents as defensive insurance for litigation threats. E.g.,
the Facebook acquisition of 750 IBM patents was undertaken after Yahoo sued
Facebook for infringing 10 patents. Following the patent purchase, the suit was
settled with a cross‐license agreement between the two firms in July 2012.14

With the exception of the Modu sale of 21 U. S. patents, none of the seller firms listed
in Table 2 were startups, although they were clearly salvaging some value from their
patent portfolio. I therefore turn to the few empirical papers on the market for
patent licenses to see whether there is evidence that failed startups are participating
in this market.

Agarwal et al. (2015) use data from a 2006 survey of potential licensors (creators
and owners of IP assets) to assess the role of the Gans and Stern factors in causing
deals to fail. They examine three stages in the negotiation: 1) identifying a
buyer/seller; 2) initiating negotiations; and 3) reaching an agreement. They find
that lack of market thickness and inability to agree the scope of IP reduce the
probability of success in phase one, while various bargaining frictions are more
salient for phase two. Failure to finally reach an agreement in phase three is more
likely to be due to lack of market safety (defined by the authors as the ability to
protect by IP) as well as regulatory problems and a lack of trust.

The evidence in this paper supports the idea that IP may help in the market for
ideas, but of course is silent on the question of whether this is the optimal allocation
of these assets. Because they also find that the firms have a large amount of IP that
they are willing to license but do not expect to be able to, it seems that the
difficulties in achieving deal success may discourage some potential transactions.
The sample of firms studied by Agarwal et al. is drawn from a 2006 survey


                                          15
B. H. Hall                          Patents and financing                             May 2018



conducted by the Licensing Foundation, and is unlikely to include many startups.1
Thus although this research can inform us about the functioning of the IP market, it
has little to say about the success startups have in accessing the market.

Love et al. (2017) created a new dataset containing a large number of sales offers by
more than 100 patent brokers and online platforms during the period 2012‐2016.15
In all, they study 2605 lots containing 39,000 patents, of which 23,900 were US
patents. Approximately three‐quarters of the offerings had price guidance attached,
with a mean (median) price of $210K ($150K) per patent, somewhat lower than the
values shown in Table 2. Dividing the sellers into five types (individual, patent
assertion entity (PAE), university, defensive aggregator, operating company), they
find that two‐thirds are operating companies. The most important sellers are AT&T,
Xerox PARC, Panasonic, Verizon, Cypress semiconductor, Alcatel Lucent, IBM, Allied
Security Trust, Hewlett‐Packard, Huawei, and Intel. Although one could argue that
some of these are firms exiting a particular line of business, the authors do not
present any information that would allow us to identify failed startups among the
sellers, although they may be there. The buyers of these patents are almost equally
split between operating companies (42 per cent) and PAEs and defensive
aggregators (55 per cent). The majority (83 per cent) of post‐purchase assertion of
these patents does come from the aptly‐named PAEs.

In contrast, Oliver et al. (2016) use similar data to report on 66 transactions across
28 companies during 2010‐2015, finding that 71‐78% of patent sales occur when
the company underperforms the NASDAQ‐100 for the two prior years. This lends
support to the idea that firms at risk of failing are able to realize value from their
patent portfolios, although it does not specifically focus on startups.

The study that is most relevant to the question being posed here is that by Serrano
and Ziedonis (2018), which is based on ownership assignments at the USPTO. They
have a sample of 285 VC‐backed startups that fail between 1988 and 2008, in
medical devices, semiconductors, and software. The firms had 1,766 patents, of
which 68 percent were sold within 5 years of the firm’s exit, mostly to operating
companies in their sector, in contrast to the evidence in Love et al. This evidence
suggests fairly strongly that salvage value is available from patents in these high‐
technology sectors, although unfortunately there is no information on its magnitude.

1 The smallest firms in the sample have at least $500,000 in revenue and R&D, as well as one
licensing professtional in their employment. The average firm has $1B‐$10B in revenue and between
5,000 and 10,000 employees.



                                               16
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                        May 2018



A closely related study is that by Ma, Tong, and Wang (2017), which examines
patent sales by firms in Chapter 11. Their sample is confined to Compustat firms,
which will exclude startups that fail pre‐IPO. They find that 40 per cent of patent‐
holding firms sell some patents during bankruptcy reorganizations, usually within
the first two quarters after bankruptcy filing. Using a number of patent‐related
measures, they are able to establish that firms in financial distress are more likely to
sell redeployable patents and more likely to sell into thicker technology markets. In
contrast, those with failed business models rather than extreme financial distress
are more likely to sell patents that are close to their core technological strength.
This study makes it clear that patent sale in bankruptcy is common and that these
intangible assets are in many cases treated the same way as tangible assets when
reorganization takes place. Unfortunately, they do not report and results by firm
size or age, so it is not possible to know how these results may differ for startup
firms.

For evidence on the price at which patent sales take place, I turn to the public patent
auctions. There are at least three empirical studies of the best‐known patent auction
marketplace, Ocean Tomo: Sneed and Johnson (2009), Lee and Lee (2010), and
Odasso et al. (2014). Ocean Tomo established the first public auction for IP rights in
2006 and held its first round of auctions through 2008. The last auction in 2009
failed to generate enough interest and the company sold this part of its business to
ICAP, which then revived the auctions in 2010. However a check online reveals that
the number of lots offered in each auction recently is rather small, and few appear to
be sold, especially when compared to the three years 2006‐2008 covered by these
studies.16

Table 3 summarizes the characteristics of the auctions analyzed in each study. The
results are fairly consistent, but with some differences due to the choice of
specification. Over the 2006‐2008 period, the number of lots sold in these auctions
averaged just under 50 per cent, and the average lot price ranged from $210
thousand dollars to $357 thousand dollars, for a per patent price that might be
about half that, on the low side when compared to the large transactions in Table 2.
All of these papers focus on the determinants of patent value in the auction, and
thus do not contain much information about the sellers, other than whether or not
the seller is a public company, individual, or other. Both Lee and Lee (2010) and
Odasso et al. (2014) find that sales of corporate‐owned patents are more likely than
those for individuals, controlling for technology and other characteristics, but
neither include information on the size and the age of the seller.



                                          17
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                        May 2018



Summing up, this look at the functioning of the market for IP with respect to its
benefits for failed startups is rather inconclusive. There is a market, and a number of
firms exiting particular technologies have made use of it, but there is little evidence
about the nature of these firms, with the exception of a few well‐known large
technology firms that attract journalist coverage. Owing to the lack of transparency
in parts of the licensing and sale market, the papers reviewed have relied on
relatively selective datasets, so the picture is very incomplete. Additionally, it must
be pointed out that there may be substantive differences between the technologies
available from large established firms that are exiting a line of business and those
from failed startups. That is, presumably one of the reasons for the failure of a
technology‐based startup may indeed be that their technology is no longer valuable
to anyone else, as well as to the firm itself.

4.2    The dark side of patent markets
The beneficial nature of patent markets or markets for technology presumes that
the sale of patents on the “secondhand” market occurs because the technology they
protect is useful to a firm other than the one currently owning the patent. In an ideal
world, the role of patent markets would be to allocate technologies to those best
able to make use of them profitably and efficiently, enhancing overall welfare.
However, the evidence on buyers in this market suggests that these patents are
being purchased for a range of reasons, most of which do not involve actually using
the protected technology. Lemley et al. (2016) suggest that operating companies
buy patents for defensive purposes (cross‐licensing or counter assertion), to keep
them from others who might assert them, or as a part of a merger transaction, and
less often for pure licensing reasons. That is, the primary motivation is not usually
acquisition of the right to use the covered technology.

In contrast, Non‐Practicing Entities (NPEs) buy patents primarily for licensing
revenue, and occasionally this leads to litigation. Such sales are a nontrivial portion
of the arms‐length transactions involving patents. For example, 63% of the lots sold
on Ocean Tomo 2006‐2008 were purchased by non‐practicing entities (NPEs), who
presumably found them potentially valuable for licensing or perhaps for sale to
others. Love et al. (2017) report a similar share of brokered patents (57%) going to
patent assertion entities and defensive aggregators, and that most of the litigation of
these patents comes from the PAEs. Cotropia et al. (2014) report that about half the
patent cases filed in 2012 were filed by NPEs (predominantly patent holding
companies, but also including individuals, large aggregators, and failed operating
companies). In ICT technologies, the share is even higher, close to 70 per cent. Such



                                          18
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                       May 2018



transactions would not be problematic if the patents in question contained useful
technology, well delineated, and whose boundaries were clear. But numerous
scholars have argued that in many cases the patents thus traded suffer from a
number of problems that make their enforcement more a matter of rent taxation
than the legitimate transfer of technology that might reward its inventors.

Burstein (2005) argues that the relevant question about patent markets is not how
to make them more efficient, but whether they enhance innovation or discourage it.
He argues that in a world of probabilistic patents and uncertain coverage, patent
markets may facilitate trolling and hold‐up that is detrimental to innovation on
balance.

The problematic factors fall under four interconnected headings: 1) the presence of
some low quality patents; 2) the frequency of parallel invention, so that the
information in the patent was not used by a potential infringer; 3) bargaining threat
points that lead to extraction of more than the value of the patented invention; and
4) actual returns to inventors are rather low. I discuss each of these factors below.
But before doing so, I need to caution the reader that this area of research is highly
contentious, largely because the various empirical studies struggle with the non‐
transparency of patent licensing and patent litigation. Many studies are based on
survey samples whose precise sampling methodology is difficult to determine, and
they often do not contain all the information (especially transaction price
information or the costs of settlement outside the court) that would be necessary for
a complete study of the costs and benefits of the market. In addition, in the case of
patent assertion, we only see the cases that are filed, and not those that are settled
before filing. Reflecting the controversial nature of the subject, empirical studies in
the area are often the object of critical comments that correct apparent data errors
or call into question their methodology.17

An interesting recent study by Lemley et al. (2017) attempts to ascertain the size of
the patent assertion “iceberg” and finds that among the 30 companies that they
surveyed, 70 per cent of the 593 patent assertions against the companies did not
proceed to litigation. But even this effort was hamstrung by the understandable
reluctance of the authors to probe deep enough to obtain any detail on the nature of
the litigated and non‐litigated assertions. In addition, the sample was largely based
on prior contacts of the authors, who are patent attorneys in Silicon Valley, so it is
not a random selection of firms, but one focused on firms in the ICT sector.




                                          19
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                         May 2018



In this context, “low quality patents” means those likely to be invalidated or found
not to be infringed if they come to trial: they typically have vague claims whose
boundaries are uncertain, lack full implementation, or cover subject matter that
courts have since ruled ineligible based on the patent statutes.18 In their book Patent
Failure, Bessen and Meurer (2009) provide evidence that the fuzzy boundaries of
some patents, especially those in the software and business method area, can lead to
litigation based on an overly broad reading of the claims in the patent. Lemley and
Shapiro (2005) term these kinds of patents “probabilistic patents” in the sense that
until a suit comes to trial, their validity and whether infringement has occurred are
difficult to determine. The problem is that such patents can be used to extract
settlements from potential infringers that are in excess of the actual contribution of
the patented technology to the product after a company has sunk other investments
in the product. Reitzig et al. (2007) present a model of this kind of behavior. In
addition, there is a free‐riding problem among alleged infringers, because winning
the suit by invalidating the patent benefits all of them, but the cost is born by one
(Harhoff et al. 2012, inter alia).

In support of the view that NPEs often assert these “probabilistic” patents, Allison et
al. (2011) find that when suits come to trial, NPE plaintiffs win less than 10 per cent
of the time, in contrast to operating (product) companies, who win 50 per cent of
their cases, as suggested by the simplest Priest‐Klein (1984) model. However Priest
and Klein also show that if the defendant faces a larger loss than the plaintiff’s gain,
the revealed win probability for the plaintiff will be lower. Therefore, the low win
rate suggests that the fact that NPEs face lower trial costs (due to far lower
discovery costs than those faced by the operating companies) means that they are
willing to pursue even doubtful cases.

Independent invention refers to the situation where an entity is sued for
infringement of a patent of which it was unaware, and whose technology it has
developed independently of any knowledge of that in the patent. In complex
technologies, especially in software, such independent solutions to individual
problems encountered in development are common. It is difficult to avoid this
eventuality using prior patent search in technologies like those in ICT that are not
indexed in a natural way (Mulligan and Lee 2012). Cotropia and Lemley (2009) find
that out of 200 infringement cases in Delaware and East District Texas, only 10 per
cent allege actual copying (which strengthens a willful infringement charge, so there
is incentive so to allege).19 Almost none of the 10 per cent were in ICT and most
were in pharmaceutical and chemical technologies.



                                          20
B. H. Hall                      Patents and financing                       May 2018



Patent markets could encourage innovation by transferring litigation risk from
inventors to those more able to bear the risk. For this to work effectively there
should be sufficient returns to inventors via this channel. We have very limited
evidence on this question. Bessen et al. (2011) argue that the returns to inventors
are small, based on examination of the accounts of 14 NPEs that are public and
therefore report their accounts to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
However, it is difficult to know how to interpret their numbers: during the 2000‐
2010 period, these 14 firms paid out $1.7 billion in non‐capital investment. This is
much less than the stock market losses of $88 billion (as measured by an event
study) that were experienced by those they sued. However, it is much more than the
net income earned by these NPEs, which was $258 million. Chien (2014) reports
that only 9 of the 223 technology startups she surveyed had monetized their patents
via licensing or sale, which suggests somewhat limited participation in this market
by startups.

Haber and Werfel (2016) conducted a small survey of inventors and entrepreneurs
in order to ascertain preferences for the enforcement of patents: in‐house or via sale
to a PAE. The thought experiment concerned a patent on a product improvement
that was valued at one million dollars. The participants were asked to choose
between 1) a certain return of $100,000 via sale and 2) various scenarios involving
unlimited lawyer time or contingent fee litigation. At these prices, about half of both
groups preferred to sell to the PAE rather than paying a lawyer and bearing the risk.
However, inventors clearly preferred the contingent fee option, whereas
entrepreneurs were indifferent. Although this was only a thought experiment with
limited data, it gives some idea of the relatively low return that some inventors
require to avoid litigation risk.

Survey and interview evidence of several kinds, as well as a more aggregate study
by Kiebzak et al. (2016) support Burstein’s (2005) view that a more liquid patent
market might not be good for innovation, especially for that by new entrepreneurial
firms. Feldman (2014) reports several findings on this question from their survey
of VCs: 1) roughly one in three VC‐backed startup companies have received
demands, higher if they are in the ICT sector; 2) two‐thirds of these companies
report that all or most of the demands come from PAEs; 3) 58% of these startup
companies report that the patent demands had a significant impact; 4) 100 per cent
of VCs might refrain from investing if a company faced an existing patent demand.
Although it is possible that all these demands were legitimate in the sense that the
asserted patents read on the technology, interviews, anecdotal evidence, the



                                          21
B. H. Hall                     Patents and financing                       May 2018



experience of VCs, and the fact that the vast majority were in the ICT sector make
that unlikely. There is no doubt that the majority of the VCs and companies view the
rise of PAEs as negative for their innovative activity.

Chien (2014) surveys 223 technology company startups of which 79 had
experienced at least one patent assertion and confirms these views, as well as
highlighting the diversity of the responses to a demand. In her sample, the response
ranges from doing nothing (22%), shutting down a line of business (9%), settling
(18%), fighting in or out of court (35%), or other (16%). She also found significant
impacts on the company’s operations for about half of those companies with
revenues less $100 million. Impacts included distraction from core business,
financial impact, delay in hiring or milestones, product changes, and changes in
business product lines.

So are patent markets beneficial for innovation? As Haber and Werfel (2016) say in
their conclusions:

       “Some studies claim that PAEs extract rents via nuisance lawsuits,
       thereby placing a direct tax on innovation. An alternative hypothesis
       is that PAEs are financial intermediaries that facilitate innovation.
       These hypotheses are not mutually exclusive.”

Based on the evidence reported here, I would agree that both views have merit, but
the balance varies across firm size and technology. For firms in the chemicals sector
and for larger firms, there may be some benefits in being able to monetize patents
that are no longer useful in their core business. However, for innovative startups,
patent markets may not create much salvage value that benefits the startup in
financing, and may instead impose enough costs that innovation in this form is
discouraged. The previous statement appears to be especially true in software and
business methods, broadly defined.


4 Conclusions
This brief survey has shown the following: in most technology‐intensive sectors,
patent applications (granted or not) are associated with a number of good
outcomes: they help with obtaining VC funding, they increase the amount of funding
thus obtained, and they are positively associated with future growth and survival.
The paper that came closest to estimating a causal relationship was Farre‐Mensa et
al. (2016), but that was for grants conditional on having an application, although



                                         22
B. H. Hall                       Patents and financing                         May 2018



some papers, such as Engel and Keilbach (2004) use control samples, or rely on
timing (lags) for identification.

However, in most cases it was also true that fewer than half the firms in the relevant
sample had any patent applications (with the exception of those studies that
conditioned on having patents). So the question of whether these patents are simply
a proxy for the quality of the underlying firm and its technology, or whether they
have value arising from the patent right, becomes important. That is, do the results
surveyed suggest that other firms could improve their prospects by applying for
patents, or would this be a wasteful activity because their underlying technology is
simply not as good as that of the firms that have patent applications? One way to
approach this question would be to choose a sample of startups in technology‐based
sectors and examine their inventions more closely, not identifying inventions by the
fact that a patent was applied for. This would require more of a case study approach,
but one that built up a reasonably sized sample of startups with inventions, only
some of which were patented.

The second set of findings in the paper concern the functioning of the patent market
that would enable technology startups to retrieve value from their patents on exit,
an essential ingredient if patents are to be used to secure technology assets for
financing. Such markets definitely exist, in several forms, but it is clear that they are
plagued by the problems identified by Gans and Stern (2010), among others. Many
lots remain unsold, and it seems doubtful that some of the largest transactions are
actually technology transfer, rather than defensive maneuvers related to litigation.
In addition, the purchasers on some (but definitely not all) of the markets appear to
be dominated by non‐practicing entities, whose primary purpose is enforcing the
patents against operating companies. Although specializing in enforcement is a
legitimate activity, some would question whether it really advances innovation in
complex technologies.

The mixed set of conclusions here are typical of most studies of the effectiveness or
usefulness of patents, which arises largely from the heterogeneity of technologies
and firm strategies. To push our understanding further, several approaches would
be useful: 1) exploring more thoroughly the use of patents in obtaining financing
beyond the venture capital channel, especially in countries that use more bank‐
based forms of finance; 2) revisiting the salience of the salvage value of patents to
VCs, using the information about the actual value realized at exit and the probability
of exit; 3) focusing on sector‐level analysis, as this is one of the main sources of
heterogeneity; 4) as mentioned above, sampling on inventions rather than patents,


                                           23
B. H. Hall                     Patents and financing                       May 2018



although this is a very tall order; 5) looking for natural experiments in patent
applications (as opposed to the grants used in Farre‐Mensa et al.) – one possibility
might be the changes in subject matter eligibility for business methods and software
following the Alice decision (and other earlier decisions) by the US Supreme Court.20




                                         24
B. H. Hall                          Patents and financing                             May 2018



5 References
Agrawal, A., I. Cockburn, and L. Zhang (2015). "Deals not done: Sources of failure in the
      market for ideas" Strategic Management Journal 36 (7): 976‐986.
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). “The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market
        Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (3): 488–500.
Allison, J. R., M. A. Lemley and J. Walker (2011). "Patent Quality and Settlement Among
        Repeat Patent Litigants." Georgetown Law Journal 99: 677‐712.
Allison, J. R., M. A. Lemley and D. L. Schwartz (2014). "Understanding the Realities of
        Modern Patent Litigation." Texas Law Review 92(7): 1769‐1801.
Anton, J. J. and D. A. Yao (2002). "The Sale of Ideas: Strategic Disclosure, Property Rights,
        and Contracting." Review of Economic Studies 67(4): 585‐ 607.
Arora, A., and A. Gambardella (2010). “The market for technology.” In Hall, B. H., and N.
        Rosenberg (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation. Amsterdam and New
        York: Elsevier, pp. 642‐674.
Banks, J. S. and J. Sobel (1987). "Equilibrium Selection in Signaling Games." Econometrica
        55(3): 647‐661.
Baum, J. A. C. and B. Silverman (2004). “Picking winners or building them? Alliance,
       intellectual, and human capital as selection criteria in venture financing and
       performance of biotechnology startups.” Journal of Business Venturing 19 (3): 411‐
       436.
Bessen, J. E. (2014). “ALL the facts: PAEs are Suing Many More Companies.” Available at
       https://patentlyo.com/patent/2014/01/facts‐suing‐companies.html
Bessen, J. E. (2005). A comment on “Do Patents Facilitate Financing in the Software
       Industry? Boston, MA, Boston University School of Law and Research on Innovation:
       8.
Bessen, J. E., J. Ford and M. J. Meurer (2011). "The private and social costs of patent trolls."
       Regulation 2011‐2012(Winter): 26‐35.
Bessen, J. E. and M. J. Meurer (2014). “The Direct Costs from NPE Disputes.” Cornell Law
       Review 99(2): 387‐424.
Bessen, J. E. and M. J. Meurer (2009). Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and Lawyers
       Put Innovators at Risk. Princeton University Press.
Burstein, M. J. (2015). “Patent markets: A framework for evaluation.” Arizona State Law
       Journal 47: 507‐541.
Cao, J. and P.‐H. Hsu (2011). “The Informational Role of Patents in Venture Capital
         Financing.” Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1678809 or
         http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1678809
Catalini, C., J. Guzman, and S. Stern (2017). “Hidden in Plain Sight: Venture Growth With or
        Without Venture Capital.” Cambridge, MA: MIT working paper.




                                               25
B. H. Hall                         Patents and financing                            May 2018



Chien, Colleen V. (2014). “Startups and Patent Trolls.” Stanford Technology Law Review 17:
        461. Santa Clara Univ. Legal Studies Research Paper No. 09‐12. Available at SSRN:
        https://ssrn.com/abstract=2146251
Cho, I.‐K. and D. M. Kreps (1987). "Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria*." The Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 102(2): 179‐221.
Cockburn, I. M. and M. MacGarvie (2009). "Patents, Thickets, and the Financing of Early‐
      Stage Firms: Evidence from the Software Industry." Journal of Economics and
      Management Strategy 18(3): 729‐773.
Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson and J. P. Walsh (2000). Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
       Appropriability Conditions and Why Firms Patent or Not? NBER Working Paper No.
       7552, Cambridge, MA.
Coleman, S., C. Cotei, and J. Farhat (2014). “The debt‐equity financing decisions of U.S.
      startup firms.” Journal of Economics and Finance 40: 105‐126.
Conti, A., M. Thursby and F. T. Rothaermel (2013). "Show Me the Right Stuff: Signals for
        High‐Tech Startups." Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 22(2): 341‐364.
Cotropia, C. A., J. P. Kesan and D. L. Schwartz (2014). "Unpacking Patent Assertion Entities
       (PAEs)." Minnesota Law Review 99(2): 649‐703.
Cotropia, C. A. and M. A. Lemley (2009). "Copying in Patent Law." North Carolina Law Review
       87(5): 1421‐1466.
Cotropia, C. A. and C. D. Quillen, Jr. (2017). “Continuing patent applications and performance
       of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office as of FY 2016.” Richmond School of Law:
       Intellectual Property Institute Research Paper No. 2017‐01
Engel, D. and M. Keilbach (2007). "Firm‐level implications of early stage venture capital
        investment — an empirical investigation." Journal of Empirical Finance 14(2): 150‐
        167.
Farre‐Mensa, J., D. Hegde and A. Ljungqvist (2016). The Bright Side of Patents. New York,
       Stern School, New York University. USPTO Economic Working Paper 2015‐5,
       revised. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2704028 or
       http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2704028
Feldman, R. (2014). “Patent Demands & Startup Companies: The View from the Venture
      Capital Community.” Yale Journal of Law and Technology 16: 236‐284. UC Hastings
      Research Paper No. 137. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2561077
Fink, C., M. Khan and H. Zhou (2016). "Exploring the worldwide patent surge." Economics of
         Innovation and New Technology 25(2): 114‐142.
Gans, J. S. and S. Stern (2010). "Is there a market for ideas?" Industrial and Corporate Change
         19(3): 805‐837.
Gans, J. S., D. H. Hsu and S. Stern (2008). "The Impact of Uncertain Intellectual Property
         Rights on the Market for Ideas: Evidence from Patent Grant Delays." Management
         Science 54(5): 982‐997.




                                              26
B. H. Hall                         Patents and financing                            May 2018



Golden, J. M. (2007). “'Patent Trolls' and Patent Remedies.” Texas Law Review 85(7): 2111‐
       2161.
Graham, S. J. H., R. P. Merges, P. Samuelson and T. Sichelman (2009). "High Technology
      Entrepreneurs and the Patent System: Results of the 2008 Berkeley Patent Survey."
      Berkeley Technology Law Journal 24(4): 1255‐1328.
Greenberg, G. (2013). "Small Firms, Big Patents? Estimating Patent Value Using Data on
      Israeli Start‐ups’ Financing Rounds." European Management Review 10(4): 183‐196.
Guzman, J. and S. Stern (2017). “Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality and
      Performance.” in Haltiwanger, J., E. Hurst, J.. Miranda, and A. Schoar (eds.),
      Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges. NBER
      Conference volume, Chicago University Press.
Haber, S. H., and S. H. Werfel (2016). “Patent trolls as financial intermediaries? Experimental
       evidence.” Economics Letters 149: 64‐66.
Haeussler, C., D. Harhoff and E. Mueller (2014). "How patenting informs VC investors ‐ The
       case of biotechnology." Research Policy 43: 1236‐1298.
Hall, B. H. (2009). “The Financing of Innovation.” European Investment Bank Papers 14 (2):
         1‐23. Reprinted (2010) in the Review of Economics and Institutions 1(1),
         http://www.rei.unipg.it/rei
Hall, B. H. (2007). "Patents and Patent Policy." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 23(4): 1‐20.
Hall, B. H. (2005). "Exploring the Patent Explosion." Journal of Technology Transfer 30: 35‐
         48.
Hall, B. H. (2002). "The Financing of Research and Development." Oxford Review of Economic
         Policy 18(1): 35‐51.
Hall, B. H. and D. Harhoff (2012). “Recent Research on the Economics of Patents.” Annual
         Review of Economics 4: 541‐565.
Hall, B. H., Helmers, C., M. Rogers, and V. Sena (2013). “The importance (or not) of patents to
         UK firms.” Oxford Economic Papers 65 (3): 603‐629.
Hall, B. H. and M. MacGarvie (2010). "The private value of software patents." Research Policy
         39(7): 994‐1009.
Harhoff, D., G. von Graevenitz and S. Wagner (2016). "Conflict Resolution, Public Goods, and
       Patent Thickets." Management Science 62(3): 704‐721.
Harhoff, D. (2009). “The role of patents and licenses in securing external finance for
       innovation.” European Investment Bank Papers 14 (2): 74‐97.
Hegde, D. and H. Luo (2017). "Patent Publication and the Market for Ideas." Management
       Science.
Helmers, C. and M. Rogers (2011). "Does Patenting Help High‐Tech Start‐Ups?" Research
      Policy 40: 1016‐1027.




                                              27
B. H. Hall                         Patents and financing                             May 2018



Hochberg, Y. V., C. J. Serrano, and R. H. Ziedonis (2017). “Patent Collateral, Investor
      Commitment, and the Market for Venture Lending.” Journal of Financial Economics,
      forthoming.
Hoenen, S., C. Kolympiris, W. Schoenmakers and N. Kalaitzandonakes (2014). "The
      diminishing signaling value of patents between early rounds of venture capital
      financing." Research Policy 43(6): 956‐989.
Hoenig, D. and J. Henkel (2015). "Quality signals? The role of patents, alliances, and team
       experience in venture capital financing." Research Policy 44(5): 1049‐1064.
Hsu, D. H. and R. H. Ziedonis (2013). “Resources as Dual Sources of Advantage: Impliations
        for Valuing Entrepreneurial‐Firm Patents.” Strategic Management Journal 34: 761‐
        781..
Hsu, D. H. and R. H. Ziedonis (2008). “Patents as Quality Signals for Entrepreneurial
        Ventures.” Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings.
Ito, J. (2005). One venture capitalist’s view on software patents. Blog entry, 8 July 2005.
          Available at
          http://joi.ito.com/archives/2005/07/08/one_venture_capitalists_view_on_software
          _patents.html
Kiebzak, S., G. Rafert and C. Tucker (2014). "The effect of patent litigation and patent
       assertion entities on entrepreneurial activity." Research Policy 45(1): 218‐231.
Kortum, S. and J. Lerner (2000). “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
      Innovation.” RAND Journal of Economics 31 (4): 674‐692.
Lemley, M. A. (2000). “Reconceiving Patents in the Age of Venture Capital.” Journal of Small
       and Emerging Business Law 4: 137‐148.
Lemley, M. A., and N. Myhrvold (2007). “How to make a patent market.” Hofstra Law Review
       36: 257‐259.
Lemley, M. A., E. Oliver, K. Richardson, J. Yoon, and M. Costa (2016). “Patent purchases and
       litigation outcomes.” Patently‐O Patent Law Journal 15.
Lemley, M. A., K. Richardson, and E. Oliver (2017). “The patent enforcement iceberg.”
       Stanford Public Law Working Paper. Available at
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3087573
Lemley, M. A. and C. Shapiro (2007a). "Patent holdup and royalty stacking." Texas Law
       Review 85(7): 1991‐2049.
Lemley, M. A. and C. Shapiro (2007b). "Reply: Patent holdup and royalty stacking." Texas
       Law Review 85.
Lemley, M. A. and C. Shapiro (2005). "Probabilistic Patents." Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 19(2): 75‐98.
Love, B. J., K. Richardson, E. Oliver, and M. Costa (2017). “An Empirical Look at the
        “Brokered” Market for Patents.” Available at
        https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3056444




                                              28
B. H. Hall                          Patents and financing                             May 2018



Ma, S., J. T. Tong, and W. Wang (2017). Selling innovation in bankruptcy. Yale, Duke, and
          Queens Universities: Working paper. Available at
          https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2903003
Machlup, F. (1958). An Economic Review of the Patent System, Study No.15 of Committee on
      Judiciary, Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights, 85th U. S.
      Congress, 2d Session.
MacMillan, I.C., R. Siegel and P. N. Subbanarasimha (1985). “Criteria used by venture
       capitalists to evaluate new venture proposals”. Journal of Business Venturing 1: 119‐
       128.
Mann, R. J. (2005). "Do Patents Facilitate Financing in the Software Industry?" Texas Law
       Review 83: 961‐1030.
Mann, R. J. and T. W. Sager (2007). "Patents, Venture Capital, and Software Startups."
       Research Policy 36: 193‐208.
Mulligan, C. and T. B. Lee (2012). “Scaling the Patent System.” NYU Annual Survey of
       American Law 68: 289‐318.
Munari, F. and L. Toschi (2015). "Do patents affect VC financing? Empirical evidence from
       the nanotechnology sector." International Entrepreneurship and Management
       Journal 11(3): 623‐644.
Odasso, C., G. Scellato and E. Ughetto (2015). "Selling patents at auction: an empirical
       analysis of patent value." Industrial and Corporate Change 24(2): 417‐438.
Oliver, E., K. Richardson, and F. Johanssen (2016). “When Do Operating Companies Sell their
        Patents?” IPWatchdog (Aug. 16, 2016).
        http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2016/08/16/operating‐companies‐sell‐their‐
        patents/id=71890/
Penrose, E. (1951). The Economics of the International Patent System, Baltimore: John
       Hopkins University Press.
Priest, G. L. and B. Klein (1984). “The Selection of Disputes for Litigation.” Journal of Legal
         Studies 13 (1): 1‐55.
Quillen, J. C. D., O. H. Webster and R. Eichmann (2003). "Continuing Patent Applications and
        Performance of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office ‐ Extended." Federal Circuit
        Bar Journal 12(1): 35‐55.
Reitzig, M., J. Henkel and C. Heath (2007). "On sharks, trolls and their patent prey:
         Unrealistic damage awards and firms' strategies of ‘being infringed’." Research
         Policy 36(1): 134‐154.
Riley, J. (1979). “Informational Equilibrium.” Econometrica 47 (2): 331‐59.
Roth, Alvin E. (2007). "The Art of Designing Markets," Harvard Business Review, October:
        118‐126 .
Schankerman, M. and A. Pakes (1986). "Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European
      Countries during the Post‐1950 Period." Economic Journal 96: 1052‐1076.




                                               29
B. H. Hall                         Patents and financing                           May 2018



Schwartz, D. L. (2012). “The Rise of Contingent Fee Representation in Patent Litigation.” 64
      Alabama Law Review 335.
Schwartz, D. L. and J. P. Kesan (2014). "Analyzing the role of NPEs in the patent system."
      Cornell Law Review 99(2): 425‐456.
Serrano, C. J. and R. H. Ziedonis (2018). “How Redeployable are Patent Assets? Evidence
       from Failed Startups.” Universitat Pompeu Fabra and Boston University: Working
       paper.
Sichelman, T. and S. J. H. Graham (2010). "Patenting by entrepreneurs: An empirical study."
       Michigan Telecommunications Technology Law Review 17(1): 111‐180.
Sneed, K. A. and D. K. N. Johnson (2009). "Selling ideas: the determinants of patent value in
       an auction environment." R&D Management 39(1): 87‐94.
Spence, M. (1974). “Competitive and optimeal responses to signals: An analysis of
       efficiencey and distribution.” Journal of Economic Theory 7:296‐332.
Spence, M. (1973). “Job market signaling.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(3): 355‐374.
U.S. Supreme Court decision (2014). Alice Corporation Pty. Ltd vs CLS Bank International et
        al. Available at https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/13pdf/13‐298_7lh8.pdf
Wagner, S. and I. Cockburn (2010). "Patents and the survival of Internet‐related IPOs."
      Research Policy 39(2): 214‐228.
Ziedonis, R. H. and B. H. Hall (2001). The Effects of Strengthening Patent Rights on Firms
       Engaged in Cumulative Innovation. In G. Libecap (ed.), Entrepreneurial Inputs and
       Outcomes, Volume 13: New Studies of Entrepreneurship in the United States, 133‐188.
       Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.




                                              30
B. H. Hall                                        Patents and financing                               May 2018



                 Table 1: Share of firms with patent applications during the study period

                                                                                            Share
             Paper                      Sample              Sector                        patenting
             Helmers & Rogers (2011)    all UK SMEs         medium & high tech                6%
             Cao & Hsu (2011)           US VC‐backed        computer‐related                 7%
             Cao & Hsu (2011)           US VC‐backed        non‐high technology              7%
             Cao & Hsu (2011)           US VC‐backed        communications/media             9%
             Engel & Keilbach (2004)    German VC‐backed    all mfg & bus services           10%
             Hsu & Ziedonis (2008)      US VC‐backed        semiconductors (grants)          14%
             Cao & Hsu (2011)           US VC‐backed        medical/health/life science      20%
             Conti et al. (2013)        Israeli startups    internet                         20%
             Mann & Sager(2005)         US VC‐backed        software                         25%
             Cao & Hsu (2011)           US VC‐backed        semiconductor                    26%
             Cao & Hsu (2011)           US VC‐backed        biotechnology                    27%
             Munari & Toschi (2015)     global VC‐backed    nanotechnology                   28%
             Hsu & Ziedonis (2008)      US VC‐backed        semiconductors (apps)            35%
             Conti et al. (2013)        Israeli startups    IT/software (grants)             38%
             Greenberg (2013)           Israeli VC‐backed   internet                         40%
             Haeussler et al. (2014)    UK, German VC       biotechnology                    40%
             Conti et al. (2013)        Israeli startups    cleantech (grants)               40%
             Wagner & Cockburn (2010)   US IPO              internet                         42%
             Conti et al. (2013)        Israeli startups    communications (grants)          42%
             Greenberg (2013)           Israeli VC‐backed   software                         54%
             Conti et al. (2013)        Israeli startups    life sciences (grants)           55%
             Conti et al. (2013)        Israeli startups    medical devices (grants)         60%
             Conti et al. (2013)        Israeli startups    semiconductors (grants)          65%
             Greenberg (2013)           Israeli VC‐backed   communications                   68%
             Greenberg (2013)           Israeli VC‐backed   semiconductors                   85%
             Greenberg (2013)           Israeli VC‐backed   life sciences                    88%
                                                            31
B. H. Hall                                     Patents and financing                                  May 2018




                                    Table 2: Selected large patent transactions

                                                                                          Price per
                                                                     Number of    Price    patent
             Date          Seller            Buyer                    patents     ($M)    ($1000)
             May 2011      Modu              Google                     21         4.9      233

                                             Apple/Microsoft
             June 2011     Nortel                                      6000       4500      750
                                             consortium

             August 2011   Motorola Mobility Google                    20000      12500     625

             September 2011 IBM              Google                    1023        NA        NA

             March 2012    IBM               Facebook                   750        NA        NA

             April 2012    AOL               Microsoft                  925       1100      1189

             July 2012     Microsoft         Facebook                   650       550       846

                                             Google/Facebook/Apple
             December 2012 Kodak                                       1100       525       477
                                             /Samsung consortium




                                                         32
B. H. Hall                                                 Patents and financing                                                         May 2018


                                                Table 3: Ocean Tomo auction studies

                                                       Ocean Tomo auction studies
                                                                              Average lot
                                                          Average     Share      price
Authors                     Data year Lots     Patents     lot size    sold   (US$1000)        Sale determinants            Pricing determinants
                                                                                                                          broader scope, smaller
                                                                                             smaller scope, smaller
                                                                                                                           family, higher forward
                                                                                            family size, younger age
Sneed & Johnson (2009)     Spring 2006   99      402        4.06      50%        210                                    cites, younger age, smaller
                                                                                              note: no technology
                                                                                                                        lot, individual or university
                                                                                                       control
                                                                                                                                    seller
                                                                                            smaller scope, corporate
                                                                                            seller, larger family size,
                                                                                            large number of related
                                                                                            bidders, smaller lot size,
Y‐G Lee & J‐H Lee (2010)         2007    78      145        1.86      49%        308                                                 NA
                                                                                              smaller n of related
                                                                                                      patents;
                                                                                               limited technology
                                                                                                      controls

Odasso et al. (2014)             2006    127     569        4.48      22%        285
                                                                                            corporate seller, higher higher forward cites, more
                                                                                              forward cites, more       assignees, technically
Odasso et al. (2014)             2007    172     440        2.56      44%        357
                                                                                             assignees, technically           congruent lot.
                                                                                                 congruent lot;          if seller is NPE : higher
Odasso et al. (2014)             2008    236     352        1.49      51%        303
                                                                                               technology & year      claims, more residual life;
                                                                                                    controls         technology & year controls
Odasso et al. (2014)        2006‐2008    535    1408        2.63      42%        331




                                                                       33
B. H. Hall                                                                     Patents and financing                                                                            May 2018


                                              Table A‐1: Literature on the impact of patents on VC funding
Author         Date Title                             Country    Industry      Years        Sample            Dep var       Patent var(s)    Results
                                                                                                                          US patent apps &
                    Picking winners or building                                                              pre‐IPO                         Do VCs pick winners or build them?
                                                                                                                           grants by year,
                    them? Alliance, intellectual,                                                        funding; sales,                     Characteristics for funding higly correlated with
                                                                                                                           plus length of
Baum &              and human capital as                                               204 startups/ 471   rnd, emply                        subsequent performance. Good at picking, but
               2004                                   Canada      biotech    1991‐2000                                     time since last
Silverman           selection criteria in venture                                        incumbents        growth; US                        then change mgmt.
                                                                                                                          patent (appears
                    financing and performance of                                                          patent apps &                      Patent apps have a highly significant impact on
                                                                                                                                to be
                    biotechnology startups                                                               grants; survival                    money raised; grants less so in presence of apps
                                                                                                                            misspecified)
                                                                                                                                        Using IV with industry instruments, D(pat)
                                                                                                            D(IPO,
                                                                                       22,000 or 10,000                                 positive for IPO, amt VC investment, negative for
                      The informational role of                                                           bankruptcy,    D(US pat app),
Cao & Hsu      2011                                     US          all      1976‐2005   VC‐backed                                      bankruptcy & acquisition, patent counts don't
                      patents in venture financing                                                       acquired), VC N(US pat apps)
                                                                                           startups                                     matter. Attempt to differentiate between
                                                                                                        funding, rounds
                                                                                                                                        certification and quality is doubtful.
                                                                                                                        granted patents
                    Patents, thickets, and the                                              software
                                                                                                                         in the market; Narrow software markets. In thickets markets,
Cockburn &          financing of early‐stage firms:                                         markets;
               2009                                     US       software    1990‐2004                  VC funding; IPO interact with lack of patents delays VC funding and IPOs; more
MacGarvie           Evidence from the software                                           software firms
                                                                                                                          1995 regime after 1995 and 1998
                    industry                                                             from CorpTech
                                                                                                                             change
                                                                  all ‐ 44%
Conti,                                                                                   117 startups in      D(VC), VC                    patents strongly predict presence and amount of
                    Show me the right stuff:       Georgia,      software,                                                  US patent apps
Thursby, and   2013                                                         1998‐2008     Georgia Tech     funds, D(angel),                VC funding contemporaneously, but no impact
                    Signals for High‐tech startups   US           only 9%                                                       in year
Rothaermel                                                                                 incubator         angel funds                   on angel funding
                                                                bio/pharma

                                                                                                                                            Instruments are US VC deal count and amount,
Conti, J.                                                                                                                  # new investors;
                    Patents as signals for startup               all high‐             787 VC‐financed    Change in                         growth in US VC deals (corr with size of Israeli VC
Thursby, and   2013                                    Israel                1994‐2011                                       VC funding in
                    financing                                      tech                    startups    granted patents                      investment). First round patent not influenced
M. Thursby                                                                                                                       round
                                                                                                                                            by funding, but later rounds are.
                    Firm level implications of                                                                                              patent filing before foundation date strongly
                                                                all mfg + ptt             142 VC‐backed    emp growth,      German patent
Engel &             early stage venture capital                                                                                             predicts VC involvement later, but VC
               2004                                   Germany       + bus     1995‐1998 firms; 21,375 non‐ D(early stage      apps before
Keilbach            investment ‐ An empirical                                                                                               involvement is only weakly associated with
                                                                  services              VC‐backed firms        VC)            foundation
                    investigation                                                                                                           further patenting
                                                                                          1st time for‐
                                                                                                                          D (pat grant);     Conditional on first patent app; uses examiner
Farre‐Mensa,                                                                             profit new US
                                                                                                           subsequent VC #follow‐on pats     assignment instrument; Patents increase prob of
Hegde, &     2016 The bright side of patents            US          all      2001‐2014   patenters, no
                                                                                                              funding      (# granted);      subsequent VC rounds. Delays in examination
Ljungqvist                                                                               patents 1990‐
                                                                                                                           exam delay        reduce this benefit; <10% have VC funding
                                                                                               2000
                    Small Firms, Big Patents?                                                                                                age and funding year‐sector dummies. Elasticity
                    Estimating patent value using               technology‐           317 tech startups log valuation at      US patent      of value to patent apps is 0.46 for non‐software
Greenberg      2013                                    Israel               1987‐2005
                    data on Israeli financing                      based              with VC funding the VC round          granted apps     (higher for life sciences), nothing for software
                    rounds                                                                                                                   and for grants, except for very young firms

                                                                                             34
B. H. Hall                                                                   Patents and financing                                                                                May 2018




                                         Table A‐1: Literature on the impact of patents on VC funding (cont.)
Author         Date Title                            Country    Industry    Years          Sample              Dep var        Patent var(s)   Results

                                                                                        all UK/German                       EP pat app stock;
Haeussler,          How patenting informs VC                                                                                                  Filing related positively to VC financing; as is
                                                       UK;                               biotechs that      obtaining VC     share X/Y refs,
Harhoff, and   2014 investors ‐ The case of                     biotech      2006                                                             examination process; about 40% have pat apps
                                                     Germany                                 want VC          finance         cites by large
Mueller             biotechnology                                                                                                             (more if VC‐backed)
                                                                                            financing                       tech; share opp.
                                                                  semi‐
Hochberg,           Patent collateral, investor                conductors,                VC backed           D (startup     patent market lenders continue to finance firms that have
Serrano, &     2017 commitment, and the market         US       software, 1987‐2008     startups 1987‐      receives loan       liquidity  credible VC commitment; patents used as
Ziedonis            for venture lending                          medical                     1999             financing)       measure     security for loans
                                                                 devices
                                                                                                                                              patent apps more important for first round than
                    The diminishing signaling
                                                                                     VC‐backed firms            Log of                        second; grants seem to matter for second, and
Hoenen et           value of patents between                                                                                  US pat apps &
               2014                                    US       biotech    2001‐2011 and SBIR funded        invesment in                      when apps excluded. Heckman correction for
al.                 early rounds of venture                                                                                  grants by round
                                                                                          firms               the round                       funding does not affect results. Quality(cites) not
                    capital financing
                                                                                                                                              as important.
                    Quality signals? The role of                                       518 potential VCs                                      conjoint analysis based on survey of VCs
                                                           biotech;
Hoenig &            patents, alliances, and team    US;                                   (ind assoc.)     choice of firm to patent app or hypothetical choices. Patent app or grant helps,
               2015                                       cleantech;         2011
Henkel              experience in venture capital Germany                               resulting in 187           fund            grant      but not more when tech quality unknown ‐
                                                              ICT
                    funding                                                                   obs                                             rejects the signaling idea.
                                                                                                               VC investor
                    Resources as dual sources of                                                                              pat app stock; focus on signaling aspect of patents pre‐IPO and
                                                                                                               quality;pre‐
Hsu &               advantage: Implications for                  semi‐     1975‐2005 VC only semi‐                           interacted with IPO; fixed effects in valuation model; evidence
               2013                                    US                                                    money value;
Ziedonis            valuing entrepreneurial‐firm               conductors (founding) conductor firms                         early round and that pats are worth more if less info; about 35%
                                                                                                            underpricing at
                    patents                                                                                                 no prior IPO exp have patent apps; 14% have granted patents
                                                                                                                    IPO
                                                                                                               valuation of patent grants at elasticity about 0.5. Doubling patent grants yields
                      The importance of patent                                          173 VC‐backed
Lerner         1994                                    US       biotech    1973‐1992                        firm in venture time of financing 50% increase in funding; increases in scope
                      scope: An empirical analysis                                           firms
                                                                                                                financing         round       similar impact; pooled cross‐section
                                                                           1997‐1999                          rounds, exit, granted patents only 1 in 4 VC‐backed software acquired patents;
Mann &                Patents, VC, and software                                      VC only software
               2005                                    US       software     (first                             total inv,     (number &      size of portfolio does not matter; issue before
Sager                 startups                                                            firms
                                                                            round)                               survival       dummies)      first round does not matter
                    Do patents affect VC
                                                                                                                             EP pat apps at VC specialists care about nano patents but not
Munari &            financing? Empirical evidence                 nano                   VC financed       VC financing at
               2015                                   global              1985‐2006                                        first round; all & other patents. VC generalists care about patent
Toschi              from the nano‐technology                   technology                nano firms          1st round
                                                                                                                              nano (core) scope (# classes) but not patents
                    sector



                                                                                            35
B. H. Hall                                                                Patents and financing                                                                               May 2018



                                         Table A‐2: Literature on the impact of VC funding on patenting
Author       Date Title                             Country    Industry     Years      Sample           Dep var           Indep var       Results
                  Picking winners or building them?
                                                                                                                        Canadian IRAP     Canadian seed capital highly correlated with
                  Alliance, intellectual, and human
                                                                                    204 startups/                         seed‐capital;   patents; firms with patents receive more pre‐IPO
Baum &            capital as selection criteria in                                                US patent apps
             2004                                   Canada     biotech    1991‐2000      471                                pre_IPO       funding, but pre‐IPO funding not associated with
Silverman         venture financing and                                                              & grants
                                                                                     incumbents                         financing; time   patent apps or grants in the presence of time
                  performance of biotechnology
                                                                                                                        since financing   since patent
                  startups
                                                                                        142 VC‐
                                                                                                                                      patent filing before foundation date strongly
                  Firm level implications of early          all mfg + ptt           backed firms;   German patent
Engel &                                                                                                                               predicts VC involvement later, but VC
             2004 stage veture capital investment ‐ Germany     + bus     1995‐1998 21,375 non‐      filings after      D (VC‐backed)
Keilbach                                                                                                                              involvement is only weakly associated with
                  An empirical investigation                  services                VC‐backed      foundation
                                                                                                                                      further patenting
                                                                                         firms
                                                                                        2‐digit     granted US pats
                                                                                                                                          Using 79 change to pension fund rules as
                                                                                    industry data     by app date,
Kortum &          Assessing the contribution of                                                                          VC funding       instrument, find that VC funding 3‐4 times as
             2000                                      US        mfg      1983‐1992 from NSF +      contemporaneo
Lerner            venture capital to innovation                                                                           amounts         productive for patents. Some problems
                                                                                       Venture         us with VC
                                                                                                                                          associated with incomplete industry controls.
                                                                                      economics          funding
                                                                                       22,000 or       Increase in                        increase in patent counts slightly smaller if VC
                  The informational role of patents                                   10,000 VC‐     patent counts       N (US patent     investment larger, controlling for industry &
Cao & Hsu    2011                                      US        all      1976‐2005
                  in venture financing                                                  backed      after first round       apps)         year; graph shows plateau after receiving
                                                                                       startups           of VC                           investment




                                                                                      36
B. H. Hall                                                                Patents and financing                                                                              May 2018


                                     Table A‐3: Literature on the impact of patenting on startup firm performance
Author       Date Title                            Country   Industry    Years         Sample           Dep var        Patent var(s)    Results
                                                                                     1st time for‐
                                                                                                     3 and 5 yr E & S D (pat grant);    Conditional on first patent app; uses examiner
Farre‐Mensa,                                                                        profit new US
                                                                                                       growth, acq    #follow‐on pats   assignment instrument; Patents increase growth,
Hegde, &     2016 The bright side of patents         US        all      2001‐2014   patenters, no
                                                                                                     prob, follow‐on    (# granted);    jobs, innovation, and investor returns. Delays in
Ljungqvist                                                                          patents 1990‐
                                                                                                       innovation       exam delay      examination reduce this benefit.
                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                       control for samp sel and simultaneity; patenting
                                                             high and
Helmers &          Does patenting help high‐                                                          growth 2001‐     D (UK pat app); increases growth 26‐27% per annum (only 6.3%
              2011                                   UK      medium       2000       all UK SMEs
Rogers             tech startups?                                                                     2005; survival    D(EP pat app) have patents); also strongly correlated with
                                                               tech
                                                                                                                                       survival
                                                                                                                                       firms with one pat app have a 32% lower prob of
                                                                                   Internet firms                       D (pat app);
                                                                                                                                       exit either via acq or bankruptcy at 5% level; 705
Wagner &             Patents and the survival of                        1998‐2001   with IPO on   survival from         D(pat app in
              2010                                   US      internet                                                                  pats do not matter; many cites delay exit via
Cockburn             internet‐related IPOs                                (IPO)   NASDAQ, 63% VC‐      IPO             705); N of pats
                                                                                                                                       acquisition; only 42% have patents. VC backed
                                                                                      backed;                           with >6 cites
                                                                                                                                       firms less likely to fail, more likely to be acquired




                                                                                       37
B. H. Hall                                  Patents and financing                                  May 2018




Endnotes
1See Hall and Harhoff (2012) for a brief survey of the evidence on the patent system‐innovation
relationship.
2 Innovative startups use a veriety of financing mechanisms, but the patent signaling literature has
focused on the VC channel, probably because that is the most important external source of finance for
such firms, and where asymmetry of information is most salient.
3In the past, the main empirical approach that is able to distinguish the two effects is that using
patent renewal data, which focuses on willingness‐to‐pay for the patent right (Schankerman and
Pakes, 1986). Unfortunately, due to the relatively low level of patent renewal fees, this approach is
not able to say much about the upper tail of the value distribution. To date, there is no research using
patent renewal fees specifically for the kind of firms that are studied here.
4In the case where the patentee does not have the first best use for the invention, it is possible that
S>π. This will not change the conclusion that it is better to have the option of salvage (or simple sale
of the invention) than not to have it.
5 Note that in the VC‐funding case, there is evidence that serial entrepreneurs do find it easier to

obtain funding, suggesting some form of reputation building (Conti et al. 2013; Baum and Silverman
2004).
6An exception is Farre‐Mensa et al. (2016), which samples on patenters and focuses on the effect of a
patent grant.
7   See Ito (2005) for one VC’s thoughts on the value (or not) of patents to startups.
8   In re Alappat 33 F.3d 1526, 31 USPQ2d 1545 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
9   State Street Bank and Trust Co., Inc. v. Signature Financial Group, Inc., 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
10It is worth noting that from an econometric panel data perspective, the regression they use is a bit
peculiar, in that the left hand side predates the right hand side. That is, the model is that the firm
chooses patents between t and t‐1 in response to the funding and investors received at t.
Instrumenting is therefore essential, since this can only be true in an expectational sense. The choice
of instruments implies that the patenting choice is identified from changes in future valuation that are
correlated with the US VC climate. If the firm expects obtaining investor funds in the future to be
easier, it will patent more. It might have been interesting to examine whether the reverse is true, with
instruments for patenting when it is on the right hand side.
11Note that this code was discontinued as of 2011 and the nano patents are now classified in B82Y,
which is in accordance with both CPC (US) and IPC (international) usage. See
http://www.epo.org/news‐issues/issues/classification/nanotechnology.html
12This paper, like much of the work in this area, is published in a law journal, where the standard for
empirical work is somewhat different from that in economics journals. The survey was conducted by
mailing VCs one survey and then asking them to distribute a slightly different survey to the
companies they funded. Unfortunately, there is no information in the paper about how the sample of
200 is split between VCs and companies, or whether the VC answers are weighted by the number of
companies they fund, or even whether the 200 is simply the VC sample.
13   https://techcrunch.com/2011/05/20/google‐spends‐4‐9‐million‐on‐modu‐patent‐portfolio/


                                                       38
B. H. Hall                                  Patents and financing                                  May 2018


14   http://money.cnn.com/2012/07/06/technology/yahoo‐facebook‐patent‐settle/index.htm
15Two of the authors on this paper are partners in the Richardson Oliver Law Group, which has a
relationship with many buyers in the patent market. This facilitated their access to the broker data,
which was obtained under non‐disclosure agreements, so there are limits to what they could disclose
about particular transactions.
16   http://icappatentbrokerage.com/2017‐summer‐catalog
17 For some examples, see Cotropia et al. (2014), critiqued by Bessen (2014), Bessen and Meurer

(2014), critiqued by Schwartz and Kesan (2014), and Lemley and Shapiro (2007a), followed by
Golden (2007) and Lemley and Shapiro (2007b).
18The key court decision is the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Alice Corp. vs. CLS Bank International
(2014), although there are several others that influence the interpretation of the section 101 of the
patent statute.
19In the U.S., some also claim that inventors are discouraged from reading patents, especially in ICT
technologies, because of the danger of a willful infringement charge in case of litigation, which can
carry a threefold increase in damages. The standard for a finding of willful infringement has been a
controversial area in the US courts [In re Seagate Tech. LLC, 497 F.3d 1360, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (en
banc); Halo Electronics, Inc. v. Pulse Electronics, Inc.,136 S. Ct. 1923 (2016)]. The American Inventors
Act of 2012 codified the 2007 Federal Circuit decision, so that it is now somewhat more difficult to
prove willful infringement.


20   In re Alice Corporation Pty. Ltd. v. CLS Bank International 573 U.S. __, 134 S. Ct. 2347 (2014).




                                                       39
