                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   POLLUTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL MIGRATION:
                     EVIDENCE FROM CORPORATE EXECUTIVES

                                         Ross Levine
                                          Chen Lin
                                         Zigan Wang

                                     Working Paper 24389
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24389


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 2018, Revised January 2020




Previously circulation "Toxic Emissions and Executive Migration." We are grateful for the
comments of participants at the 31st Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Karel
Hrazdil, Lucas Davis, Adair Morse, Philip Strahan, and Reed Walker. We thank Yan Li, Luping
Yu and Po-Yu Liu for excellent assistance. Lin acknowledges the financial support from the Seed
Funding for Strategic Interdisciplinary Research at HKU and the Center of Financial Innovation
and Development of HKU. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Zigan Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pollution and Human Capital Migration: Evidence from Corporate Executives
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Zigan Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 24389
March 2018, Revised January 2020
JEL No. G3,J61,J63,Q5,R32

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the impact of pollution on the migration of high human capital employees. We link data
on the opening of toxic-emitting plants with the career paths of executives at S&P 1500 firms.
We discover that toxic-emitting plant openings increase executive departures from neighboring
firms with adverse effects on stock prices. The results: are larger when polluting plants and firms
are geographically closer, hold only for executives physically-based at treated firms, hold only for
the opening of polluting plants, do not reflect other local factors or prior stock price performance,
and are larger among executives with more general human capital.


Ross Levine                                       Zigan Wang
Haas School of Business                           Faculty of Business and Economics
University of California at Berkeley              The University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)       Hong Kong
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                           wangzigan@gmail.com
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu

Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk
1. Introduction

        Pollution imposes costly externalities. Exposure to toxic pollutants increases infant

mortality, neurodevelopmental disorders, respiratory and cardiovascular disease, cancer rates,

and premature death.1 The World Health Organization (2016) attributes about one in six

deaths to air pollution. According to the American Lung Association (2019), more than 40%

of the U.S. population lives in counties with unhealthful levels of air pollution. Consequently,

researchers examine the impact of environmental protection regulations on health, economic

activity, and business profitability (e.g., Becker and Henderson 2000; Greenstone 2002;

Krueger, Sautner, and Starks 2019).

        In this paper, we examine an additional potential consequence of pollution: The

migration of highly-valued employees from firms that are geographically close to polluting

plants. Given that exposure to toxic pollutants has adverse health effects, the opening of a

toxic emitting plant could trigger the migration of workers from neighboring firms and this

migration could harm the firm from which they are separating. While research shows that

people migrate away from polluted areas (Chen, Oliva, and Zhan 2017) and shareholders,

households, firms, and markets react to environmental factors (e.g., Flammer 2013; Agarwal

Sing, and Yang 2019; Agarwal, Wang, and Yang 2019; Chang et al. 2019; Li, Massa, Zhang,

and Zhang 2019), we are unaware of systematic research into the impact of pollution on the

migration of highly-valued employees and the resultant effects of those separations on their

former firms.

        To evaluate the impact of pollution on human capital migration and the stock

market’s reaction to those departures, we focus on corporate executives. We focus on

executives—and not on employees more generally—for two reasons. First, executives exert a

significant impact on corporate policies and performance (e.g., Bertrand and Schoar 2003;

Kaplan, Klebanov and Sorensen 2012; Graham, Harvey and Puri 2013; Pan, Wang, and

Weisbach 2015, 2016; Pan 2017). Second, we can trace the career paths of executives over


1
 See, Chay and Greenstone (2003), Currie and Neidell (2005), Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2016), Schlenker
and Walker (2016), Isen, Rossin-Slater, and Walker (2017), Qian et al. (2017), and Landrigan et al. (2017) and
Agarwal, Deng, and Li (2019).

                                                      1
time and across corporations. Thus, we ask: When a plant starts emitting toxic pollutants,

does this trigger executives in neighboring firms to leave and migrate to areas with less

pollution, and are these executive departures associated with a drop in firm value? By linking

environmental economics with corporate finance, we provide additional evidence on the

effects of pollution.

        To address these questions, we create a unique database on the career paths of

executives and combine several datasets on toxic emissions. First, we assemble data on the

career paths for all executives at S&P 1500 firms over the period from 2000 through 2014

from BoardEx and ExecuComp. Thus, we know where executives work, when they depart,

and to which firms they migrate. Second, we identify plants that emit airborne toxic

pollutants using the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) Toxic Release Inventory

(TRI) program. Since 1986, the Emergency Planning, Community Right to Know Act

requires that plants in particular industries that use specific toxic chemicals in sufficient

quantities and that have ten or more full-time equivalent employees report their emissions of

TRI-listed toxins. Third, to obtain precise information on the opening and location of these

TRI-plants, we match data from the EPA’s TRI program with National Establishment Time-

Series (NETS) data, which contains information on the universe of U.S. establishments (over

58.8 million) during the past two decades. The matched sample yields the exact location and

opening dates of 48,317 TRI plants. Fourth, we use data from EPA outdoor monitors on the

concentration of airborne pollutants. Critically, we show that TRI plant openings are

associated with a material increase in airborne pollutants close to those new TRI plants.

        The key challenge to identifying the impact of toxic emissions on executive migration

is omitted variable bias. An omitted factor could account for both toxic emissions in a locality

and executive migration from that locality, potentially leading to spurious inferences about

the impact of pollution on executive migration. We use a series of empirical strategies—

including differentiating among executives within the same firm—to address this concern. In

the first part of our analyses, we focus on firms and assess whether the opening of toxic

emitting plants induces executives at neighboring firms to leave those firms. The second part


                                               2
of our analyses focuses on individual executives. We evaluate whether an executive is more

likely to separate from a firm with greater exposure to toxic emitting plants.

           We begin our firm-level analyses by examining the impact of TRI plant openings on

the percentage of executives who leave geographically close firms.2 In these analyses, the

dependent variable is the percentage of executives who separate from an S&P 1500 firm one

or two years after the TRI plant opening. The main explanatory variable measures the degree

to which the S&P 1500 firm is exposed to TRI plant openings. To measure exposure, we use

indicators of whether a TRI plant opens within one (or two) miles of an S&P 1500 firm.

Critically, the regressions control for city-year effects, so that we are comparing S&P 1500

firms within the same city and year that are differentially exposed to TRI plant openings due

to their distance from the plant. The regressions also control for (a) industry-year fixed

effects since industries might concentrate geographically and have distinct pollution and

executive migration tendencies, (b) firm fixed effects, and (c) time-varying firm traits, e.g.,

firm size, growth, leverage, and cash-flow volatility.

           We find that exposure to TRI plant openings is associated with a sharp increase in

executive migration. The firm-level analyses indicate that TRI plant openings are associated

with a material increase in the percentage of executives who leave neighboring S&P 1500

firms. For example, the estimates indicate that if one TRI plant opens within one mile of an

S&P 1500 firm, the proportion of executives who leave during the next year rises by 4.2%,

which is large since only 12% of executives leave the average firm each year. Although these

analyses control for city-year fixed effects—as well as assortment of other controls, we were

concerned that there might be time-varying, within-city local factors that trigger both

executive separations and the opening of TRI plants. Consequently, we extend the analyses.

           Building on these firm-level analyses, we employ several strategies to better identify

the impact of the exposure of executives to air pollution on their decisions to migrate. First,

we exploit the distance between the firm and the new toxic-emitting TRI plant. As discussed

in Currie et al. (2015), the density of air pollution dissipates with distance. Thus, if exposure

to toxic pollutants triggers executive migration, then the impact of TRI plants on executive
2
    Currie et al (2015) evaluate the impact of TRI plant openings on housing prices.

                                                          3
migration should be larger for firms that are geographically closer to the new TRI plants. This

is what we find. For example, there is no relationship between executive migration from a

firm and TRI plants opening between two to five miles of the firm and the estimated impact

of TRI plant openings on executive migrations is twice as large for TRI plant openings within

one mile of the firm as for plant openings between one and two miles from the firm.

       Second, we implement a placebo test that focuses on corporate leaders who are not

physically based at the firm. If a firm’s leaders migrate because they are exposed to pollution

from a neighboring TRI plant, then leaders who are physically present at their firms should be

more likely to leave than those who are typically not physically present at those firms. To test

this, we examine non-executive directors, leaders who are less likely than executives to be

physically present at the firm on a regular basis. Consistent with the view that physical

exposure to toxic air pollutants triggers executive migration, we find no relationship between

TRI plant openings and the migration of non-executive directors from neighboring firms.

       Third, we implement a different placebo test by examining the impact of non-TRI

plant openings on the rate of executive migration from neighboring firms. If exposure to

pollution drives the results on executive migration, then we should not find executive

migration from S&P 1500 firms when non-TRI plants open close by. That is, if migration is

caused by pollution emitted by TRI plant openings—and not by some other factor associated

with new plant formation, then the opening of non-TRI plants should not trigger executive

migration from geographically close firms. Consistent with the view the exposure to pollution

drives executive migration, we find no evidence that the opening of non-TRI plants induces

executive from neighboring firms to leave.

       Fourth, we were concerned that TRI plant openings might be more likely to occur

around failing S&P 1500 firms and failing firms are more likely to fire executives. Although

our findings that geographic proximity down to a mile and the placebo test of non-executive

directors mitigate such concerns, we can also directly address concerns about firm

performance. Specifically, we eliminate S&P 1500 firms that were performing poorly during

the year prior to TRI plants opening close to those firms. If the earlier results were driven by

poor firm performance driving both executive migration and TRI plant openings, then the
                                               4
results should weaken after we exclude poorly performing firms. This is not what we find.

Even when eliminating poorly performing firms, the results hold and the estimated

coefficients are very similar. This is consistent with the view that exposure to pollution, not

prior firm performance, accounts for the findings.

       Fifth, we employ both propensity score matching and nearest neighbor matching

algorithms to estimate the impact of the opening of a TRI plant on the migration of

executives from geographically close firms. That is, we match each “treated” firm, i.e., each

firm exposed to the opening of TRI plant, with otherwise similar control firms using these

matching algorithms. We then compare the frequency of executive separations in the treated

and control groups. The results from using both matching techniques confirm the earlier

findings: TRI plant openings increase the rate at which executives leave treated firms.

       In the second part of our analyses, we focus on individual executives. Rather, than

testing whether TRI plant openings increase the percentage of executives who leave

geographically close firms, we now assess whether an executive is more likely to separate

from a firm with greater exposure to TRI plant openings. To conduct this assessment, we use

a linear probability model where the dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals

one if the executive leaves the firm during the next year (or two). The main explanatory

variable is again a measure of firm exposure to TRI plant openings. In addition to including

all of the control variables employed in the firm-year analyses, these individual-level

analyses also control for individual fixed effects as well as the executive’s age and tenure

with the firm. Moving to individual-year analyses focuses on the separation experiences of

individual executives and allows us to condition out all time-invariant executive traits.

       The results from these individual-level analyses confirm the firm-level findings:

executives are more likely to leave their firms when a TRI plant opens close to them. The

estimated effects are large. If one TRI plant opens within one mile of an executive’s firm, our

estimates indicate this increases the probability that the executive leaves the firm during the

next year by about 5%. This is large, as only about 13% of executives leave firms over the

average year.


                                               5
       To address additional identification concerns, we differentiate among executives

within the same firm by the degree to which they have general human capital skills—skills

that are valued by other firms. Specifically, if the results are driven by exposure to toxic air

pollutants, then we expect that executives with more general human capital skills—and

therefore executives that are likely to have comparatively appealing employment options in

less polluted areas—should be more likely to separate from firms exposed to TRI plant

openings than executives with more firm-specific human capital skills. This is what we find.

Using Custodio, Ferreira and Matos’s (2013) measure of the degree to which an executive’s

skills are transferrable across firms and industries, we find that exposure to TRI plant

openings is associated with greater migration of executives with more general human capital

skills. By examining whether executives with different human capital skills within the same

firm respond differently to the same TRI plant openings, we reduce concerns that an omitted

variable is biasing our results, as any such variable would also have to account for this

differential response.

       Finally, we extend the analyses to shed additional light on the mechanisms linking

pollution and executive migration. First, one interpretation of our findings is that TRI plant

openings increase pollution and this pollution prompts executives to leave; that is, these

executive separations are triggered by pollution, not by poor executive performance. This

interpretation implies that executive departures from firms exposed to TRI plant openings

should reduce the stock prices of those firms. This is what we find. Firms’ cumulative

abnormal returns (CARs) fall markedly when executives announce their departures following

geographical close TRI plant openings—and the drop in CARs associated with executive

departures following TRI-plant openings is much greater than the drop associated with

executive departures from firms unexposed to TRI-plant openings. This is consistent with the

view that voluntary executive resignations (from greater pollution) have more adverse effects

on stock prices than forced executive departures (e.g., Warner, Watts and Wruck 1988, and

Denis and Denis 1995). Second, the view that toxic emissions encourage executive migration

also has predictions about where those executives go. If executives leave S&P 1500 firms

because of pollution or other nonmonetary factors, then we should observe these executives
                                               6
moving to firms in less polluted areas (e.g., Deng and Gao (2013) on the quality of life as a

component of executive compensation. We confirm this prediction: Executives who leave

S&P 1500 firms after TRI plant openings systematically move to firms in less polluted locals.

       Our examination relates to research on the degree to which people “vote with their

feet” (e.g., Tiebout 1956; Banzhaf and Walsh 2008). For example, Moretti and Wilson (2017)

show that U.S. state corporate taxes shape the migration patterns of star scientists, Giroud and

Rauh (2019) explores how U.S. state corporate and individual taxes affect the reallocation of

workers and businesses, and Kleven, Landais and Saez (2013), Kleven, Landais, Saez and

Schultz (2014), and Akcigit, Baslandze and Stantcheva (2016) examine the international

migration of highly skilled individuals in response to differences in personal income tax rates.

In our paper, we quantify (a) the sensitivity of the migration of corporate executives to TRI

plant openings that emit toxic air pollutants and (b) the impact of these executive departures

on corporate valuations. By documenting these findings, our research also adds to the

literature on executive turnover (e.g., Warner, Watts and Wruck 1988; Weisbach 1995) and

the reallocation of talent within firms (e.g. Giroud and Mueller 2015).

       Our work also contributes to research on the political economy of environmental

regulations and corporate social responsibility (CSR). Research examines how different

interest groups compete in shaping environmental policies (e.g., Baumol and Oates 1988;

Oates and Portney 2003). Our results indicate that corporations exposed to the toxic

emissions of other plants experience costs in terms of the migration of high human capital

individuals and stock price reductions. These costs could factor into cost-benefit assessments

of environmental regulations and the formation of corporate interest groups favoring stricter

environmental laws. Research also explores why firms adopt environment management

practices beyond regulatory requirements (e.g. Delmas and Toffel (2004, 2008) Reid and

Toffel (2009) and the connections between CSR, corporate performance, and national

policies (e.g., Flammer 2015a, 2015b; Krueger 2015; De Haas and Popov 2019). Our work

adds to this line of research by suggesting a connection between a major public health

concern, toxic air pollution, and the stock price performance of non-polluting firms.


                                               7
2.       Data, Variable Construction, and Descriptive Analyses

         2.1.     Toxics Release Inventory Plants, Monitors, and NETS Data

         The EPA’s Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) program mandates that all U.S. plants that

meet specific criteria report how much of each toxic chemical they release into the air, water,

or soil in each year. The EPA mandates that any plant that (1) manufactures, processes, or

otherwise uses a TRI-listed chemical in quantities above threshold levels in a given year, (2)

has 10 or more full-time equivalent employees, and (3) is in the mining, utility,

manufacturing, publishing, hazardous waste, or federal industry must report the emissions of

each TRI-listed toxic chemical. The TRI program makes this information publicly available,

along with the latitude and longitude of each TRI plant.

         To determine the year when a TRI plant opened, we augment the EPA’s data. In

particular, a plant enters the TRI database in the year that it meets all three criteria mentioned

above. However, a plant could be emitting toxic pollutants before it enters the TRI database

but only enters the TRI database, for example, after it has ten employees. Thus, to establish

the year when the TRI plant began operations, we merge the EPA’s TRI database with the

National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) data. NETS provides data on U.S. plants and

their parent companies, including the year when each plant was established, the geographic

location of each plant, as well as data on sales, number of employees, ownership, etc. The

NETS dataset has information on over 58.8 million U.S. establishment-year observations

during the past two decades. The matched TRI-NETS dataset allows us to infer the opening

year of each TRI plant.3 Given the other data in our analyses, we use data on the opening of

TRI plants from 2000 through 2014.

         The EPA also provides annual data on pollutant density as recorded by each of its air

monitors. A single air monitor records the density of multiple pollutants at a fixed location

every hour. We compute the average hourly density of each pollutant at each monitor over

each year. These monitors have the capacity to record 894 different pollutants, but every

3
  There might be concerns that a plant was operating for several years and only started emitting toxic pollutants
in the year that it entered the TRI program. In this case, it would be inappropriate to use the date from NETS
when the plant was first established. Consequently, we have conducted all of the analyses using the date when a
plant first appears in the TRI database and obtain very similar parameter estimates and p-values.

                                                       8
monitor does not record every pollutant every year. Therefore, we examine the most heavily

monitored pollutants. Specifically, we sort the pollutants by how often they are monitored

across all monitor-year observations and select the top 10 pollutants: PM10 Total 0-10um

STP (STP: standard temperature and pressure), Suspended Particulate (TSP: total suspended

particulates), Carbon monoxide, Ozone, Lead (TSP) STP, Sulfur dioxide, Benzene, Toluene,

PM10 – LC (LC: local conditions), and Ethylbenzene. The EPA provides the latitude and

longitude of each monitor.


          2.2.     S&P 1500 Firms

          We follow the career paths of all executives at S&P 1500 firms between 2000 and

2014. We obtain data on executives in each year from BoardEx and ExecuComp. By

comparing the lists in successive years, we identify those executives who leave and join firms.

We also collect information on each executive over time, including age, experience, tenure in

each firm, positions in the firm (e.g., CEO, chair of the board, etc.). In this way, we trace out

the career paths of each executive over time and across S&P 1500 firms.

          We assemble detailed data on all S&P 1500 firms from different data sources. From

the Compustat database, we obtain Total Assets, Leverage (liabilities/total assets), Operating

Cash Flow / Total Assets, Sales Growth, Cash Flow Volatility (standard deviation of cash

flows during the last five years). We identify the historical address of each firm’s

headquarters using several databases. We start from the database compiled by McDonald and

Yun, who have parsed all of the fields appearing in headers for 10-K forms (available on the

SEC’s EDGAR website) to determine the precise historical location of each listed firm’s

headquarters. 4 For firms that are not in the McDonald and Yun database, we use the

Compustat Snapshot database and WRDS SEC Analytics Suite to determine historical

locations. Because the SEC did not require electronic filings that contain the street and city

address of each corporation’s headquarters until May 1996, our sample starts then. From the

address, we compute longitudinal and latitudinal coordinates.



4
    https://www3.nd.edu/~mcdonald/10-K_Headers/10-K_Headers.html

                                                   9
       2.3.     TRI Plant Openings Near S&P Firms

       We construct and examine two time-varying measures of the exposure of S&P 1500

firms to toxins emitted by the opening of TRI. First, TRI Open within 1 Milef,t equals one if

there is at least one TRI plant opening within one mile of S&P1500 firm f in year t and zero

otherwise, where the TRI plant is not owned by S&P1500 firm f. Second, TRI Open within 2

Milesf,t equals one if there is at least one TRI plant opening within two miles of S&P1500

firm f in year t and zero otherwise, where again the TRI plant is not owned by the S&P1500

firm f. As a robustness test, we also confirm that the results hold when using alternative

measures of the geographic proximity of TRI plant openings to S&P 1500 firms. In particular,

we confirm the paper’s findings when using either the number of TRI plant openings or the

distance-weighted number of TRI plant openings, where each opening is weighted by the

inverse of the distance between the TRI plant and the S&P 1500 firm.


       2.4.    Descriptive Information

       Table 1 provides detailed variable definitions, Table 2 gives summary statistics, and

Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of TRI plants across the United States. It includes plants

that opened at some point since 1996. Plants are largely distributed in the New York, Boston,

Chicago, and Detroit metropolitan areas. Other areas with a high density of plants include

Atlanta, Charlotte, Minneapolis, Salt Lake City, Phoenix, Denver, Houston, Dallas, Seattle,

Portland, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Tampa, and Orlando. There are approximately 2,000 –

4,000 openings and closings each year. The total number of plants remains relatively stable at

between 22,000 and 25,000, with no clear trend over time.



3.     Empirical Results

       3.1.     Effect of TRI Plant Openings on Major Pollutants

       Before assessing the impact of TRI plant openings on the separation of executives

from geographically close S&P 1500 firms, we first establish that TRI plant openings are

associated with increases in air pollution near those plants.



                                               10
       To conduct this examination, we construct time-series measures of the density (in

nanograms/m3) of different air pollutants at air monitors close to each TRI plant. Specifically,

for each monitor in each year, we identify all TRI plant locations within one or two miles.

For each of these monitor-plant pairs in each year, we assign the density of the pollutants

recorded by the relevant air monitor, so that we have multiple observations for each TRI plant

in a year when there is more than one monitor within one or two miles of the plant. If two

TRI plants are within one or two miles of the same monitor, we assign each of these monitor-

plant pairs the same pollutant density. Thus, we define pm,l,t as the density of pollutant p

measured at monitor m that is within one or two miles of plant l in year t.

       Given these data, we estimate the following regression,

             𝑝!,!,! = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑠 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔               !,!   + 𝛿! + 𝛿!,! + 𝜀!,!,! ,   (1)

where 𝛼 is a constant, the main explanatory variable, Dummy (Plant is Operating), is a

dummy variable that equals zero in the years before a TRI plant opens and one afterwards,
the regression controls for year fixed effects (𝛿! ) and monitor-plant fixed effects (𝛿!,! ), and

𝜀!,!,! is the error term. The estimated value of 𝛽 provides information on the impact of a TRI

plant opening on pollution levels at monitors within one or two miles of the plant. Table 3

reports the results of ten regressions, one for each pollutant.

       Table 3 shows that TRI plant openings induce a statistically significant and

economically large increase in pollution. The TRI plant openings trigger an increase in each

of the specific air pollutants, as measured by air pollution monitors within both one and two

miles of the plant, except for lead. The last column of Table 3 provides information on the

economic magnitudes of the estimated coefficient on Dummy (Plant is Operating) for each
pollutant by computing the estimated change in the pollutant as a percentage of the

pollutant’s average across all monitors in the country. For example, when examining the

toxin Benzene within two miles of a plant, the estimated coefficients indicate that a TRI plant

opening is associated with an increase of 9.69 nanograms/m3 of lead in the air, which is 18.3%

of the mean density of lead recorded by an average monitor.



                                                11
         3.2.     TRI Plant Openings and Executives Migration: Firm-year Analyses

         We next examine the relationship between TRI plant openings and the percentage of

executives who leave neighboring S&P 1500 firms. As noted above, these TRI plant

openings do not include plants owned by the neighboring S&P 1500 firm. For brevity, we

refer to S&P 1500 firms as “firms,” and use the designator “f.” The dependent variable in
                                           !
these firm-year regressions is either (1) 𝐸!,! : the percentage of executives who leave firm f

during year t, (i.e., the number of executives who leave the S&P 1500 firm between the end

of year t-1 and the end of year t divided by the total number of executives in that firm, f, at
                             !
the end of year t-1) or (2) 𝐸!,! : the percentage of executives who leave firm f during years t

and t+1 (i.e., the number of executives who leave the firm during the two years between the

end of t-1 and the end of t+1 divided by the total number of executives in f at the end of year

t-1).

         Thus, we estimate the following regression:
                       !
                      𝐸!,! = 𝛼 + 𝛾𝑇𝑅𝐼 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛!,! + 𝜃𝑿!,! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛿! + 𝜖!,! , (2)

                                                 !       !
         where the dependent variable is either 𝐸!,! or 𝐸!,! , and TRI Openf,t is one of the two

time-varying measures of the exposure of S&P1500 firms to toxins emitted by the opening of
TRI plants: TRI Open within 1 Milef,t or TRI Open within 2 Milesf,t, 𝑿!,! represents the

following characteristics of S&P 1500 firm f in year t: Total Assets, Leverage, Operating

Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility. We show that the

results are robust to excluding or including these time-varying firm traits. All regressions also
control for city-year (𝛿!,! ), industry-year (𝛿!,! ), and firm 𝛿! fixed effects, where we use the

headquarter city (c) and the industry (k) of firm f.5 Standard errors are double clustered at the

city and year levels.6

         This specification addresses three potential concerns with identifying the impact of

TRI plant openings on the proportion of executives who depart from firms geographically

close to the toxic emitters. First, there might be concerns that (a) businesses choose to open
5
 All of the results hold when using Metropolitan Statistical Area-year fixed effects instead of city-year effects.
The city-year analyses are more granular, as the average city is only 25 square miles. There are 552 cities with
at least one S&P 1500 headquarters, 226 cities with two or more headquarters, and 69 with five or more.


                                                       12
toxic emitting plants in economically depressed localities and (b) executives are more likely

to separate from firms in economically declining areas, so that any relationship between TRI

plant openings and executive migration reflects something about local economic conditions

and not the impact of pollution from TRI plant openings on executive separation decisions.

Thus, we control for city-year fixed effects. By including city-year effects, we compare S&P

1500 firms within the same city and year that are differentially exposed to TRI plant openings.

That said, there might be concerns that omitted within-city factors account both for where

businesses open toxic emitting plants and executive migration from firms. We address such

omitted variable concerns below.

       Second, there might be concerns that time-varying industry characteristics explain

both the increases of executive turnover and pollution. If particular industries congregate

geographically and have different distinct pollution and executive turnover patterns, then this

could impede our ability to draw inferences about the impact of TRI plant openings on

executive migration. Although city-year fixed effects will help address this concern,

industries might congregate geographically even within cities. Thus, we control for industry-

year fixed effects to further reduce concerns that omitted factors, e.g., time-varying industry

characteristics, create a spurious correlation between TRI plant openings and executive

migration.

       Third, firm-specific characteristics might affect the self-selection of executives out of

particular geographical areas. To condition out all time-invariant firm traits, we control for

firm fixed effects. Below, we address additional concerns with these evaluations of the

relationship between TRI plant openings and executive departures.

       Panel A of Table 4 shows that TRI plant openings are associated with an

economically large and statistically significant increase in the percentage of executives who

leave S&P 1500 firms close to the new TRI plants. Across all specifications, each of the three

measures of TRI Open enters positively and significantly. This holds when the dependent
                                                                                   !
variable is either the proportion of executives who leave the firm during year t (𝐸!,! ) or the
                                                           !
proportion of executives who leave during year t and t+1 (𝐸!,! ). Furthermore, the results are

robust to excluding or including the time-varying firm characteristics and the estimated
                                              13
coefficients on the TRI Open variables change little when conditioning on firm traits. The

estimated coefficients are economically meaningful. For example, using regression (4), if one

TRI plant opens within one mile of an S&P 1500 firm, the proportion of executives who

leave during the next year rises by 4.23%, where 11.9% of executives leave the average firm

every year.


       3.3.    Addressing Additional Identification Concerns

       We next conduct six tests to address additional identification concerns. First, we

differentiate firms by their distances to TRI plant openings. If exposure to toxic pollutants

triggers executive migration, then the impact of the opening of toxic-emitting TRI plants on

executive migration should be larger for firms that are closer to the new TRI plants. To

evaluate this hypothesis, we use the same specification as in equation (2) except that the

explanatory variable is either (a) a dummy variable that equals one if a TRI plant opened

within one mile of the firm (TRI Open Within 1 Mile, (b) a dummy variable that equals one if

a TRI plant opened between 1 and 2 miles of the firm (TRI Open Between 1 and 2 Miles), and

(c) dummy variable that equals one if a TRI plant opened between 2 and 5 miles of the firm

(TRI Open Between 2 and 5 Miles). Since the density of pollution dissipates with distance

(see, e.g., Currie et al. 2015), we test whether the relationship between TRI plant openings

and executive migration falls as the distance between the TRI plant and the firm grows.

       As shown in Panel B of Table 4, the results are consistent with the view that physical

exposure to pollution induces executives to leave. Besides repeating the finding that TRI

Open Within 1 Mile, the results show that the estimated relationship between TRI plant

openings and the rate of executive migration from S&P 1500 firms falls when the distance

between the plant and firm is larger. Indeed, when examining firms between two and five

miles from the TRI plant, we find (1) no significant increase in the rate of executive

departures following TRI plant openings, i.e., the coefficient on TRI Open Between 2 and 5

Miles enters insignificantly. Furthermore, the absolute value of the estimated coefficient on

TRI Open Between 1 and 2 Miles is much smaller than that on TRI Open Within 1 Mile. For

example, when considering executives that leave within one year of the TRI plant opening

                                             14
while including firm controls, the estimated coefficient on TRI Open Between 1 and 2 Miles

is only about one-third of the coefficient estimate on TRI Open Within 1 mile.

       Second, we distinguish between a firm’s leaders who are more likely to spend

considerable time at the firm’s headquarters from leaders who are typically not physically

present at corporate headquarters on a regular basis. If a firm’s leaders migrate when a TRI

plant opens close by because they are physically exposed to pollution, then we should not

observe an increase in the rate of migration among corporate leaders who are not physically

present at their firm’s headquarters on a regular basis. To conduct this placebo test, we

examine non-executive directors, who do not typically work at the firm’s headquarters on a

daily basis, and evaluate the impact of TRI plant openings on the rate of non-executive

director departures. We define the rate of non-executive director migration as the percentage

of non-executive directors who leave firm f during year t (or during years t and t+1), divided

by the total number of non-executive directors in that firm, f, at the end of year t-1).

       As shown in Panel C of Table 4, the results of the placebo test are consistent with the

interpretation that physical exposure to pollution drives executive migration. For non-

executive directors—those who are less likely to be physically present at their S&P 1500

firms on a regular basis, we find no relationship between TRI plant openings and migration.

However, as shown in Panel A, for executives, there is a strong, positive relationship between

the opening of a TRI plant and the rate of executive departures.

       As a third test, we examine the impact of non-TRI plant openings on the rate of

executive migration from neighboring S&P 1500 firms. If the results are driven by

pollution—and not by some other factor associated with new plant formation, then the

opening of non-TRI plants should not influence the migration of corporate leaders from

geographically close S&P 1500 firms. To conduct this placebo test, we use the NETS data

and identify the location of all non-TRI plant openings during the same sample period and

conduct the same analyses as those reported in Table 4 Panel A.

       As shown in Panel D of Table 4, the results are consistent with the view that it is the

opening of toxic emitting TRI plants—and not the opening of plants in general, the drive

executive migration. Consistent with the placebo hypothesis, there is no evidence that the
                                                15
opening of non-TRI plants close to S&P 1500 firms induces executive migration from those

firms.

         Fourth, we address the concern that executives might separate from firms

involuntarily because of poor firm performance, not because they are exposed to pollution. If

TRI plant openings are more likely to occur around failing S&P 1500 firms and failing firms

are more likely to fire executives, then the Panel A results in Table 4 could reflect the impact

of poor firm performance on both executive separations and TRI plant opening, not the

impact of pollution on executive migration.

         To address this concern, we eliminate S&P 1500 firms that were performing poorly

during the year prior to TRI plants opening close to those firms. In particular, in Panel E of

Table 4, we conduct the same analyses as those in Panel A except that we exclude firms that

experienced over a 10% reduction in their stock prices in the year prior to TRI plant openings.

If TRI plant openings are more likely to occur around failing S&P 1500 firms and failing

firms are more likely to fire executives. In this way, we exclude firms that were performing

poorly—firms for which involuntary executive separations are more likely than in better

performing S&P 1500 firms. If the earlier results are driven by poor firm performance driving

both executive migration and TRI plant openings, then the results should dissipate after we

exclude poorly performing firms. In contrast, if the results are driven by exposure to pollution,

then eliminating the poorly performing firms should not materially affect the results.

         As shown in Panel E of Table 4, we continue to find a strong impact of TRI plant

openings on executive migration after excluding poorly performing firms. In unreported

robustness tests, we find that these results hold when using other stock price reduction cutoffs

besides 10%. The results in Tables 3 and 4 are consistent with the view that TRI plant

openings increase pollution around geographically close S&P 1500 firms and executives

working in those firms have higher probabilities of leaving those exposed firms, regardless of

the firm’s stock price performance before the TRI plant opening.7


7
  We were also concerned that the results might differ by the power or prestige of the firm. Thus, we conducted
the analyses while splitting the sample between S&P 500 and other firms. The results hold in both groups and
the estimated coefficients are of similar magnitudes. These results are available on request.

                                                      16
       Fifth, we implement both propensity score matching (PSM) and nearest neighbor-

matching (NNM) algorithms to estimate the impact of toxic emissions on executive migration.

That is, we match each “treated” firm with otherwise similar controls firms and compare the

frequency of executive separations in the treated and control groups.

       For the PSM, we first run a probit regression on the full sample of COMPUSTAT

firms. The dependent variable is a dummy that indicates whether a firm has a TRI plant open

within 1 mile (or 2 miles) in a year or not. We regressors include five time-varying firm

characteristics (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales

Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility). From this Probit, we obtain predicted values of the

dependent variable, or the probability of having a TRI open near each firm. We then match

each treated firm-year observation to five control firm-year observations based on the closest

propensity scores and restrict the treated and control firms to those without TRI plant opening

nearby in the past three years. As is standard in these PSM algorithms, we might match the

same control firm-year observation to more than one treated firm-year observation. In our

analyses, the number of control firms is roughly 3.5 times the number of treated firms. The

sample used in regressions includes treated and control firms.

       For the NNM, we search the entire COMPUSTAT database for five control firms with

the smallest Euclidean distance of five time-varying firm characteristics (Total Assets,

Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility)

and restrict the treated and control firms to those without TRI plants open nearby in the past

three years. As with the PSM technique, the NNM strategy might match the same control

firm-year observation for different treated firm-year observations and the regression sample

includes both treated and control firms.

       As shown in Table 4 Panels F and G, the earlier results hold when using either the

PSM or the NNM algorithms: TRI plant openings materially increase the rate at which

executives leave treated firms. When examining executive departures from firms one or two

years after treatment, and when examining TRI plants opening within one or two miles of the

firms, the results hold across all specifications for both the PSM and NNM techniques. By


                                              17
comparing similar treatment and control firm using these matching techniques, these analyses

reduce concerns that an omitted variable was biasing the earlier findings.

        Finally, we conduct a placebo test to address the potential influence of pre-trends.

That is, rather than examining the relationship between the opening of a toxic-emitting TRI

plant and the subsequent migration of executives at neighboring firms, we examine the

relationship between TRI plant opening and the rate of executive migration before the TRI

plant opened. If the opening of a TRI plant triggers an increase in the rate of executive

migration at nearby plants, then we should not observe an increase in the rate of executives

separating from neighboring firms one or two years before the plant starts releasing toxic air

pollutants. We examine the rate of executive migrations (1) during the year before TRI plant

openings and (2) during the two years before TRI plant openings

        As shown in Panel H of Table 4, the results confirm this view: TRI plant opening are

unassociated with executive migration during the year before the TRI plant opening or during

the two years before TRI plant openings. Rather, as shown above, TRI plant openings are

associated with a sharp increase in the rate of executive separations at neighboring firms in

the year following TRI plant openings. These findings are consistent with the view the

unexpected increases in air pollution induce executives to separate from firms at a faster rate.


        3.4.    TRI Openings and Executive Migration: Individual-year Analyses

        To provide more information on the relationship between TRI plant openings and

executive departures from neighboring firms and to address additional identification concerns,

we turn our focus from the proportion of executives leaving firms and instead trace the

decisions of individual executives over time. In these individual-year analyses, we evaluate

the change in the probability that an executive leaves an S&P 1500 firm when a TRI plant

opens nearby. By studying individuals rather than the group of executives at firms, we control

for all time-invariant, and several time-varying, traits of each executive.
        In these regressions, the dependent variable is either 𝐿!!,!,! , which equals one if

executive i leaves firm f in year t, and zero otherwise, or 𝐿!!,!,! , which equals one if executive i

leaves firm f during year t or t+1, and zero otherwise. As above, we separately examine the

                                                 18
exposure of firm f to TRI plants in year t using TRI Open within 1 Milef,t or TRI Open within

2 Milesf,t. Furthermore, the regressions control for the time-varying S&P 1500 firm
characteristics discussed above (𝑿!,! ), as well as two characteristics of each executive (𝑪!,!,! ),

Tenure and Age, that might independently influence the rate of separation between the
executive and firm. We provide the results with and without 𝑿!,! and 𝑪!,!,! .

          Thus, we estimate the following linear probability models:

           𝐿!!,!,! , = 𝛼 + 𝛾𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦(𝑇𝑅𝐼 𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑡 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛)!,! + 𝜃𝑿!,! + 𝜆𝑪!,!,! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛿!,! +

                                                                                               𝜖!,!,! ,   (3)

where the dependent variable is 𝐿!!,!,! or 𝐿!!,!,! . All regressions include city-year (𝛿!,! ),

industry-year (𝛿!,! ), and individual-firm (𝛿!,! ) fixed effects, where we use the city and

industry (k) of the S&P 1500 firm (f) in which individual i is an executive.8 The regressions

are estimated using OLS, and standard errors are double clustered at both the city and year

levels.

          Consistent with the firm-level analyses, the results from the individual-level analyses

reported in Table 5 indicate that executives are more likely to leave their firms when a TRI

plant opens close to them. Each of the three measures of TRI Open enters positively and

significantly. These results hold when examining either the indicator of whether the executive

leaves during the year that the TRI plant opens or the indicator of whether the executive

leaves in the two years following the TRI plant opening. With respect to the economic sizes

of the estimated coefficients, consider the impact of one TRI plant opening within one mile of

an executive’s firm. The results reported in regression (3) indicate that this is associated with

an almost 5% increase in the probability that the executive leaves the firm within the next

year, where 12.7% of executives leave every year in the average firm.




8
 We can include individual by firm fixed effects (𝛿!,! ) because some individuals are executives in more than
one firm during the sample period.

                                                     19
        3.5.          Differentiating by Generalist and Specialist Executives

        We next assess whether executives with different human capital skills respond

differently to TRI plant openings. We hypothesize that when TRI plant openings increase

toxic air pollutants, executives at nearby firms who have skills that are in stronger demand at

other firms will be more likely to relocate than executives with more firm-specific skills. This

hypothesis predicts that when executives are “treated” with air pollution, the executives with

more general human capital will be more likely to leave the firm than executives with more

firm-specific human capital.

        To evaluate this hypothesis, we examine the degree to which CEOs have general

human capital skills, i.e., skills that are valued highly at other firms. We use the Generalist

CEO Index constructed and analyzed by Custodio, Ferreira, and Matos (2013) that gauges the

extent to which a CEO’s skills are transferrable across firms and industries. The Generalist

CEO Index varies over time for each individual and reflects information on the numbers of

past positions, firms, and industries and whether the executive was a CEO in the past and the

complexity of the organizations in which the CEO was employed.9 We then test whether

there is a larger increase in the rate of departures of CEOs with more general human capital

skills when a TRI plant opens nearby.

        The regression specification and estimation procedures are the same as in equation (3)

except that we add an interaction term between TRI Open and Generalist CEO Index.

Specifically, we estimate the following equation:

        𝐿!!,!,! , =

𝛼 + 𝛽𝑇𝑅𝐼 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛!,! ∗ 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝐶𝐸𝑂 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥!,! + 𝜙𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 𝐶𝐸𝑂 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥!,! +

𝛾𝑇𝑅𝐼 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛!,! + 𝜃𝑿!,! + 𝜆𝑪!,!,! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛿!,! + 𝜖!,!,! ,                              (4)




9
 The Index can, in some cases, vary over time while an individual is a CEO at one firm, as individuals
occasionally take simultaneous positions at other firms. We conducted all of the analyses using the value of
Generalist CEO Index for individual i in firm f during the first year that the individual is a CEO at firm f,
eliminating any time variation in Generalist CEO Index for individual i at firm f. All of the results hold.

                                                     20
where the variables are defined as above. If 𝛽 > 0, then this would suggest that CEO

departures are more likely in response to a TRI plant opening when the CEO has more

general, and hence more transferable, skills.

       As shown in Table 6, the evidence is consistent with the view that when firms are

exposed to air pollution from the opening of a TRI plant, executives with more general

human capital skills leave firms more frequently during the next years than executives with

more firm-specific skills. These results are reported in regressions (5) – (8) of Table 6. The

estimated coefficient on the interaction term between TRI Open and Generalist CEO Index

enters positively and significantly for each of the three TRI Open measures and these findings

are robust to including or excluding the time-varying firm and individual controls. The

estimated economic effects are large. For example, compare two CEOs running exactly the

same S&P 1500 firm, one at the 25th percentile of the distribution of the Generalist CEO

Index (-0.71) and the other at the 75th percentile of distribution (0.54). The results from

regression (8) indicate that the opening of a TRI plant within two miles of these CEOs would

increase the probability of the CEO at the 75th percentile of leaving the firm by 32% more

than the CEO at the 25th percentile of the Generalist CEO Index distribution, i.e., 32% =

0.257*(0.46 – (-0.79)). By differentiating executives by human capital and showing that they

respond in a theoretically predictable manner to the same pollution shock, we reduce

concerns that the findings on executive migration are driven by an omitted factor that

simultaneously increases pollution and executive migration in city.



4.     Extensions

       We now extend the results by examining two additional implications of the view that

TRI plant openings increase toxic emissions that induce executives at neighboring firms to

leave. We explain each implication and then provide an empirical evaluation.


       4.1.    CARs around Executives’ Turnover Announcement

       First, if there are costs associated with replacing well-performing executives (e.g.,

Gabaix and Landier 2008) and air pollution triggers the departure of executives in general,

                                                21
and not simply the departure of poorly-performing executives, then air pollution-induced

migration will tend to reduce the firm’s stock price. That is, if air pollution is causing an

otherwise sound executive to leave a firm, this is likely to have an adverse effect on the firm

as suggested by the work of Warner, Watts and Wruck (1988) and Denis and Denis (1995).

Since we showed (Table 4) that TRI plant openings trigger the departure of executives in

general, not the departure of executives from poorly performing firms in particular, we now

assess what happens to the stock prices of S&P 1500 firms when executives announce their

departures, both departures associated with TRI plant openings and departures that are

unassociated with such openings.

       We examine the relationship between the announcement date of executive departures

and their firm’s cumulative abnormal returns (CARs). To obtain announcement dates,

ExecuComp provides some of those dates and we hand-collected most dates from Factiva

news and 8-K filings. In particular, using the announcement dates from ExecuComp, our

sample is 1,772. We confirm each of these announcements using separate sources (Factiva

and 8-K filings). We then searched Factiva and 8-K filings for information on each executive

at S&P 1500 firms over our sample period to discern the announcement date of other

executive departures. This increased our sample to 4,365, for which we can compute the

firms’ CARs around those dates. We report the results with our larger sample, and note that

the results hold with the smaller, ExecuComp-only sample.

       To compute the CARs, we use security prices from the Center for Research in

Security Prices (CRSP) database. We examine CARs over the 5-day window from two days

before until two days after the announcement day. Setting the announcement day as day 0,

the CAR window is therefore indicated as (-2, +2). We use three standard models to compute

abnormal returns. The 1-factor abnormal return is computed as the firm’s return minus the

market index return. Following Brown and Warner (1985), we define 3-factor and 4-factor

abnormal returns by using the difference between actual and projected returns. To compute

projected returns, we (1) regress the firm’s daily return on the value-weighted returns on the

CRSP equally weighted market portfolio over the 200-day period from the 210th trading day

through the 11th trading day before the announcement date of each deal and (2) use the
                                              22
estimated parameters to compute the projected returns during the 5-day event window (-2,

+2). For the 3-factor model, we use the Fama-French benchmark factors of Rm-Rf, SMB, and

HML as regressors, where Rm-Rf is the value-weighted market return minus the one-month

Treasury bill rate, SMB (Small Minus Big) is the average return on three small portfolios

minus the average return on three big portfolios, and HML (High Minus Low) is the average

return on two value portfolios minus the average return on two growth portfolios. The

numbers are obtained from Kenneth R. French’s website. The 4-factor model adds the Fama-

French momentum factor, which is constructed from six value-weighted portfolios formed

using independent sorts on size and prior returns of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks.10

We report the results in Table 7 using the 4-factor model, but all of the results hold using

either the 1- or 3-factor models to construct 5-day CARs around the announcement date.

        Table 7 provides regression results where the dependent variable is the 5-day CARs

around the announced departure dates of executives from S&P 1500 firms and the main

explanatory variable is a dummy variable that equals one if a TRI plant opened close to the

S&P 1500 firm. In particular, the main explanatory variable is either TRI Open within 1 Mile

or TRI Open within 2 Miles. All regressions include firm and year dummy variables. As

indicated, we also provide regressions conditioning on time-varying Firm Controls (Total

Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow

Volatility) and time-varying Individual controls (Tenure and Age). Thus, Table 7 provides

tests of whether there are significant differences between the CARs around announced

departures of executives from (1) firms exposed to TRI plant offerings and (2) firms

unexposed to such openings.

        As shown, when executives announce their departures from S&P 1500 firms exposed

to TRI plant openings, the CARs of those firms fall significantly more than when executives

depart from unexposed firms.11 This is consistent with the views that (a) the toxic releases


10
   The momentum factor equals 1/2 (Small High + Big High) - 1/2 (Small Low + Big Low),
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/det_mom_factor_daily.html.
11
   Besides finding that the CARs of firms with executive departures following TRI-plant openings fall more than
the CARs of firms with executive departures that were not exposed to TRI-plants, we also find that the CARs of
firms with executive departures following TRI-plant openings fall. These results are consistent with the
extensive literature on executive departures in general and are available on request.

                                                      23
from TRI plant openings induce some otherwise well-performing executive at neighboring

firms to separate from those firms, so that the distribution of executive departures following

TRI plant openings at neighboring firms has a higher proportion of these voluntary departures

than the executive departures from firms unexposed to TRI plant opening and (b) voluntary

executive departures have a larger adverse influence on stock prices than executive

departures for other reasons, including poor firm performance or expected poor performance.

These findings suggest that TRI plant openings have material effects on the executives and

shareholders of neighboring firms.


       4.2. Comparison of Pollutant Density between New Areas and Old Areas

       The view that pollution triggers executive migration provides predictions about where

those departing executives go and their compensation at their new firms. First, if executives

leave S&P 1500 firms because of pollution, then we should observe these executives moving

to firms in less polluted areas. To assess whether this holds, we first identify the location of

the executive’s new firm through BoardEx and ExecuComp. We then compute the pollutant

levels in the first year after the executive moves to the new firm using EPA monitor data.

Specifically, for each pollutant, we compute the pollutant’s level at the executive’s “old firm”

and its level at the new firm, where monitor nearest to the firm measures the pollutant level.

Since not all executives who leave S&P 1500 firms following TRI plant closings migrate to

other S&P 1500 firms, these analyses materially reduce the sample size. Thus, we simply

provide the results for executives leaving S&P 1500 firms after a TRI plant opens within two

miles of the firm.

       As shown in Table 8, executives who leave S&P 1500 firms after a TRI plant opens

nearby tend to move to firms in less polluted parts of the country. These findings are not

surprising given that (a) TRI plants increase pollution and (b) executives have a higher

propensity to migrate following the opening of TRI plants close their firms. Nevertheless, it is

valuable to confirm that when executives leave a firm following the opening of a

geographically close toxic emitting plant, they tend to find new executive positions in firms

located in areas with lower pollution levels.

                                                24
5.     Conclusion

       In this paper, we examined the impact of toxic emissions on the migration of

corporate executives from neighboring firms. We merge data on TRI plant openings—plants

that emit toxic air pollutants—with information on the career paths of executives at all S&P

1500 firms. We then ask: When one firm starts emitting toxic pollutants, does this induce the

migration of corporate executives from neighboring firms and are such migrations associated

with a drop in the CARs of those firms?

       We discover that the opening of toxic emitting plants increases the rate at which

executives leave geographically close firms. These findings are especially pronounced among

executives with more general human capital skills and are not driven by executives at firms

experiencing poor stock price performance. We also show that increases in executive

migration following the opening of geographically close toxic emitting plants hold for

executives who are most likely to work regularly and physically at the firm. Indeed, the

findings do not hold for non-executive directors, who are unlikely to be physically present at

the firm on a regulator basis and therefore less likely to be affected by the TRI plant-induced

increase in air pollution. In addition, we show stock returns fall when executives announce

their departures following the opening of toxic-emitting plants. These analyses suggest that

an additional, costly externality of air pollution is the migration of executives from

geographically close firms.




                                              25
References

Agarwal, S., Wang, L., and Yang, Y., 2019. Blessing in disguise? Environmental shocks and
      performance enhancement. (SSRN 3189351).
Agarwal, S., Deng, Y. and Li, T., 2019. Environmental regulation as a double-edged sword
      for housing markets: Evidence from the NOx Budget Trading Program. Journal of
      Environmental Economics and Management, 96, pp.286-309.
Agarwal, S., Sing, T.F., and Yang, Y., 2019 Impact of transboundary haze pollution on
      household utilities consumption. (SSRN 2942096).
Akcigit, U., Baslandze, S. and Stantcheva, S., 2016. Taxation and the international mobility
       of inventors. The American Economic Review, 106(10), pp.2930-2981.
American Lung Association, 2019. State of the Air 2019. American Lung Association:
      Chicago, IL.
Banzhaf, H.S. and Walsh, R.P., 2008. Do people vote with their feet? An empirical test of
      Tiebout’s mechanism. American Economic Review, 98(3), pp. 843-863.
Baumol, W.J. and Oates, W.E., 1988. The Theory of Environmental Policy. Cambridge
     university press.
Becker, R. and Henderson, V., 2000. Effects of air quality regulations on polluting
       industries. Journal of Political Economy, 108(2), pp.379-421.
Bertrand, M. and Schoar, A., 2003. Managing with style: The effect of managers on firm
       policies. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), pp.1169-1208.
Brown, S.J. and Warner, J.B., 1985. Using daily stock returns: The case of event
      studies. Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1), pp.3-31.
Chang, X., Fu, K., Li, T., Tam, L. and Wong, G., 2019, Corporate Environmental Liabilities
      and Capital Structure, Nanyang Technological University working paper.
Chatterji, A.K., Levine, D.I. and Toffel, M.W., 2009. How well do social ratings actually
       measure corporate social responsibility?. Journal of Economics & Management
       Strategy, 18(1), pp.125-169.
Chay, K.Y. and Greenstone, M., 2003. The impact of air pollution on infant mortality:
      evidence from geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession. The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), pp.1121-1167.
Chen, S., Oliva, P. and Zhang, P., 2017. The effect of air pollution on migration: evidence
       from China. NBER Working Paper 24036
Currie, J., Davis, L., Greenstone, M., and Walker, W.R., 2015. Environmental Health Risks
        and Housing Values: Evidence from 1600 Toxic Plant Openings and Closings,
        American Economic Review, 105(2): 678-709.
Currie, J. and Neidell, M., 2005. Air pollution and infant health: what can we learn from
       California's recent experience? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), pp.1003-
       1030.
                                            26
Custódio, C., Ferreira, M.A. and Matos, P., 2013. Generalists versus specialists: Lifetime
       work experience and chief executive officer pay. Journal of Financial
       Economics, 108(2), pp.471-492.
Delmas, M. and Toffel, M.W., 2004. Stakeholders and environmental management practices:
      an institutional framework. Business strategy and the Environment, 13(4), pp. 209-
      222.
Delmas, M.A. and Toffel, M.W., 2008. Organizational responses to environmental demands:
      Opening the black box. Strategic Management Journal, 29(10), pp.1027-1055.
Deng, X. and Gao, H., 2013. Nonmonetary benefits, quality of life, and executive
      compensation. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48(1), pp.197-218.
Denis, D.J. and Denis, D.K., 1995. Performance changes following top management
      dismissals. The Journal of Finance, 50(4), pp.1029-1057.
Dominici F., Peng R.D., Bell M.L., et al. 2006, Fine particulate air pollution and hospital
      admission for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. Journal of the American
      Medical Association, 295(10), pp. 1127–1134.
Flammer, C., 2013. Corporate social responsibility and shareholder reaction: The
     environmental awareness of investors. Academy of Management Journal, 56(3), pp.
     758-781.
Flammer, C., 2015a. Does corporate social responsibility lead to superior financial
     performance? A regression discontinuity approach. Management Science, 61(11), pp.
     2549-2568.
Flammer, C., 2015b. Does product market competition foster corporate social responsibility?
     Evidence from trade liberalization. Strategic Management Journal, 36(10), pp. 1469-
     1485.
Gabaix, X. and Landier, A., 2008. Why has CEO pay increased so much? The Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 123(1), pp.49-100.
Giroud, X. and Mueller, H.M., 2015. Capital and Labor Reallocation within Firms. The
       Journal of Finance, 70(4), 1767-1804.
Giroud, X. and Rauh, J., 2019. State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity:
       Evidence from Establishment-level Data. Journal of Political Economy, 127(3), 1262-
       1316.

Graham, J., Harvey, C., and Puri, M., 2013. Managerial attitudes and corporate actions.
      Journal of Financial Economics 109, pp.103-121
Greenstone, M., 2002. The impacts of environmental regulations on industrial activity:
       Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 clean air act amendments and the census of
       manufactures. Journal of Political Economy, 110(6), pp.1175-1219.
De Haas, R. and Popov, A.A., 2019. Finance and carbon emissions. (SSRN 3459987).



                                            27
Isen, A., Rossin-Slater, M., and Walker, W.R., 2017. Every breath you take—every dollar
       you’ll make: The long-term consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970. Journal of
       Political Economy, 125(3), 848-902.
Kang, J.K. and Shivdasani, A., 1995. Firm performance, corporate governance, and top
      executive turnover in Japan. Journal of Financial Economics, 38(1), pp.29-58.
Kaplan, S.N., Klebanov, M.M. and Sorensen, M., 2012. Which CEO characteristics and
      abilities matter?. The Journal of Finance, 67(3), pp.973-1007.
Kleven, H.J., Landais, C., and Saez, E., 2013. Taxation and International Migration of
      Superstars: Evidence from the European Football Market. American Economic
      Review, 103(5), pp. 1892-1924.
Kleven, H.J., Landais, C., Saez, E., and Schultz, E., 2013. Migration and wage effects of
      taxing top earners: Evidence from the foreigners’ tax scheme in Denmark. The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), pp.333-378.
Knittel, C.R., Miller, D.L., and Sanders, N.J., 2016. Caution, drivers! Children present:
        Traffic, pollution, and infant health. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2),
        pp.350-366.
Krueger, P., 2015. Corporate goodness and shareholder wealth. Journal of financial
      economics, 115(2), pp.304-329.
Krueger, P., Sautner, Z. and Starks, L.T., 2019. The importance of climate risks for
      institutional investors. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Landrigan, P.J., Fuller, R., Acosta, N.J., Adeyi, O., Arnold, R., Baldé, A.B., Bertollini, R.,
       Bose-O'Reilly, S., Boufford, J.I., Breysse, P.N. and Chiles, T., 2017. The Lancet
       Commission on pollution and health. The Lancet.
Li, J.J., Massa, M., Zhang, H. and Zhang, J., 2019. Air pollution, behavioral bias, and the
         disposition effect in China. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Moretti, E., and Wilson, D., 2017. The Effect of State Taxes on the Geographical Location
      of Top Earners: Evidence from Star Scientists. American Economic Review, 107(7),
      pp. 1858-1903.
Murphy, K.J., 1999. Executive compensation. Handbook of Labor Economics, 3, pp.2485-
      2563.
Oates, W.E. and Portney, P.R., 2003. The political economy of environmental
       policy. Handbook of Environmental Economics, 1, pp.325-354.
Pan, Y., 2015. The determinants and impact of executive-firm matches. Management
      Science, 63(1), pp. 185-200.
Pan, Y., Wang, T.Y. and Weisbach, M.S., 2015. Learning about CEO ability and stock return
       volatility. The Review of Financial Studies, 28(6), pp. 1623-1666.
Pan, Y., Wang, T.Y. and Weisbach, M.S., 2016. CEO investment cycles. The Review of
      Financial Studies, 29(11), pp. 2955-2999.

                                             28
Qian, D., Dai, L., Wang, Y. et al., 2017. Association of short-term exposure to air pollution
       with mortality in older adults. Journal of the American Medical Association, 318(24),
       2446-2456.
Reid, E.M. and Toffel, M.W., 2009. Responding to public and private politics: Corporate
       disclosure of climate change strategies. Strategic Management Journal, 30(11),
       pp.1157-1178.
Schlenker, W. and Walker, W.R., 2016. Airports, air pollution, and contemporaneous
      health. The Review of Economic Studies, 83(2), pp.768-809.
Tiebout, C.M., 1956. A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of Political
       Economy, 64(5), pp.416-424.
Volpin, P.F., 2002. Governance with poor investor protection: Evidence from top executive
       turnover in Italy. Journal of Financial Economics, 64(1), pp.61-90.
Warner, J.B., Watts, R.L. and Wruck, K.H., 1988. Stock prices and top management
      changes. Journal of Financial Economics, 20, pp.461-492.
Weisbach, M.S., 1995. CEO turnover and the firm’s investment decisions, Journal of
      Financial Economics, 37, pp.159-188.
The World Health Organization, 2016. Ambient Air Pollution: A Global Assessment of
     Exposure and Burdent of Disease. World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland.




                                             29
 Figure 1: Locations that Had Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) Plants Between 1996 and 2014
Notes: This figure maps the location of the 58,094 TRI plants that operated between 1996 and 2014.
                             Each dot represents a TRI plant location.




                                               30
                             Table 1 Sample Construction and Variable Definition
This table (1) describes the construction of the three samples (Monitor-Plant-Year Sample, Firm-Year Sample, and
Person-Year Sample) and (2) provides variable definitions of the dependent, independent, and control variables.
The variables are ordered according to when they appear in the tables.

                                               Sample Construction

Firm-Year Sample                    Each row is an S&P 1500 firm’s observation in a year. Data are constructed
                                    from EPA, BoardEx and Compustat.
Monitor-Plant-Year Sample           For each functioning monitor in a year, we match the TRI plant location with it
                                    and construct monitor-plant pairs. Each row is a pollutant’s density (in
                                    nanogram/m3) in a monitor-plant pair in a year. A dummy shows whether the
                                    plant is operating or not within 10 miles of the monitor in a given year. Data are
                                    from EPA.
Person-Year Sample                  Each row is an executive’s observation in an S&P 1500 company in a year.
                                    Data are constructed from EPA, BoardEx and Compustat.



                                               Dependent Variables

1-factor (3-factor, 4-factor) CAR   5-day CAR during the window (-2, +2), where day 0 is the date that an
(-2，+2)                             executive announces her leaving. We define abnormal returns by using the
                                    difference between actual and projected returns, where we estimate projected
                                    returns as follows: (1) based on 1-factor (3-factor, 4-factor) stock abnormal
                                    return model, regress the S&P 1500 firm’s daily return on the returns on the
                                    CRSP value-weighted market portfolio over the 200-day period from the 210th
                                    trading day through the 11th trading day before the announcement date and
                                    collect the estimated coefficients and (2) use the estimated coefficients to
                                    compute the projected returns during the 5-day event window (-2, +2). Data are
                                    from CRSP.
All Other Compensation              The value of an executive's all other compensation. In thousand USD. Obtained
                                    from BoardEx and ExecuComp.
Dummy (Leave the Company in         In the person-year level data, for each executive that was in the S&P 1500
One Year)                           company in year y-1, the dummy equals one if she was in the company in year
                                    y+1, and equals zero if she was not in the company in year y+1. Constructed
                                    from BoardEx and ExecuComp.

Dummy (Leave the Company in         In the person-year level data, for each executive that was in the S&P 1500
Two Years)                          company in year y-1, the dummy equals one if she was in the company in year
                                    y+2, and equals zero if she was not in the company in year y+2. Constructed
                                    from BoardEx and ExecuComp.

Percentage of Executives Who        In the firm-year level data, for each S&P 1500 firm, first construct the list of all
Left the Companies in One Year      executives from BoardEx and ExecuComp in year y-1 (say n executives in
                                    total), and the list of all executives in year y+1; then construct the list of
                                    executives who were in the company in year y-1 but not in year y+1 (say there
                                    are m executives who have left the company); then the percentage of executives
                                    who left the company is defined as m/n. Constructed from BoardEx and
                                    ExecuComp.




                                                          31
Percentage of Executives Who   In the firm-year level data, for each S&P 1500 firm, first construct the list of all
Left the Companies in Two      executives from BoardEx and ExecuComp in year y-1 (say n executives in
Years                          total), and the list of all executives in year y+2; then construct the list of
                               executives who were in the company in year y-1 but not in year y+2 (say there
                               are m executives who have left the company); then the percentage of executives
                               who left the company is defined as m/n. Constructed from BoardEx and
                               ExecuComp.
Percentage of Non-executive    In the firm-year level data, for each S&P 1500 firm, first construct the list of all
Directors Who Left the         non-executive directors from BoardEx and ExecuComp in year y-1 (say n non-
Companies in One Year          executive directors in total), and the list of all non-executive directors in year
                               y+1; then construct the list of non-executive directors who were in the company
                               in year y-1 but not in year y+1 (say there are m non-executive directors who
                               have left the company); then the percentage of non-executive directors who left
                               the company is defined as m/n. Constructed from BoardEx and ExecuComp.

Percentage of Non-executive    In the firm-year level data, for each S&P 1500 firm, first construct the list of all
Directors Who Left the         non-executive directors from BoardEx and ExecuComp in year y-1 (say n non-
Companies in Two Years         executive directors in total), and the list of all non-executive directors in year
                               y+2; then construct the list of non-executive directors who were in the company
                               in year y-1 but not in year y+2 (say there are m non-executive directors who
                               have left the company); then the percentage of non-executive directors who left
                               the company is defined as m/n. Constructed from BoardEx and ExecuComp.

Proportion of Being a          The average proportion of whether a person has been a Chairperson of Board in
Chairperson of Board           the current or previous companies. Obtained from BoardEx and ExecuComp.
Proportion of Being a CEO      The average proportion of whether a person has been a CEO in the current or
                               previous companies. Obtained from BoardEx and ExecuComp.
Shares Compensation            The value of an executive's compensation in the form of granted shares. In
                               thousand USD. Obtained from BoardEx and ExecuComp.
Total Current Compensation     The total current compensation of an executive, including salary and bonus. In
(Salary + Bonus)               thousand USD. Obtained from BoardEx and ExecuComp.
Years of Being an Executive    The total number of years that the person has been an executive in the current or
                               previous companies. Obtained from BoardEx and ExecuComp.



                                         Independent Variables

TRI Open within 1 Mile         Dummy variable. At the firm-year level, it equals one if there is at least one TRI
                               plant open within 1 mile of an S&P 1500 firm’s headquarter location in a given
                               year, and equals zero otherwise.
TRI Open within 2 Miles        Dummy variable. At the firm-year level, it equals one if there is at least one TRI
                               plant open within 2 miles of an S&P 1500 firm’s headquarter location in a given
                               year, and equals zero otherwise.
Dummy (Plant is Operating)     In the monitor-plant-year sample, this dummy shows whether the plant is
                               operating (=1) or not (=0) within 5 miles of the monitor in a given year.
Generalist CEO Index           General Ability Index defined in Custodio, Ferreira, and Matos (2013)
                               winsorized at 1%. It captures the skills of the CEO that are transferrable across
                               firms and industries, instead of firm-specific skills. The index gives close to
                               equal weights to the past number of positions, firms, and industries and a lower
                               weight to the past CEO and conglomerate experiences.




                                                     32
                                          Control Variables

Age                           Age of an executive. Obtained from BoardEx.
Cash Flow Volatility          Standard deviation of cash flows in the past five years. Obtained from
                              Compustat. In million USD.
Leverage                      Liabilities divided by total assets. Obtained from Compustat.
Operating Cash Flow / Total   Operating cash flow divided by total assets. Constructed from Compustat.
Assets Ratio
Sales Growth                  Obtained from Compustat.
Tenure                        The number of years that an executive has served in the company. Constructed
                              from BoardEx.
Total Assets                  Obtained from Compustat. In million USD.




                                                  33
                                              Table 2 Summary Statistics
                                                 Obs         Mean           Std. Dev.   25%      Median    75%

                                                 Dependent Variables

                                                Firm-Year Level Data
Percentage of Executives Who Left the
                                               17,047         11.855         14.023       0       12.5      20
Companies in One Year
Percentage of Executives Who Left the
                                                15,953        22.653         19.174       0        20      33.33
Companies in Two Years
Percentage of Non-executive Directors Who
                                               17,047         2.096          12.203       0        0        0
Left the Companies in One Year
Percentage of Non-executive Directors Who
                                                15,953        4.146          17.635       0        0        0
Left the Companies in Two Years

                                               Person-Year Level Data
Dummy (Leave the Company in One Year)          86,282        0.127           0.333        0        0        0
Dummy (Leave the Company in Two Years)         73,900        0.183           0.386        0        0        0

                            Monitor-Plant-Year Level Data, Mean Density (nanograms)
PM10 Total 0-10um STP                       340,935        11627.1        14695.0         0         0     23721.3
Suspended particulate (TSP)                 237,410        13393.2        26476.2         0         0         0
Carbon monoxide                             173,052         358.1          526.4          0         0     608.739
Ozone                                       147,325         22.6           22.0           0      32.236    43.554
Lead (TSP) STP                              204,712         42.4           406.4          0         0      5.7765
Sulfur dioxide                              198,377        2204.5         3496.6          0         0      3448.9
Benzene                                     161,053         959.2         2354.0          0         0     1201.48
Toluene                                     158,603        2482.2         6865.3          0         0     2498.64
PM10 - LC                                   170,226        4526.9         10286.3         0         0         0
Ethylbenzene                                156,428         383.2         1118.2          0         0     338.235

                                              Key Independent Variables

                                                Firm-Year Level Data
TRI Open within 1 Mile                         17,047        0.034           0.182        0        0        0
TRI Open within 2 Miles                        17,047        0.064           0.245        0        0        0

                                               Person-Year Level Data
TRI Open within 1 Mile                         86,282        0.502           1.078         0        0        0
TRI Open within 2 Miles                        86,282        0.136           0.481         0        0        0
Generalist CEO Index                           12,565        -0.063          0.952      -0.706   -0.147    0.544

                                            Monitor-Plant-Year Level Data
Dummy (Plant is Operating)                   30,312,380       0.189          0.391        0        0        0




                                                         34
                                      Table 2 Summary Statistics (Continued)
                                               Obs          Mean          Std. Dev.   25%     Median   75%

                                                Control Variables

                                              Firm-Year Level Data
Total Assets                                  15,768       19.423         105.082     0.839   2.577    8.747
Leverage                                      15,524        0.225          0.192      0.064   0.200    0.336
Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio      15,546        0.102          0.083      0.053   0.094    0.142
Sales Growth                                  15,720        1.251          6.595      1.000   1.076    1.170
Cash Flow Volatility                          14,838      2.004377          60.3      0.000   0.004    0.039

                                             Person-Year Level Data
Total Assets                                 78,148        19.692         105.649     0.945   3.101    14.006
Leverage                                     77,100        0.226           0.193      0.097   0.226    0.351
Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio     69,864        0.103           0.083      0.057   0.096    0.145
Sales Growth                                 78,007        1.234           6.197      1.009   1.084    1.187
Cash Flow Volatility                         73,593        1.669            53.5      0.489   4.249    49.267
Tenure                                       83,946        4.364           3.998         2       5        8
Age                                          77,586        51.162          7.726        48      53       59




                                                       35
                                                        Table 3: TRI Plant Openings and Major Pollutants

This table reports the effect of TRI plant openings on air pollution. To measure air pollution, we use the annual density of major air pollutants recorded by
EPA monitors within one (Panel A) or two (Panel B) miles of each TRI plant. The table reports the estimated coefficient on 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑠 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 !,! ,
which is a dummy variable that equals zero in the years before a TRI plant opens and one afterwards. The last column of Table 3 provides information on the
economic magnitudes of the estimated coefficient on Dummy (Plant is Operating) for each pollutant by computing the estimated change in the pollutant as a
percentage of the pollutant’s average across all monitors in the country. All regressions control for year fixed effects and monitor-plant fixed effects. Robust
t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                          Panel A: Annual density of major air pollutants recorded by EPA monitors within one mile of each TRI plant
                                          Dummy                                    Monitor-                             Mean
                                                                            Year                                                 Additional % of Pollutant
                  Chemical Name           (Plant is             Constant            Plant   R-squared Observations    Density
                                                                           Dummy                                                 from One More TRI Plant
                                         Operating)                                Dummy                           (Nanograms)
            PM10 Total 0-10um STP        504.81**      (2.06)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.458     114,764     11627.050             4.34%
            Suspended particulate (TSP) 1,381.78***    (3.04)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.412      80,549     13393.240             10.32%
            Carbon monoxide                24.04*      (1.89)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.481      50,607       358.102              6.71%
            Ozone                          1.29**      (2.29)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.501      44,446        22.597              5.71%
            Lead (TSP) STP                  11.06      (1.44)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.116      69,870        42.355             26.11%
            Sulfur dioxide               769.88***     (9.83)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.490      60,667      2204.460             34.92%
            Benzene                        90.08*      (1.86)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.258      50,354       959.239              9.39%
            Toluene                      516.72***     (3.46)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.249      48,354      2482.186             20.82%
            PM10 - LC                      132.54      (0.64)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.411      54,757      4526.893              2.93%
            Ethylbenzene                  84.71***     (3.67)     Yes       Yes     Yes       0.200      47,858       383.226             22.10%

                         Panel B: Annual density of major air pollutants recorded by EPA monitors within two miles of each TRI plant
                                           Dummy                                   Monitor-                           Mean
                                                                            Year                                                 Additional % of Pollutant
                  Chemical Name            (Plant is            Constant            Plant   R-squared Observations   Density
                                                                           Dummy                                                 from One More TRI Plant
                                          Operating)                               Dummy                           (Nanograms)
            PM10 Total 0-10um STP         571.93***    (3.81)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.415     340,935     11103.350             5.15%
            Suspended particulate (TSP)     392.35     (1.45)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.402     237,410     12473.680             3.15%
            Carbon monoxide                19.38***    (2.68)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.453     173,052       322.829             6.00%
            Ozone                           0.79**     (2.52)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.478     147,325        21.684             3.64%
            Lead (TSP) STP                   4.08      (0.70)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.146     204,712        39.829            10.24%
            Sulfur dioxide                  82.84*     (1.77)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.480     198,377      2076.380             3.99%
            Benzene                        92.99***    (3.08)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.218     161,053       890.236            10.45%
            Toluene                       317.65***    (3.66)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.219     158,603      2266.939            14.01%
            PM10 - LC                     251.94**     (2.16)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.393     170,226      4159.733             6.06%
            Ethylbenzene                   44.45***    (3.33)     Yes       Yes      Yes      0.179     156,428       343.336            12.95%

                                                                                   36
                                                  Table 4: Executives Departures and TRI Plant Openings

                                            Panel A: Core results on TRI plant openings and executive departures
This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the one or two years
following the opening of a nearby TRI plant. The dependent variables are the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the indicated time
period. The main independent variables include the dummy variables of TRI plant opening within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm respectively. All
regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility),
as well as city-year, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered at the city and year level.
Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                                              (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)
                                                             Percentage of Executives Who Left the        Percentage of Executives Who Left the
                                                                    Companies in One Year                       Companies in Two Years

               TRI Open within 1 Mile                       3.53***                   4.23***            5.55***               6.56***
                                                             (4.54)                    (5.37)             (4.10)                (4.14)
               TRI Open within 2 Miles                                  1.90**                  2.22**              3.09***                3.56**
                                                                        (2.82)                  (2.47)               (3.21)                (2.89)

               Firm-year Controls                                                      Yes       Yes                             Yes        Yes

               City-Year Fixed Effects                        Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
               Industry-Year Fixed Effects                    Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
               Firm Fixed Effects                             Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

               Double Cluster by City and Year                Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

               Constant                                       Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

               Observations                                  17,047     17,047        13,487    13,487   15,953     15,953     12,519      12,519
               R-squared                                      0.636      0.635         0.688     0.688    0.701      0.701      0.752       0.751




                                                                                 37
               Panel B: TRI plant openings and executive departures, differentiating by distance between TRI plants and S&P 1500 firms
This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the one or two years
following the opening of a nearby TRI plant. The dependent variables are the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the indicated time
period. The main independent variables are respectively (a) a dummy variable that equals one if a TRI plant opened within one mile of the firm, (b) a dummy
variable that equals one if a TRI plant opened between 1 and 2 miles of the firm, and (c) dummy variable that equals one if a TRI plant opened between 2 and
5 miles of the firm. All regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and
Cash Flow Volatility), as well as city-year, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered at
the city and year level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                    (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)     (11)       (12)
                                   Percentage of Executives Who Left the Companies in One Year     Percentage of Executives Who Left the Companies in Two Years

TRI Open within 1 Mile            3.53***                         4.23***                         5.55***                         6.56***
                                   (4.54)                          (5.37)                          (4.10)                          (4.14)
TRI Open Between 1 and 2 Miles               1.58**                          1.70**                          2.93**                          3.45***
                                             (2.48)                          (2.16)                          (2.66)                           (5.36)
TRI Open Between 2 and 5 Miles                           0.51                            0.91                            0.55                             0.09
                                                        (0.67)                          (0.90)                          (0.89)                           (0.15)

Firm-year Controls                                                  Yes        Yes       Yes                                        Yes        Yes        Yes

City-Year Fixed Effects             Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Industry-Year Fixed Effects         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                  Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

Double Cluster by City and Year     Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

Constant                            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

Observations                      17,047     17,047     17,047    13,487     13,487     13,487    15,953     15,953     15,953     12,519     12,519    12,519
R-squared                          0.636      0.635      0.635     0.688      0.687      0.687     0.701      0.701      0.701      0.752      0.751     0.751




                                                                               38
                              Panel C: TRI plant openings and executive departures, a placebo test of less exposed executives
This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between the percentages of non-executive directors who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the one or
two years following the opening of a nearby TRI plant. The dependent variables are the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the
indicated time period. The main independent variables include the dummy variables of TRI plant opening within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm
respectively. All regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash
Flow Volatility), as well as city-year, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered at the
city and year level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                                (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
                                            Percentage of Non-executive Directors Who Left the Percentage of Non-executive Directors Who Left the
                                                          Companies in One Year                             Companies in Two Years

         TRI Open within 1 Mile                 0.61                       -0.12                      2.48                      2.04
                                               (0.78)                     (-0.17)                    (1.00)                    (0.69)
         TRI Open within 2 Miles                              0.42                      0.40                       1.36                      1.85
                                                             (1.09)                    (0.78)                     (1.62)                    (1.60)

         Firm-year Controls                                                Yes          Yes                                     Yes           Yes

         City-Year Fixed Effects                Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
         Industry-Year Fixed Effects            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
         Firm Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes

         Double Cluster by City and Year        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes

         Constant                               Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes

         Observations                          17,047       17,047        13,487       13,487       15,953       15,953        12,519       12,519
         R-squared                              0.561        0.561         0.561        0.561        0.561        0.610         0.610        0.610




                                                                              39
                 Panel D: TRI plant openings and executive departures, a placebo test of non-TRI plant openings near S&P 1500 firms
This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the one or two years
following the opening of a nearby non-TRI plant. The dependent variables are the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the indicated
time period. The main independent variables include the dummy variables of non-polluting plant opening within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm
respectively. All regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash
Flow Volatility), as well as city-year, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered at the
city and year level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                                          (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)
                                                         Percentage of Executives Who Left the       Percentage of Executives Who Left the
                                                                Companies in One Year                      Companies in Two Years

                 Non-TRI Plants Open within 1 Mile         0.45                 0.03                  1.71                  1.32
                                                          (0.50)               (0.04)                (0.77)                (0.46)
                 Non-TRI Plants Open within 2 Miles                  0.22                  0.24                  1.79                  1.94
                                                                    (0.38)                (0.30)                (1.71)                (1.75)

                 Firm-year Controls                                              Yes        Yes                             Yes        Yes

                 City-Year Fixed Effects                   Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                 Industry-Year Fixed Effects               Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                 Firm Fixed Effects                        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

                 Double Cluster by City and Year           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes

                 Constant                                  Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes

                 Observations                            17,047     17,047     13,487     13,487     15,953     15,953     12,519     12,519
                 R-squared                                0.557      0.557      0.611      0.611      0.630      0.630      0.686      0.686




                                                                              40
                            Panel E: TRI plant openings and executive departures, accounting for poorly performing firms
This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the one or two years
following the opening of a nearby TRI plant, excluding the firms with over 10% stock price drop in the lagged year. The dependent variables are the
percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the indicated time period. The main independent variables include the dummy variables of TRI
plant opening within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm respectively. All regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating
Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility), as well as city-year, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable
definitions. Standard errors are double clustered at the city and year level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5%
and 10%.


                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                  Percentage of Executives Who Left the Companies Percentage of Executives Who Left the Companies
                                                                    in One Year                                    in Two Years

         TRI Open within 1 Mile                      3.30**                  4.30***                   6.09***                  6.92***
                                                     (2.91)                   (5.04)                    (3.68)                   (4.09)
         TRI Open within 2 Miles                                 1.61***                  2.49***                   3.61**                    3.65*
                                                                  (3.20)                   (3.17)                   (2.74)                    (2.12)

         Firm-year Controls                                                    Yes          Yes                                   Yes          Yes

         City-Year Fixed Effects                      Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
         Industry-Year Fixed Effects                  Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
         Firm Fixed Effects                           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes

         Double Cluster by City and Year              Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes

         Constant                                     Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes

         Observations                                7,937        7,937       6,196        6,196        7,279       7,279        5,622        5,622
         R-squared                                   0.676        0.675       0.675        0.676        0.675       0.726        0.726        0.726




                                                                              41
                        Panel F: Robustness Check for TRI plant openings and executive departures: propensity score matching
This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the one or two years
following the opening of a nearby TRI plant. The dependent variables are the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the indicated time
period. We use a propensity score matched control group in the sample. The main independent variables include the dummy variables of TRI plant opening
within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm respectively. All regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow /
Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility), as well as city-year, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions.
Standard errors are double clustered at the city and year level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.


                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                      Percentage of Executives Who Left the         Percentage of Executives Who Left the
                                                             Companies in One Year                        Companies in Two Years

                 TRI Open within 1 Mile            6.49***                 5.70**                8.06***                7.35***
                                                    (3.24)                 (2.53)                 (2.99)                 (2.71)
                 TRI Open within 2 Miles                       2.19**                  2.19**                2.20**                  2.25**
                                                               (2.25)                  (2.32)                (2.15)                  (2.22)

                 Firm-year Controls                                         Yes         Yes                               Yes         Yes

                 City-Year Fixed Effects             Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
                 Industry-Year Fixed Effects         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
                 Firm Fixed Effects                  Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

                 Double Cluster by City and Year     Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

                 Constant                            Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

                 Observations                       2,537       7,066      2,537       7,066      2,322       6,481      2,322       6,481
                 R-squared                          0.654       0.483      0.656       0.484      0.736       0.584      0.740       0.586




                                                                              42
                        Panel G: Robustness Check for TRI plant openings and executive departures: nearest neighbor matching
This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the one or two years
following the opening of a nearby TRI plant. The dependent variables are the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the indicated time
period. We use a nearest neighbor matched control group in the sample. The main independent variables include the dummy variables of TRI plant opening
within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm respectively. All regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow /
Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility), as well as city-year, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions.
Standard errors are double clustered at the city and year level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.


                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                      Percentage of Executives Who Left the         Percentage of Executives Who Left the
                                                             Companies in One Year                        Companies in Two Years

                 TRI Open within 1 Mile            7.95***                8.37***                8.60***                9.41***
                                                    (4.04)                 (4.48)                 (4.12)                 (3.74)
                 TRI Open within 2 Miles                       2.84***                2.86***                2.85**                  2.79**
                                                                (3.25)                 (3.31)                (2.50)                  (2.46)

                 Firm-year Controls                                         Yes         Yes                               Yes         Yes

                 City-Year Fixed Effects             Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
                 Industry-Year Fixed Effects         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
                 Firm Fixed Effects                  Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes

                 Double Cluster by City and Year     Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes

                 Constant                            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes

                 Observations                       2,159       6,395      2,159       6,395      2,010       5,914      2,010       5,914
                 R-squared                          0.737       0.502      0.738       0.503      0.811       0.603      0.812       0.604




                                                                              43
                                                        Panel H: Pre-TRI-opening executive departures

This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the one or two years
before the opening of a nearby TRI plant. The dependent variables are the percentages of executives who leave their S&P 1500 firms in the indicated time
period. The main independent variables include the dummy variables of TRI plant opening within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm respectively. All
regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility),
as well as city-year, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered at the city and year level.
Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                   Percentage of Executives Who Left the Companies Percentage of Executives Who Left the Companies
                                                                     in Last Year                                  Two Years Ago

                 TRI Open within 1 Mile               0.25        0.74                                4.07        4.41
                                                     (0.12)      (0.31)                              (1.18)      (1.15)
                 TRI Open within 2 Miles                                      -1.10       -1.17                               0.92        0.89
                                                                             (-1.26)     (-1.34)                             (0.91)      (0.89)

                 Firm-year Controls                                           Yes         Yes                                 Yes         Yes

                 City-Year Fixed Effects              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                 Industry-Year Fixed Effects          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                 Firm Fixed Effects                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes

                 Double Cluster by City and Year      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes

                 Constant                             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes

                 Observations                        17,195      13,851      17,195      13,851      17,195      13,851      17,195      13,851
                 R-squared                            0.328       0.352       0.329       0.352       0.413       0.447       0.412       0.446




                                                                                 44
                                      Table 5: Executive Departures and TRI Plant Openings: Individual-level Analyses

This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between each executive’s decision to leave or remain in their S&P 1500. The dependent variable is a
dummy variable that equals one for executives leaving the firm during a one (or two) year period and zero otherwise. The main independent variables include
the dummy variables of TRI plant opening within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm respectively. All regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total
Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility), time-varying Individual controls (Tenure and Age), as
well as city-year, industry-year and individual-firm fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered at the city and
year level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                                        (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)            (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                      Dummy (Leave the Company in One Year)          Dummy (Leave the Company in Two Years)

           TRI Open within 1 Mile                    0.0486***               0.0469***               0.0623***               0.0625***
                                                      (5.1855)                (5.3105)                (4.9967)                (3.3968)
           TRI Open within 2 Miles                               0.0481***               0.0806***               0.0370***               0.0540***
                                                                  (6.7305)                (7.2835)                (5.3731)                (5.6493)

           Firm-year Controls                                                   Yes         Yes                                Yes         Yes
           Individual-year Controls                                             Yes         Yes                                Yes         Yes

           City-Year Dummy                              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
           Industry-Year Dummy                          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
           Firm-Individual Dummy                        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes

           Double Cluster by City and Year              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

           Constant                                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

           Observations                                86,282     86,282      48,169      48,169      73,900      73,900      40,873      40,873
           R-squared                                    0.418      0.418       0.418       0.418       0.418       0.430       0.432       0.431




                                                                              45
                      Table 6: Individual Probability of Leaving and TRI Plant Openings: Interaction with Generalist CEO Index

This table presents OLS regression results of the relation between each CEO’s decision to leave or remain in their S&P 1500 firm, while differentiating CEOs
by the degree of general human capital. The dependent variables are dummies that equal one for the CEO leaving the company in one/two year(s) and zero
otherwise. The main independent variables are (a) the dummy variables of TRI plant opening within 1 or 2 miles of the S&P 1500 firm respectively and (b)
the interaction of these TRI plant opening variables with the Generalist CEO Index. The Generalist CEO Index measures the skills of the CEO that are
transferrable across firms and industries. All regressions include time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow / Total Assets
Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility), time-varying Individual controls (Tenure and Age), as well as city-year, industry-year and individual-firm
fixed effects. Table 1 provides variable definitions. Standard errors are double clustered at the city and year level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
*** indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                                          (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)              (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)
                                                         Dummy (Leave the Company in One Year)            Dummy (Leave the Company in Two Years)

      TRI Open within 1 Mile*Generalist CEO Index      0.1810***                0.2762***                0.2759***                0.3619***
                                                         (3.57)                   (4.48)                   (4.11)                   (4.79)
      TRI Open within 1 Mile                           0.2648***                0.3230***                0.2582***                0.2403**
                                                         (3.24)                   (3.83)                   (4.08)                   (2.41)
      TRI Open within 2 Miles*Generalist CEO Index                  0.2325***                0.2906***                0.1741***                0.2574***
                                                                      (3.58)                   (3.62)                   (2.92)                   (3.05)
      TRI Open within 2 Miles                                       0.1740***                0.2116***                0.1500**                 0.1662***
                                                                      (3.15)                   (4.41)                   (2.63)                   (3.58)

      Firm-year Controls                                                              Yes       Yes                                  Yes          Yes
      Individual-year Controls                                                        Yes       Yes                                  Yes          Yes

      City-Year Fixed Effects                             Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
      Industry-Year Fixed Effects                         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
      Firm-Individual Fixed Effects                       Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

      Double Cluster by City and Year                     Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

      Constant                                            Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

      Observations                                       3,813        3,813       2,681        2,681       3,598        3,598       2,518        2,518
      R-squared                                          0.705        0.718       0.751        0.767       0.768        0.770       0.798        0.804

                                                                                 46
                         Table 7: CAR around Executives’ Turnover Announcement

The dependent variable is the 4-factor CARs around the announcement dates of executive departures from
S&P 1500 firms. The dependent variable is the 5-day CARs around the announced departure dates of
executives from S&P 1500 firms and the main explanatory variable is a dummy variable that equals one if
a TRI plant opened close to the S&P 1500 firm. The explanatory variable of focus is either a dummy
variable that equals one if a TRI plant opened within one mile of the S&P 1500 firm (TRI Open within 1
Mile) or a dummy variable that equals one if a TRI plant opened within two miles of the S&P 1500 firm
(TRI Open within 1 Mile). All regressions include firm and year fixed effects. As indicated, regressions (3)
and (4) also condition on time-varying Firm Controls (Total Assets, Leverage, Operating Cash Flow /
Total Assets Ratio, Sales Growth, and Cash Flow Volatility) and time-varying Individual controls (Tenure
and Age). Robust t-statistics clustered at firm level are in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at
1%, 5% and 10%.



                                             (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)
                                             4-factor Cumulative Abnormal Return (-2, +2)


          TRI Open within 1 Mile        -0.0194***                     -0.0308***
                                         (-2.8228)                      (-2.8497)
          TRI Open within 2 Miles                         -0.0160***                 -0.0210***
                                                           (-3.3430)                  (-2.5829)

          Firm Controls                                                   Yes            Yes
          Individual Controls                                             Yes            Yes

          Firm Fixed Effects                Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes
          Year Fixed Effects                Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes

          Constant                          Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes

          Observations                     4,365            4,365        4,365          4,365
          R-squared                        0.268            0.267        0.268          0.270




                                                     47
          Table 8: Comparison of Pollution Levels of the Location of Departing Executives

This table compares the pollution levels at the locations of the departing executive’s original and new
firms. The sample includes executives who left S&P 1500 firms following a TRI plant opening within 2
miles of the firm in the past one year (upper panel) or in the past two years (bottom panel).

            Executives leaving S&P 1500 firms with at least one plant opening within 2 miles

  Executives who left the S&P 1500 firms with at least one plant opening within 2 miles in the past one year
Pollutant                        New Area            Original Area           Diff            t stat      Obs
PM10 Total 0-10um STP               24.15                24.68              -0.529          -0.591        77
Suspended particulate (TSP)          56.3                47.73              8.574           1.317         15
Carbon monoxide                       0.6                0.661           -0.0613**          -2.266        86
Ozone                              0.0401                0.0409          -0.000779          -0.855       104
Lead (TSP) STP                     0.0313                0.0388           -0.00746          -0.267        22
Benzene                             2.116                 2.374           -0.258**          -1.722        66
Sulfur dioxide                       3.93                 4.727           -0.797**          -2.189        66
Toluene                             5.748                 6.952          -1.204***          -2.552        65
PM10 - LC                           22.48                 23.92           -1.443**          -2.272        33
Ethylbenzene                        0.923                 0.933            -0.0101          -0.115        58

 Executives who left the S&P 1500 firms with at least one plant opening within 2 miles in the past two years
Pollutant                        New Area            Original Area           Diff           t stat      Obs
PM10 Total 0-10um STP               23.47                24.69             -1.211*         -1.589        93
Suspended particulate (TSP)         50.04                55.79              -5.75          -0.827        13
Carbon monoxide                     0.551                0.635          -0.0837***         -3.869       102
Ozone                              0.0404               0.0387            0.00169           2.175       125
Lead (TSP) STP                     0.0762               0.0414             0.0349           0.588        23
Sulfur dioxide                      3.628                5.512           -1.884***         -4.623        63
Benzene                             2.278                2.774           -0.496***         -2.557        69
Toluene                             6.664                8.523            -1.859**         -2.297        68
PM10 - LC                           22.69                 22.4               0.29           0.566        51
Ethylbenzene                        0.987                1.289            -0.302**         -1.759        58




                                                     48
