                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE NEW PRESCRIPTION DRUG PARADOX:
                         PIPELINE PRESSURE AND RISING PRICES

                                         Alice M. Ellyson
                                          Anirban Basu

                                       Working Paper 24387
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24387


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2018




The authors thank comments from seminar participants at the University of Washington
PHEnOM series, Federal Trade Commission, RAND, and the Department of Defense. All
opinions and errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24387.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Alice M. Ellyson and Anirban Basu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The New Prescription Drug Paradox: Pipeline Pressure and Rising Prices
Alice M. Ellyson and Anirban Basu
NBER Working Paper No. 24387
March 2018
JEL No. I11,I13,I18,K23,L11,L13

                                              ABSTRACT

Economic literature has extensively studied how prices for incumbent pharmaceutical drugs respond
to generic competition after entry. However, less attention has been paid to pricing behavior in anticipation
of brand-to-brand competition. We contribute to this gap in the literature by both developing a model
of pricing strategies for incumbent drug manufacturers under tiered-insurance anticipating branded
competition. Our model predicts rising prices for incumbent drugs for a range of elasticities as the
likelihood of entry increases from competitors with horizontally-differentiated products. Using the
insulin market as a natural experiment, we exploit exogenous variation in a potential entrant's completion
of clinical trials to identify the effect of drug pipeline pressure on the prices of incumbent drugs. Results
suggest that pipeline pressure significantly increases the prices of incumbent drugs. We expect that
similar pricing effects will be prevalent with potential biosimilar entry.


Alice M. Ellyson
The Comparative Health Outcomes, Policy,
and Economics (CHOICE) Institute
1959 NE Pacific St
Box - 357630,
Seattle WA 98195
aellyson@uw.edu

Anirban Basu
The CHOICE Institute
Departments of Pharmacy,
Health Services, and Economics
University of Washington, Seattle
1959 NE Pacific St., Box - 357660
Seattle, WA 98195
and NBER
basua@uw.edu
   Several studies have recently documented rising prices for pharmaceuticals in various therapeutic areas,

especially among branded drugs [Hua et al. (2016); Bennette et al. (2016); Hartung et al. (2015); Howard et al.

(2015)]. Brand-name drugs account for 72 percent of drug spending, though they comprise only 10 percent

of prescriptions dispensed in the U.S. [Kesselheim, Avorn and Sarpatwari (2016); Generic Pharmaceutical

Association (2015); Express Scripts (2015)]. Among the most commonly used branded drugs, prices increased

by about 164 percent between 2008 and 2015, greatly outpacing inflation (Office of the Assistant Secretary

for Planning and Evaluation 2016). These trends are quite different from pricing trends observed in markets

with generic drugs or over-the-counter drugs. Despite these considerable observed differences, the majority

of our understanding in prescription drug pricing and entry relies on literature focused primarily on the

competitive effects of generic drugs. The original prescription drug paradox referred to a phenomenon

following generic entry whereby price-sensitive consumers switched to the generic and prices among brand

name drugs subsequently rose as the remaining demand for brand name drugs was less elastic.

   The new prescription drug paradox refers to a phenomenon of increasing prices corresponding with an

increasing number of branded competitors. These escalating prices are perplexing given that as more treat-

ment options become available over time, patients and insurers should have more flexibility and bargaining

power in both drug choice and drug costs. Furthermore, these rising prices may be symptomatic of concerns

highlighted by Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1988) that potential competition, and even competition itself, may not

be sufficient to eliminate substantial market power in modern industries, especially those like healthcare and

drug manufacturing where considerable Research & Development (R&D) is required and prices are not fully

observable. In the current healthcare debate, understanding the role of competition and what it may and

may not be able to accomplish is fundamental, especially in brand name competition. Therefore, there is a

critical policy need to understand the role of brand name competition and potential competition to better

inform policies addressing prescription drug prices.

   We contribute to this policy debate by studying the effect of potential competition on pricing decisions of

drug manufacturers under patent. Our analysis approaches this issue in two ways. First, we derive a model

of branded pharmaceutical price competition under tiered insurance for incumbent drugs facing uncertain

entry in the future. The intuition behind the model proposes that pharmaceutical firms have a long-term

revenue maximizing strategy, where uncertain entry introduces a tradeoff between current revenue and future

revenue. Branded drugs in the pipeline represent a kind of market exclusivity loss. Though an incumbent

will be the only producer of a certain drug, other drugs which can serve as a therapeutic substitute can eat

into the incumbent’s market share. It may be revenue maximizing, and therefore profit maximizing, for the



                                                       2
incumbent to raise prices now and offset some of the revenue loss due to market share loss if/when entry

occurs. This theoretical result relies largely on the incumbent manufacturer facing less elastic demand due

to insurance. The tiered structure of prescription drug coverage incentivizing the entrant to reference price

the incumbent’s current market prices and horizontal differentiation between drugs. The model predicts that

as the credible threat of entry increases, an incumbent drug manufacturer will increase price. It also allows

for an entrant with a vertically-differentiated product to price higher than existing drugs, and demonstrates

that following entry, price for the incumbent will decrease, but maintain a markup.

    Second, we empirically test whether existing competitors adjust price in the presence of pipeline pressure,

focusing on a particular drug market without entry but with an increasing amount of potential entry -

insulin. This market provides a suitable natural experiment because there is no change in the composition

of incumbent’s over a span of several years, yet several potential entrants have new insulins in the drug

development pipeline. We use clinical trial results to exploit exogenous variation in a potential entrant’s

success in different phases of the pipeline, and consider the change in price in quarters following pipeline

shocks compared to quarters without pipeline shocks. Though the choice to start research & development

(R&D) in a particular market will be endogenous with price, neither the timing of clinical trials clearance nor

regulatory approval can be controlled by market participants. Therefore, the effect of competitive pressure

on prices of incumbent manufacturers can be identified using pipeline shocks. Results indicate that pipeline

shocks have significant effects on the price of incumbent insulins. Pipeline pressure significantly increases the

prices of incumbent drugs, and potential biosimilar entry may drive this effect. Furthermore, pipeline shocks

have cumulative effects. As the probability of entry of at least one or more new branded drugs increases,

the pipeline shock effect becomes stronger. Both the third and fourth pipeline shocks increase prices among

incumbent drugs by about $2.30 per shock. For the average patient taking about 12.48mL of insulin per

month, this corresponds to about 30 additional dollars. However, the quality of information about the shock

and the particular drug shock matters. In the insulin market, rising prices due to pipeline pressure are largely

driven by a branded biosimiliar in the pipeline. These results are robust to several specification checks.



1     Background and Literature Review

1.1    The Drug Approval Process

Drugs available for treatment undergo a rigorous process before they are prescribed to patients. The drug

approval process begins with pre-clinical research within a manufacturing firm. If a treatment provides


                                                       3
promising results from pre-clinical research, manufacturers submit an Investigational New Drug (IND) ap-

plication, which is reviewed by the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). If an IND

application is approved, manufacturers begin clinical trials with people. These clinical trials are broken

into three phases − Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3 − where each subsequent phase indicates success in the

previous phase. If all three phases of clinical trials are successful, then a manufacturer submits a New Drug

Application (NDA) or Biologic License Application (BLA). The FDA reviews these applications and if a

drug successfully demonstrates safety and efficacy, the drug will be approved for use in the United States.1

   Drug patents and/or exclusivity awards are critical in this market. Patents are granted by the United

States Patent and Trademark Office at any time, regardless of approval status, and carry a term of 20 years.

Exclusivity awards place a delay and prohibitions on the approval of competitor drugs. Exclusivity takes

effect once a drug receives FDA approval, with the longest possible exclusivity award, 7 years, applying

to orphan drugs. According to the FDA, “patents and exclusivity may or may not run concurrently and

may or may not cover the same aspects of the drug product.”2 Yet, both of these institutional awards

grant a drug manufacturer monopoly power, which provides the incentives for pharmaceutical companies

to invest in R&D for innovative treatments. Recent estimates of R&D costs per drug approval amount to

about $2.87 billion (DiMasi, Grabowski and Hansen 2016), so these awards are critical to incentivize these

incredibly risky investments. Most work studying the effect of entry on pharmaceutical prices focuses on

generic entry. Generic drugs are pharmacologically-identical to their brand-name counterpart drugs. They

have the same intended use, effects, side-effects, administration route, risks, safety, and dosage as the original

drug. Drugs manufacturers are protected from generic competition during patent/exclusivity periods. When

the period granted ends, a pharmaceutical product may face generic entry. However, drugs under the patent

and/or exclusivity period may face competition from other patented drugs which obtain the same or similar

therapeutic goal, but are not pharmacologically-identical to existing drugs, and therefore do not violate

patent and/or exclusivity rules.

   We will refer to this type of competition as brand-to-brand, brand-name, or branded competition.

Note that in branded competition, it is possible to have both horizontally-differentiated and vertically-

differentiated products. Horizontally-differentiated drugs are different, but the choice of which drug depends

on the consumers preferences. Vertically-differentiated drugs are of different quality. Inn other words, drugs

are different and all consumers would prefer one drug over the other. The patent process does not require
   1 More information on this process can be reviewed at

https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/SmallBusinessAssistance/ucm053131.htm
   2 More information on drug patents and exclusivity can be found at https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/ucm079031.htm




                                                           4
that new drugs be vertically-differentiated. Manufacturers seeking FDA approval are only required to show

that the drug’s benefits outweigh its known risks and that the drug can be manufactured in a way that

ensures its quality. Drugs are not required to show that they perform “better” than existing drugs on the

market. Patents are awarded as long as the new drug has a formulation that is different from existing drugs.

Therefore, it is possible to observe both vertical differentiation and/or horizontal differentiation in branded

competition. “Me-too drugs” may be considered horizontally-differentiated drugs.

   The amount of brand-to-brand competition an incumbent may face is considerably more uncertain than

the threat of generic entry. Studies report that the clinical success rate − the product of individual phase

transition probabilities for the clinical trials portion of drug development − is quite low, around one in ten

(Hay et al. 2014). However, estimates from various studies indicate that success in phase 3 ranges from 55

to 64 percent [Abrantes-Metz, Adams and Metz (2004); Kola and Landis (2004); DiMasi et al. (2010); Hay

et al. (2014)]. Thus, the credibility of the threat of entry increases considerably once a drug reaches phase

3. These studies also suggest that phase 3 success further increases the threat of entry. Estimates from the

same set of studies indicate that between 77 - 93 percent that successfully complete phase 3 studies move

on to NDA submission and approval.


1.2    Drug Price Competition

The economic field of industrial organization has extensively studied the game theoretic behavior of firms and

how incumbent firms anticipate and respond to entry (Tirole 1988). Theoretical work largely demonstrates

that under many circumstances entry − and even potential entry (Baumol, Panzar and Willig 1982) −

can drive markets to the efficient allocation of resources. In many ways, competition has generally been

regarded as a force which exerts “downward pressure on costs, reduces slack, provides incentives for the

efficient organization of production, and even drives innovation forward” (Nickell 1996). It has also been

largely regarded as a force to reduce price. Yet, theoretical work also suggests that there are a wide array

of anticompetitive strategies a firm can employ to deter entry (Salop 1979). This prompted a series of

econometric studies investigating the market effects of entry in various industries [Bresnahan and Reiss

(1991); Berry (1992); Bunch and Smiley (1992); Mazzeo (2002); Pakes, Ostrovsky and Berry (2007); Aghion

et al. (2009)]. The empirical work indicates that the incumbent response to entry is both mixed and selective

(Geroski 1995).

   This econometric work has important implications for the prescription drug pricing debate. It is not

clear that competition, potential or actual, can be the silver bullet to the drug pricing dilemma. Research


                                                      5
following the passage of the 1984 Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act indicated

that generic competition was a driving effect in declining prices [Grabowski and Vernon (1992); Frank and

Salkever (1997); Morton (1999); and Reiffen and Ward (2005)], with a minor caveat that market size and

concentration may limit the speed and extent of the transition to lower priced generics (Tenn and Wendling

2014). Yet, this research also suggests that competition is not the only market incentive at play. Grabowski

and Vernon (1992), Frank and Salkever (1997), and Ching (2010) all contend that there is considerable

consumer heterogeneity in price-sensitivity which can produce differential effects on drug prices following

entry. Ching (2010) also suggests consumers learning plays a role and incumbent manufacturers have an

incentive to slowly raise prices, retaining as much market share as possible and slowing the learning process

about new drugs.

   Furthermore, research has indicated a variety of factors influence the price of prescription drugs, mostly

factors that may mitigate the pressure from competition. Drug-level factors like innovation, the development

of drugs with therapeutic gains from greater efficacy and/or safety relative to existing drugs [Reekie (1978)

and Lu and Comanor (1998)], differentiation, both vertical and horizontal, and advertising increase drug

prices [Perloff, Suslow and Seguin (1995); Bhattacharya and Vogt (2003); Ching (2010)]. Institutional-level

factors like regulatory standards, patent protection, and market structure can also influence market efficiency

and price dynamics [Danzon and Chao (2000); Kyle (2007); Brekke, Canta and Staume (2016)]. Additionally,

the role of insurance as an institutional factor in drug pricing has largely been assumed away, despite a key

detail that nearly all prescription drugs are provided through health insurance plans. Nearly all Americans

obtaining health coverage through an employer have access to a plan with prescription drug coverage, and in

most cases the worker has coverage without first meeting a deductible (Claxton et al. 2016). In addition, over

89% of these plans have tiered prescription drug coverage (Claxton et al. 2016). It is clear that prescription

drug insurance will tie into consumer price-sensitivity [Lakdawalla and Sood (2009) and Berndt, McGuire

and Newhouse (2011)].

   We suspect that typical prescription drug insurance plans largely eliminate patient price-sensitivity re-

sulting in a lack of downward pressure on price. Specifically, we conjecture that under this institutional

structure, both incumbent drug manufacturers and potential entrants face a pricing decision under which

increasing price is the dominant strategy. We contribute to the existing literature on anticipating entry and

pharmaceutical competition in the following ways. First, we explore the effect of pressure in the pipeline on

prescription drugs. The aforementioned econometric work has focused on the effects of actual entry, because

it is not often possible to observe potential entry. However, in the case of pharmaceuticals, information from



                                                      6
the drug development pipeline is publicly available due to the Food and Drug Administration Modernization

Act (FDAMA) of 1997 requiring trial registry. Therefore, we can directly observe potential competitors in

the pipeline and identify the effect of the credible threat of entry on incumbent pricing strategies. Second, we

develop a two-period model of pricing strategies under tiered prescription drug insurance for an incumbent

drug manufacturer. The model predicts rising prices for incumbent drugs for a range of elasticities as the

likelihood of entry increases. Third, we econometrically assess pricing adjustments due to pipeline pressure,

using the insulin market as a natural experiment. Finally and perhaps most importantly, we contribute to

the growing assessments of pharmaceutical competition. Policy-makers may expect entry and competition

to improve consumer welfare, but we find evidence that this wishful thinking is unlikely to be true.


1.3     A Motivating Example: Insulin

Insulin is a life-saving drug used to treat diabetes.3 It helps patients maintain glycemic control and pre-

vent and/or delay considerable complications and costs. On average, medical expenditures in the US are

approximately 2.3 times higher for patients with diabetes than those without, and it accounts for more than

1 in 5 health care dollars spent (Yang et al. 2013). Therefore, consistent treatment with insulin can be both

beneficial to patients and the US healthcare system. This particular drug is a biologic, originally discovered

and patented in the early 1920s, marking a monumental improvement in treating patients with diabetes.

In the last 95 years, incremental improvements in safety, efficacy, and convenience have characterized the

market for insulin. Older versions of insulin were derived from animal and human DNA. The newest version

of insulin which is derived from recombinant DNA (rDNA), the insulin analogue, was introduced on the U.S.

market in 1996. Animal and human insulins are considered somewhat inferior in both efficacy and safety to

insulin analogues,4 and used less frequently.

    Recent research reports that the price of insulin has soared in the previous decade. Hua et al. (2016)

report that the price of insulin, measured as the mean price per milliliter, rose 197 percent from 2002

to 2013. Between 2007 and 2014, there were no new insulin analogues approved by regulatory agencies,

but there were several in pipeline development. Various insulins in drug development completed the final

phase of clinical trials and submitted national drug applications (NDAs) in the following quarters: 2009q1,

2011q3, 2013q4, 2014q2. Despite the rising threat of potential competition, Figure 1 depicts that the average

inflation-adjusted price of insulin per mL is increasing over time, from $14.67 at the beginning of 2007 to
   3 It is the only treatment for type 1 diabetes, and is used as a second and/or third line therapy for type 2 diabetes when

other treatments are unsuccessful.
   4 Insulin analogues both improved glycemic control and reduced the rate of adverse events in the form of severe hypoglycemia,

two life-threatening issues for patients with this condition, compared to earlier versions of insulin like animal and human.


                                                               7
                      Figure 1: Average Prices for all Insulin Prescriptions, 2007-2015


$61.22 by the end of 2015. On average, this is a 317.3 percent increase in the price of incumbent insulins.

The majority of these price increases were absorbed by payers, though this could be dampened by the size

of rebates. Payments made by patients increased by 56 percent.



2     Brand Name Drug Competition with Uncertain Entry

Consider a drug manufacturer in a two-period model facing uncertain entry in the second period. In the

first period, the drug manufacturer is a monopolist. This drug is a brand name drug under patent. Entry

in the second period is probabilistic. Therefore, the monopolist is referred to as the “incumbent” and

a new “entrant” firm may enter the market. If entry occurs, the entrant firm produces a branded drug

which is qualitatively similar to the incumbent’s product but considered to be an imperfect substitute.

This is because, the entrant’s drug may have limited information on effectiveness at regulatory approval,

while patients requiring treatment for this drug have experience with the incumbent’s drug for consumers.

Therefore, the differentiation between the incumbent’s and the entrant’s drug is horizontal and driven by

patient preferences, doctor preferences, or some other implicit preference to try the new treatment. After

observing price in the first period, there is some probability that entry occurs and both the incumbent and

entrant simultaneously set a price in the second period.

    In the presence of insurance, the demand price faced by the consumer is vastly different from the market


                                                     8
price that a monopoly may set. In fact, in many cases an insurer would only charge a fixed copay from

the beneficiaries for a drug. The insurer pays the rest of the price. Berndt, McGuire and Newhouse (2011)

demonstrate that coinsurance makes demand less elastic and suggest that plans with fixed copayments will

result in even higher prices with price increases translated into higher premiums. Consequently, consumer

demand for this drug is inelastic, giving the monopolist an opportunity to set a price that can extract rents

from the market. This is unlike a traditional monopolist whose price is constrained directly by the elasticity

of consumers. The final price set by the monopolist would involve negotiations with the insurer so that

the price would preserve a non-negative profit margin for the insurer. For our purposes, we do not need to

explicitly consider the specific form of insurer constraint. Whatever it is, we acknowledge that it is used to

set equilibrium prices. Furthermore, we acknowledge that the presence of uncertainty, imperfect information,

and insurance can have a significant effect on markets as demonstrated by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976)

and Arrow (1963). Without modeling these details, this model attempts to outline the incentives for a drug

manufacturer whose demand is largely supplied by insurance. Our goal is to see if the equilibrium price prior

to entry is influenced by other factors, especially pressure from the drug development pipeline, or potential

competition.


2.1    Extensive Form of the Two Period Model

There are two participants, the incumbent and the entrant. In the first period, the incumbent chooses

price. In the second period, both the entrant and the incumbent make a simultaneous choice on price. The

incumbent has complete but imperfect information about the likelihood of entry in the second period. Let

subscript i represent the incumbent firm and subscript e denote the entrant firm. In addition, let subscript

1, 2 denote the period of the game. Then, for example, term Ri is the incumbent’s revenue, and P1i , c1i ,

and Q1i denote the incumbent’s price, copayment, and quantity in the first period, respectively. There are

three formal assumptions that are required.

Assumption 1. Each product in the market is available to consumers at a constant demand price (for

example, a set copay) via insurance.

Assumption 2. Without loss of generality, marginal costs are zero for each drug.

Assumption 3. Drugs are homogenous in terms of clinical benefit. That is, they are therapeutically equiva-

lent in treatment, but may exhibit other quality attributes that are more or less desirable according to patient

preferences.


                                                       9
Assumption 4. Under tiered prescription drug insurance, a lower price generates a more favorable tier

placement, and therefore a lower copay charged. That is, if the entrant sets a price Pe = γPi where γ ≤ 1,

and the copayment is a function of the fraction of price charged, ce = ce (γ), copayments can be anchored

at ce (0) = 0 and ce (1) = ci where setting price equivalent to the incumbent dictates that the two drugs be

placed on the same insurance tier. It follows that the elasticity of copayment with respect to price is linear,
∂ci       ci            ∂ce       ce
∂Pi   =   Pi   and      ∂Pe   =   Pe   in both periods.

In what follows, we solve for a Sub-game Perfect Nash Equilibrium (SPNE) using backward induction (Selton

1965) and the aforementioned Assumptions. Therefore, we will first find best response functions, the optimal

strategy for a particular player given the strategies of other players, for both players in the second period,

and use these expectations to examine the pricing strategy for the incumbent in the first period.


2.2       Equilibrium Strategy for the Entrant

First, consider the equilibrium strategy for the entrant. Let price set by the entrant be P2e = γP2i where

γ ≤ 1 and denotes the fraction the entrant sets its price in reference to P2i . Let c2e = c2e (γ) where c2e

denotes the copayment that the insurer charges for the entrant’s drug in the second period. Naturally,
                                  0
                                         ∂c2e
c2e (γ) ≤ c2i ∀γ and c2e =                ∂γ    > 0, that is, a lower price of the entrant’s product would lead to the lower
                                                                                                 0
copay charged. Let c2e (γ) be linear in γ. Since c2e (0) = 0 and c2e (1) = c2i , then c2e = c2i . It follows that for
                                                                                                                   ∂ci       ci
both the incumbent and the entrant, the elasticity of copayment with respect to price is 1, that is,               ∂Pi   =   Pi
      ∂ce          ce
and   ∂Pe      =   Pe    in both periods. In the second period, if a new manufacturer gets regulatory approval to

enter the market with a qualitatively similar but imperfect substitute to the incumbent’s drug, the pricing

decision follows a simultaneous game where the incumbent and the entrant are trying to price their own

products anticipating competition from the other, albeit in the presence of insurance. Like the incumbent,

the entrant is also subject to the demand price separation due to insurance that protects it from the full

price-elasticity of consumer demand. Let the demand function for the entrant be given as


                                                          Q2e = a − b1 c2e + b2 c2i                                          (1)


where c2e and c2i are the copayments set for the entrant’s and incumbent’s drugs, respectively, by the insurer.

Here b1 captures the responsiveness of the entrant’s demand with respect to its own copayment, while b2

captures the responsiveness with respect to the incumbent’s copayment. a denotes the demand intercept

facing the entrant.


                                                                     10
   If the insurer covers both drugs at the same copayment level (i.e. c2e = c2i ), and there are no restrictions

set on which drug the patient chooses to take, switching to the entrant’s drug is determined entirely by

patient preferences, doctor preferences, or some other implicit preference to try the new treatment. Both

the incumbent and entrant drug can achieve the same treatment goal, but rather switching to the new

drug is determined by underlying preferences. Gaynor, Propper and Seiler (2016) and Santos, Gravelle

and Propper (2017) demonstrate that certain quality characteristics matter in this type of discrete choice

between products and/or providers in healthcare, specifically considering patient choice among hospitals in

the English National Health Service. As previously mentioned, we assume that products in this theoretical

model are horizontally differentiated, so that switching to the new drug is not driven by vertical differences

in quality. Let there be some portion, θ, of the population demanding treatment for this condition, Q, at

a copay of c2i who will switch to the entrant’s drug under these conditions, leaving a fraction (1 − θ) for

the incumbent’s demand. Therefore, following a linear inverse demand function for the entrant’s drug under

this condition is

                          Q2e = θQ = a − b1 c2i + b2 c2i =⇒ a = θQ + c2i (b1 − b2 )                         (2)


Under such a scenario, there is no reason for the entrant to price its drug any differently than the current

prevalent price of the monopolist, i.e. P2e = P2i . This is because P2i is the maximum price the entrant can

charge in this simultaneous game, which maximizes its revenues since θQ is outside of entrant control.

   However, since insurers often utilize a tiered system of copays to induce price elasticity of demand between

two products, the entrant will have a pricing decision at hand. Specifically, the entrant debates whether to

charge a lower price than P1i so that its product may be placed in a higher tier, (i.e. lower copayment) than

the monopolist incumbent’s product. Would the demand surge due to this favorable placement be enough

to overcome the shortfall in revenue due to the lower price? To answer this question, we solve the entrant’s

revenue maximization problem as follows. The entrant will maximize revenue in the second period, which

also maximizes profit. This is given by

                                             max Re = P2e · Q2e                                             (3)
                                              P2e


Substituting for Q2e using Equation 2, we can rewrite the entrant’s second-period problem as

                                                                            
                                max Re = P2e · Q2e = P2e a − b1 c2e + b2 c2i


Solving the entrant’s first-order condition with respect to P2e , setting this equal to zero, and solving for



                                                      11
P2e generates the best response function for the entrant. The best response function describes the optimal

strategy for a particular player, here the entrant, given the strategies of other players, here the incumbent.

To simplify the entrant’s best response function, we apply Assumption 4 and Equation 2 as well as requiring
       c2e       c1i         c2i       c1i
that   P2e   =   P1i   and   P2i   =   P1i .
                                                                 θQP1i    1
                                                         P2e =           + P2i                                 (4)
                                                                 2b1 c1i  2

Equation 4 displays the entrant’s best response function. Note that if θ = 0, that is, no one switches to the

entrant’s drug, the entrant prices the new drug at half the incumbent’s price. Notice also that this suggests

the entrant may increase price over the incumbent’s drug, if the market share gain is high relative to the

elasticity with respect to copay. In fact, if the entrant’s product is substantially differentiated vertically, and

therefore the entrant captures a larger share of demand, the entrant may price considerably higher than the

incumbent price.


2.3     Equilibrium Strategy for the Incumbent

The incumbent two-period decision problem is given as


                                                    max Ri = P1i · Q1i + E(R2i )                               (5)
                                                   P1i ,P2i



where P , Q, and R denote price, quantity, and revenue, respectively. In drug manufacturing, fixed costs are

high and sunk, and marginal costs of production are low. Therefore, by Assumption 2, maximizing revenue

is equivalent to maximizing profit. Note that although the monopolist can set prices with certainty in the

first period and thereby determine revenue, it faces uncertainty about the second period stream of revenue

due to the potential entry of the entrant’s product. Let the probability of an entrant entering the market in

period 2 be denote by ρ. Hence the incumbent’s problem can be written as:

                                                                                           
                                         max Ri = P1i · Q1i + (1 − ρ)P1i · Q1i + ρP2i · Q2i                    (6)


   We can also find a best response function for the incumbent in the second period based on the entrant’s

best response. Like the entrant, the incumbent also faces demand separation. Let the inverse demand

function for the incumbent in the second period be given as


                                                       Q2i = α − β1 c2i + β2 c2e                               (7)



                                                                   12
From the demand function of the entrant, we know that if the copayments for both products are the same,

there is a shift of demand of θQ from the incumbent to the entrant for reasons other than demand prices. By

construction, this also means that there is no brand loyalty strategy that can alter the size of θ. Therefore,

at equal copay, (7) can be written as:


                    Q2i = (1 − θ)Q = α − β1 c2i + β2 c2e =⇒ α = (1 − θ)Q + c2i (β1 − β2 )                                (8)


Next, we will find the incumbent’s best response function in the second period, using the entrant’s best re-

sponse function. Since we are seeking an SPNE using backward induction, we must consider the incumbent’s

second period decision. The incumbent will maximize revenue in the second period given by

                                                                             
                                    max P2i · Q2i = P2i · α − β1 c2i + β2 c2e                                            (9)


                                                                                        c2e       c1i         c2i       c1i
By simplifying using the entrant’s best response function from Equation 4 as well as    P2e   =   P1i   and   P2i   =   P1i ,

we can describe the incumbent’s second period maximization problem only in terms of incumbent’s prices.

This is given by
                                             h       c1i          c1i  θQP1i  1 i
                        max P2i · Q2i = P2i · α − β1     P2i + β2             + P2i                                     (10)
                                                     P1i          P1i 2b1 c1i  2

Taking the incumbent’s first-order condition with respect to P2i and solving for P2i in terms of P1i gives

                                                                 θQ
                                                          α + β2 2b 1
                                             P2i = P1i                                                                  (11)
                                                         c1i (2β1 − β2 )

Equation 11 describes the incumbent’s best response function.

Theorem 1. Under Equations 4 and 11, the incumbent will raise its market price in period 1 if the probability
                                                                   dP1i
of an entrant entering the market in period 2 increases, i.e.       dρ     > 0.

   Recall the incumbent’s problem in Equation (6),

                                                                                
                              max Ri = P1i · Q1i + (1 − ρ)P1i · Q1i + ρP2i · Q2i                                        (12)


Replacing Q2i using Equation 7 and replacing Q1i assuming that Q1i = Q, i.e. the incumbent was meeting

the full demand in period 1 at the copay of c2i . Furthermore, the inverse demand function for the incumbent

in the first period is Q1i = α − β1 · c1i , where the elasticity of copayment with respect to price is 1 (following



                                                         13
                                                                                       θQ
                         ∂c1i       c1i                                          α+β2 2b
Assumption 4), i.e.      ∂P1i   =   P1i .   To simplify expressions, let ω =      2β1 −β2
                                                                                         1
                                                                                               =⇒      P2i = ω Pc1i
                                                                                                                 1i
                                                                                                                    . After

simplification presented fully in the Appendix, we can rewrite the incumbent’s problem in (12) as

                                                                             P1i                h θQ   1 i
        max Ri = P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + (1 − ρ)P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + ρω         α − β1 ω + β2       + ω             (13)
        P1i                                                                  c1i                   2b1  2

Next, we differentiate the incumbent’s revenue with respect to price and set this equal to zero yields the

incumbent’s first-order condition with respect to P1i . After simplifying this expression, we have


                                             2α − 4β1 c1i − αρ + ρ2β1 c1i = 0                                          (14)


This condition is based on both the entrant and the incumbent choosing optimal strategies according to the

SPNE. We are not necessarily concerned with the equilibrium, but rather how equilibrium pricing in the
                                                                                             dP1i
first period changes as the probability of entry changes. In other words, when                dρ    ≥ 0, the incumbent will

increase price in the first-period as the probability of entry increases. To assess this, we use implicit function

differentiation. Therefore, the incumbent will raise first-period price as long as the following inequality is

true.
                                                dP1i   2β1 Pc1i (ρ − 2)
                                                     =       1i
                                                                        ≥0                                             (15)
                                                 dρ     2β1 c1i − α

What conditions are required to observe this effect? Note that by definition 0 < ρ < 1, and 2β1 Pc1i
                                                                                                  1i
                                                                                                     > 0,

so the numerator will be negative. Therefore, we must find conditions under which the denominator is

also negative, or when 2β1 c1i − α < 0. Recall that demand facing the incumbent in the first period is

Q1i = α − β1 · c1i . Elasticity for this demand curve is given by

                     ∂Q P       c1i P1i       c1i         −β1 c1i              β1 c1i
                ε=     ·  = −β1    ·    = −β1     =⇒ ε =            =⇒ |ε| =
                     ∂P Q       P1i Q1i       Q1i        α − β1 c1i          α − β1 c1i

For what elasticity will 2β1 c1i − α < 0 be true? Suppose elasticity for prescription drugs is 0.20 as indicated




                                                           14
in the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Then,

                                                β1 c1i
                                         ε=              < 0.2
                                              α − β1 c1i
                                                   β1 c1i < 0.2(α − β1 c1i )

                                        β1 c1i + 0.2β1 c1i < 0.2α
                                                    1
                                            β1 c1i − α < 0
                                                    6
                                                    1
                                           2β1 c1i − α < 0
                                                    3

As long as α > 1, 2β1 c1i − 31 α < 0 =⇒ 2β1 c1i − α < 0. Since α is a demand intercept, this is almost

certainly the case. Therefore, the incumbent will increase price in the first period as the probability of entry

is increasing. In fact, we can verify that this condition will be satisfied as long as |ε| ≤ 1. Many prescription

drugs face relatively inelastic demand, especially those that are life-saving. Therefore, this range of elasticity

is likely to be satisfied, especially in the market we consider empirically. In what follows, we consider the

price effects of pipeline pressure in a particular drug market, insulin.



3    Empirical Strategy: Pipeline Pressure in the Insulin Market

News of potential competition in the pipeline becomes available as entrants clear various phases of drug de-

velopment and publish the results from clinical trials. As each phase of development is cleared, the likelihood

of competing with at least one entrant increases, and incumbent firms may adjust their expectations about

future competition. This news from the pipeline serves as an exogenous shock to the existing market. The

completion of potential entrant clinical trials determine the timing of these shocks, not existing competitors.

Therefore, news of potential entry will be regressed on the prices of existing insulin drugs. We model price

as

                    Pit = αi + θ1 t + θ2 t2 + Qtr2,3,4 η + Xit β + PipelineShocksit δ + uit                   (16)


where Pit is the price of drug i in quarter t, defined as average (median) payments for one mL supply. αi

are drug-level fixed effects which control for time-constant drug characteristics. This can include product

differentiation, like higher concentration insulins, characteristics that affect ease of use, and therapeutic gains

over existing drugs. t denotes time since the first phase 3 clearance of a potential competitor and captures

continuous trends in price. Qtr2,3,4 is equal to one in the second, third, and fourth quarters, respectively, of



                                                        15
                                                                                    •                    Toujeo
                                                                               •                         Basaglar
                                                      •                                                  Ryzodeg 70
                                                                                                                 30

                                                      •                                                  Tresiba
                           •                                                                             Afrezza

             2008q1                2010q1                 2012q1              2014q1                2016q1
                                                       Year, quarter

                    Figure 2: Pipeline Shocks, Completion of Phase 3 of Drug Development



the year which capture yearly cyclical trends in price. Xit includes market characteristics like the number

of quarters the drug was on the market at baseline, and the health plan type providing coverage. Length

of time on the market may also impact the pricing decision. More established brands may feel less pressure

if they have had an ample amount of time to build brand loyalty to their product. Bhattacharya and Vogt

(2003) establish this strategy, intended on increasing market share and improving brand loyalty to the drug,

prior to generic entry. uit is the idiosyncratic error, assumed to be independently and identically distributed.

    Finally, PipelineShocksit is the main factor of interest in this analysis and represents exogenous shocks

from the drug development pipeline. In the initial specification, we consider the strongest signal of potential

entry, completion of phase 3 clinical trials. We use the first national drug application (NDA) submission to

mark successful completion of phase 3 trials.5 PipelineShocksit is a vector of a series of indicators which

mark each additional completion of Phase 3 by a new potential entrant.6 Table 8 in the Appendix lists all

the clinical trials on record for insulins in the clinical trials phase of development during our panel. Figure 2

depicts how the PipelineShocksit indicators are constructed for Phase 3 using information from Table 8.

Once a drug in development clears a particular phase, a new indicator is created and the indicator stays on,

i.e. is equal to one, for the remainder of the panel. Note that in some cases, information about more than

one drug in the pipeline comes out at the same time. Therefore, this information will be represented jointly

by one indicator, since separate effects cannot be estimated.
   5 Both Tresiba and Ryzodeg 70 have an intial NDA submission, which is resubmitted in the first quarter of 2015. Existing
                                 30
drug manufacturers will likely internalize the information from the initial NDA submission in their price setting strategy, so
the subsequent submission is not considered.
   6 In other specifications, we also consider the informational shocks from Phase 1 and Phase 2.




                                                             16
4     Data

Data on insulin prices was obtained from Truven Marketscan Commercial and Medicare Claims from 2007-

2015. This resource includes individual-specific healthcare enrollment, utilization, and expenditure data

from inpatient, outpatient, prescription drug, and carve-out services. MarketScan databases include both

commercial claims, and medicaid and medicare supplements. All claims from Truven Marketscan from

January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2015 with national drug codes (NDC) for all types of insulin were included

in this analysis. These NDCs are listed in Table 9 in the Appendix. Claims were included for all enrollees

regardless of age, insurance type, or diabetes type (diagnosis codes). We excluded claims where the enrollee

identification number was missing (less than one percent of claims), and claims that were not fully adjudicated

(less than 1.3 percent of claims).7 In addition, claims for other anti-hyperglycemic medications were not

included in this analysis.8 After implementing these criterion on all insulin claims, there are 28,801,450

claims. The vast majority of claims (28,388,234 claims or 98.56 percent of claims) are for incumbent drugs,

whose prices are considered in the analysis. In total, 87.2 percent of claims are for insulin analogues, the

most modern form of insulin.

    The price, the main outcome of interest, was calculated as total expenditures per patient for a one

mililiter (mL) supply of each drug in each quarter adjusted for inflation using the urban consumer price

index (CPI). Expenditures include payments from patients (copayments and coinsurance) and payments

from the health plan. Health plan payments reflect a reduced payment after discounts are applied, but

before rebates are transferred. Patient prices for a thirty-day, one mL supply were also computed. These

patient prices include both copayments and coinsurance, depending on the construction of the health plan.

In most cases, only a copayment or coinsurance is required. Figure 3 depicts the distribution of insulin price.

Prices are considerably positively skewed with a long tail on the right hand side. However, over 95.9 percent

of prices are concentrated between 0 and 100. Sensitivity checks were conducted to determine whether this

significantly changes the results we obtain.

    The following graphics derived from insulin claims are informative. Figure 4 depicts the frequency of

claims for insulin by health plan type.9 The majority of claims, 56.94 percent, are provided by PPO plans.
   7 When a claim does not match on all required criteria, adjustments cannot be made. This is a very small portion of the

sample.
   8 These drugs are not typically used to treat patients with type 1 diabetes and among patients with type 2 diabetes they

are used as a first-line treatment. Type 2 patients demanding insulin will likely have already tried these alternate therapies
without success, or they may use these drugs in conjunction with insulin.
   9 There are nine health plan types: 1 − basic major medical, 2 − comprehensive (COMP), 3 − exclusive provider organization

(EPO), 4 − health maintenance organization (HMO), 5 − non-capitated point of service (Non-cap POS), 6 − preferred provider
organization (PPO), 7 − capitated or partially-capitated point-of-service (Cap or Part-Cap POS), 8 − consumer driven health
plan (CDHP), and 9 − high deductible health plan (HDHP).



                                                             17
                                        Figure 3: Distribution of Insulin Price


The next most common plan providers are HMO plans, 16.42 percent, and comprehensive plans, 12.36

percent. Figure 5 depicts the frequency of claims for insulin by brand. The most commonly used insulin

brand is Lantus, 39.73 percent of all claims. Novolog and Humalog are the next most commonly used insulin

brands, 20.30 and 17.85 percent, respectively.

   The claims data was supplemented with additional data on drug characteristics obtained from Redbook

and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Orangebook and Drugs@FDA database as well as information

about drugs in the development pipeline from the United States Clinical Trials Online Registry. Drug

attributes are matched to claims using the national drug code (NDC). Each national drug code identifies the

size in mililiters (mL), a description of the packaging, the strength in units per mL (U/mL), the mechanism

of action (peak, onset, and duration of the drug), and the insulin form (animal, human or analogue). We also

obtain information on patents for each drug, and the patent expiration date to identify loss of exclusivity.10

Finally, pipeline shock indicators described previously are constructed using information from the United

States Clinical Trials Online Registry and from the Drugs@FDA database. This information is consolidated

for this analysis and listed in Table 8 in the Appendix.

   Table 1 presents summary statistics for variables used in the analysis which are partitioned by market
 10 Of  all insulin products under patent, those with patent expirations prior to 2017 are discontinued. The earliest loss of
exclusivity of drugs considered here is June 20, 2017.



                                                             18
Figure 4: Percentage of Insulin Claims by Health Plan Type




     Figure 5: Percentage of Insulin Claims by Brand



                           19
                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                   Incumbent Insulins, 2007q1 to 2015q4

 Variable                                        Mean      Median      Std. Dev.      Min                Max
 Price                                           30.46      20.42        33.63         0               3,074.73
 Patient Price                                    3.04       2.34         3.62         0                784.93
 Baseline Time on Market (in quarters)           35.50        27         22.61         4                 100
 Market Share, by NDC                            0.12       0.09          0.09         0                 0.32
 Market Share, by Brand                          0.25       0.20          0.13         0                 0.41
 Note. Summary statistics presented above, Incumbent Insulins, are calculated using observations included in the analysis.

                                     Entrant Insulins, 2015q1 to 2015q4

 Variable                                        Mean      Median      Std. Dev.      Min                Max
 Price                                           138.25     83.58       134.71         0               3,251.93
 Patient Price                                    13.73      9.73        24.30         0               1,220.07
 Baseline Time on Market (in quarters)           -31.86      -32          0.73        -34                 -29
 Market Share, by NDC                             0.02      0.03          0.01         0                 0.03
 Market Share, by Brand                           0.02      0.03          0.01         0                 0.03
 Note. Summary statistics presented above, Entrant Insulins, are calculated using post-entry observations. They are for
 reference purposes only and are not included in the analysis which follows.



participation status. Incumbent drugs are insulins with approvals prior to the start of the panel. Entrant

drugs are insulins in stages of the drug development pipeline during the panel. The analysis which follows

considers only the prices of incumbent insulins, so the presentation of summary statistics for entrant insulins

is only for informational purposes. There are several intuitive and revealing insights from this segmentation.

First, median prices tend to be lower than average prices for both incumbent insulins and entrant insulins.

The average time on the market for incumbent insulins at baseline (2007q1) is 35.5 quarters, over 8 years,

and baseline time of the market for entrants is negative, by definition. Both prices and patient prices tend to

be higher for entering drugs compared to incumbent drugs, indicating that new products may be vertically

differentiated from existing products and therefore prices exhibit a markup. Market share tends to be higher

for incumbent drugs compared to entrants, whether it is calculated by National Drug Code or by brand. In

fact, the degree of market share loss immediately following entry in this market is quite low.




                                                            20
       Table 2: The Effect of Phase 3 Pipeline News Shocks on Incumbent Insulin Prices
                                                                (1)                (2)                 (3)
 Variable                                                  Full Sample        Analogue Only         Human Only
 Phase 3 Shocks
     1st Pipeline Shockt                                          -0.726            -0.678               -1.215
                                                                 (0.795)           (0.917)              (0.790)
        2nd Pipeline Shockt                                       -1.147            -1.247               -0.312
                                                                 (0.912)           (1.076)              (1.116)
        3rd Pipeline Shockt                                     2.285**           2.350**                 0.654
                                                                 (1.053)           (1.103)              (2.054)
        4th Pipeline Shockt                                     2.263**            2.284*                 1.117
                                                                 (1.142)           (1.178)              (2.177)
 Time                                                           0.715***          0.810***             0.447***
                                                                (0.0957)           (0.110)             (0.0838)
 Time2                                                         0.0323***         0.0311***            0.0252***
                                                               (0.00636)         (0.00709)            (0.00763)
 Quarter 2                                                        -0.643            -0.678               -0.443
                                                                 (0.455)           (0.517)              (0.534)
 Quarter 3                                                        -0.278            -0.312               -0.162
                                                                 (0.492)           (0.555)              (0.570)
 Quarter 4                                                        -0.412            -0.411               -0.371
                                                                 (0.516)           (0.581)              (0.629)
 Health Plan Type
      Exclusive Provider Organization                          -3.436***         -3.535***             -3.093***
                                                                 (0.308)           (0.354)               (0.364)
        Health Maintenance Organization                        -6.775***         -6.919***             -5.803***
                                                                 (0.307)           (0.342)               (0.559)
        Non-capitated Point of Service (POS)                   -3.508***         -3.648***             -2.776***
                                                                 (0.301)           (0.348)               (0.285)
        Preferred Provider Organization                        -4.923***         -5.162***             -3.611***
                                                                 (0.238)           (0.276)               (0.274)
        Capitated or Partially-capitated POS                   -9.680***         -9.991***             -7.466***
                                                                 (0.553)           (0.619)               (0.587)
        Consumer Driven Health Plan                            -7.624***         -7.955***             -5.700***
                                                                 (0.306)           (0.345)               (0.375)
        High Deductible Health Plan                            -7.007***         -7.310***             -5.814***
                                                                 (0.319)           (0.355)               (0.394)
 Constant                                                       22.80***          23.76***              14.93***
                                                                 (0.758)           (0.860)               (0.784)

 R-squared                                                    0.222                 0.195                0.341
 F-statistic                                                410.81∗∗∗            393.06∗∗∗             144.42∗∗∗
 Observations                                               27,359,428           23,785,610            3,573,818
 Number of drugs                                                122                   54                   68
 Note. All estimates are obtained using OLS with drug-level fixed effects. The dependent variable in all specifications
is price per mL, adjusted for inflation. Standard errors are clustered at the drug-quarter level. All health plan
coefficients should be interpreted as the change in price relative to the base health plan, comprehensive.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level
** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level
*** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level




                                                          21
5           Results

5.1          The Effect of Pipeline Pressure on Incumbent Insulin Prices

Initial results are displayed in Table 2. All results were obtained using drug-level fixed effects linear regres-

sions. The first column presents results obtained using the full sample, while the second and third columns

stratify by insulin type, analogue or human. There are less than 30 total claims for animal insulins, making

it impossible to assess effects on the pricing of insulins of this type. The direction of pipeline shock effects are

similar regardless of the sample considered, though there are minor differences in magnitude and significance.

Response to competitive pressure in the pipeline is stronger for insulin analogues than for human versions of

insulin. The first two shocks do not have a significant effect on price. However, the third and fourth shocks

significantly increase insulin price, specifically among analogues. The biggest price effect is concentrated

among insulin analogues. Prices are about $2.35 larger per mL in quarters following the third pipeline shock

compared to quarters prior to this shock. The fourth pipeline shock has an additionally positive effect on

price, increasing insulin price per mL by about $2.28 in quarters following this shock. For the average patient

in this sample taking 12.48 ml per month, this is an increase in the total amount paid for insulin of $29.33

due to the third shock and an additional $28.45 due to the final shock.

    In general, price is increasing at an increasing rate over time, by about $1.34 per quarter at the mean

number of quarters since the first pipeline shock.11 Pipeline shocks reflect a shift in this more general time

trend. Since identification of the pipeline shocks relies on a correct specification of the time trend, we also

consider whether there is a systematic issue in the specification of the time trend by graphing the average

residuals over time, provided in Figure 7 in the Appendix. Results also indicate that there is no cyclical

dimension to pricing, that is, prices in later quarters are not significantly different than prices in the first

quarter of the year. Lastly, the health plan type has a considerable impact on price. All health plan types

covering insulin have lower prices than comprehensive health plans, with capitated or partially-capitated

POS plans, consumer driven health plans, high deductible health plans, and health maintenance organization

health plans having the biggest differences in price. This may be due to in part to plan structure, but could

also be due to levels of insurer bargaining power associated with each plan type. Growing literature on

insurer bargaining power and bargaining power in healthcare may contribute to our understanding of these

results [Ho and Lee (2017); Gaynor, Ho and Town (2015); Ho (2009); and Capps, Dranove and Satterthwaite

(2003)].
 11 θ       + 2θ2 (E(t)) = 0.715 + 2(0.0323)(9.74) = 1.344
        1




                                                             22
     Table 3: The Effect of Phase 3 Pipeline News Shocks on Patient Out-of-Pocket Prices
                                                                (1)                (2)                 (3)
 Variable                                                  Full Sample        Analogue Only         Human Only
 Phase 3 Shocks
     1st Pipeline Shockt                                      -0.263***           -0.274***            -0.205***
                                                               (0.0571)            (0.0643)             (0.0739)
        2nd Pipeline Shockt                                    0.142***           0.144***               0.124*
                                                               (0.0397)            (0.0444)             (0.0750)
        3rd Pipeline Shockt                                    0.161***           0.166***               0.0728
                                                               (0.0595)            (0.0611)              (0.175)
        4th Pipeline Shockt                                    0.384***           0.373***              0.472***
                                                               (0.0604)            (0.0623)              (0.162)
 Time                                                          0.101***            0.103***           0.0907***
                                                              (0.00541)           (0.00629)            (0.00771)
 Time2                                                      -0.00203***         -0.00208***          -0.00204***
                                                             (0.000309)          (0.000348)           (0.000433)
 Quarter 2                                                    -0.0705**           -0.0704**              -0.0708
                                                               (0.0276)            (0.0302)             (0.0490)
 Quarter 3                                                    -0.172***           -0.178***            -0.136***
                                                               (0.0264)            (0.0288)             (0.0477)
 Quarter 4                                                    -0.357***           -0.369***            -0.273***
                                                               (0.0289)            (0.0316)             (0.0483)
 Health Plan Type
      Exclusive Provider Organization                          -0.636***         -0.595***             -0.807***
                                                                (0.0519)          (0.0580)              (0.0661)
        Health Maintenance Organization                        -0.349***         -0.264***             -0.745***
                                                                (0.0425)          (0.0480)              (0.0833)
        Non-capitated Point of Service (POS)                     -0.0206          -0.00263               -0.0210
                                                                (0.0343)          (0.0402)              (0.0487)
        Preferred Provider Organization                           0.0387           0.0811              -0.159***
                                                                (0.0431)          (0.0507)              (0.0479)
        Capitated or Partially-capitated POS                   -0.597***         -0.604***             -0.336***
                                                                (0.0520)          (0.0585)              (0.0837)
        Consumer Driven Health Plan                            -0.773***         -0.701***             -1.277***
                                                                (0.0721)          (0.0814)              (0.0734)
        High Deductible Health Plan                            -0.981***         -0.903***             -1.624***
                                                                (0.0813)          (0.0906)              (0.0813)
 Constant                                                       2.731***          2.719***              2.682***
                                                                (0.0577)          (0.0652)              (0.0814)

 R-squared                                                    0.062                 0.055                0.101
 F-statistic                                                295.21∗∗∗            295.38∗∗∗             191.65∗∗∗
 Number of drugs                                                122                  54                    68
 Observations                                               27,359,428           23,785,610            3,573,818
 Note. All estimates are obtained using OLS with drug-level fixed effects. The dependent variable in all specifications
is patient price per mL which includes all patient out-of-pocket costs, adjusted for inflation. Standard errors are
clustered at the drug-quarter level. All health plan coefficients should be interpreted as the change in patient
out-of-pocket costs relative to the base health plan, comprehensive.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level
** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level
*** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level




                                                          23
   Table 3 provides estimates of the effect of pipeline news shocks on patient out-of-pocket costs. Pipeline

shocks have largely significant effects on patient prices, as price changes are passed on to consumers. All but

one of these pipeline shocks, the first, has a positive effect on price. The second, third, and fourth pipeline

shocks are associated with price increases of $0.14, $0.16, and $0.38, respectively, in quarters after the shocks.

All of these price effects are statistically significant at the one percent level, but significant responses are

mostly concentrated among insulin analogues. For the average patient in this sample taking 12.48 ml per

month, this is an increase in out-of-pocket costs for insulin of $1.74, $2.00, and $4.74, respectively, or a

total of $26.48 additional out-of-pocket costs over 8 years due to competition pressure from the pipeline. On

average, that’s an additional $3.31 per year.

   The first pipeline shock decreases patient price following the shock by about $0.26. This result is also

statistically significant at the one percent level. This suggests that there may be something different about

the first pipeline shock. This market information shock represents Afrezza completing the last phase of drug

development has a significantly negative effect on price, but the rest of the pipeline shocks increase price.

This is likely due to the degree of product differentiation associated with Afrezza. Afrezza is an inhale-able

insulin, while the rest of the drugs on the market are injectables. This pipeline shock decreases out-of-pocket

costs by about $3.24 for the average patient in this sample, bringing the total change in patient costs due

to pipeline pressure to an increase of about $23.24 over 8 years. This also demonstrates that incumbent

manufacturers may have a holistic view of the probability of entry as indicated by information from the

pipeline. As more than one potential competitor completes phase 3, the probability that one of them will

eventually be successful increases. As demonstrated in the theory, manufacturers will increase price when

facing relatively inelastic demand in a setting where entry is becoming more likely.

   Trends in patient prices are somewhat different than trends for total prices. Patient out-of-pocket costs

are lower for only a few plan types relative to comprehensive plans. This includes EPOs, HMOs, Capitated

or Partially-capitated POS, CDHPs, and HDHPs. High deductible plans are associated with the biggest

reduction in patient prices relative to comprehensive plans, which may demonstrate that patients in high-

deductible plans are much more price sensitive than patients in other health plans. In addition, note that

quarter of the year effects have considerably significant effect on patient out-of-pocket costs. Patient prices

are significantly lower in the second, third, and fourth quarters relative to the first quarter of the year, and

patient out-of-pocket costs are lowest in the fourth quarter relative to the first quarter. This likely reflects

the decline in out-of-pocket costs as patients hit their deductible during the year.




                                                       24
5.1.1   Verifying Shock Exogeneity: Restricting the Analysis to External Firm Shocks

Incumbent insulins in our sample are only manufactured by three drug companies, Sanofi, Novo Nordisk, and

Eli Lilly. Each of these firms also has another insulin in development during our panel that clears various

phases of the drug development pipeline. In this market, an incumbent firm with a product in one category

of insulin may be in drug development for a different insulin in another category. We will consider the issue

of category and the definition of the market in detail in a later section. For now, let us only consider the

effect this may have on the exogeneity of the pipeline shocks. For a firm with both an incumbent drug and a

new drug in the development pipeline, the information about success in the pipeline will not necessarily be

a “shock” to this incumbent at all. Firms may internalize their success in the drug development pipeline as

they anticipate pricing effects from their new drug. Therefore, we also conduct firm-specific pipeline shock

tests. While it is reasonable to assume that external pipeline shocks, across firms, are exogenous, it is may

be inappropriate to assume that internal pipeline shocks, within firm, are exogenous. Therefore, we stratify

our sample at the firm-level, and consider only the shocks that are external to the firm. In other words, we

drop pipeline shocks from a firm’s own drug.

   Table 4 presents results from firm-specific shock tests. Note that qualitatively, the impact of each shock is

qualitatively similar both in the full sample without regard to strict shock exogeneity and by firm, excluding

shocks which may be internalized. However, it is striking to note that Eli Lilly and Sanofi prices changes,

drive the results in the full sample. Eli Lilly increases prices by about $4.19 in quarters following the fourth

shock, and Sanofi increases prices by about $4.47 in quarters following the third shock. These effects are only

somewhat significant, at the ten and five percent levels, respectively. There is no significant change in prices

among Novo Nordisks insulin products in response to any of the pipeline shocks. It is worth considering how

each of these firms may view these pipeline shocks. The amount of competitive pressure associated with

pipeline shocks will likely depend on the degree to which these products are used as perfect and/or imperfect

substitutes in practice and whether or not they can also be used in complementary ways. Section 5.2 details

particular categories of these drugs to highlight the nature of competition in these markets.


5.1.2   Differential Effects by Plan Design − Copayment or Coinsurance

As discussed in the theoretical model presented previously, patients facing copayment for prescription drugs

tend to be less price sensitive than those facing coinsurance. In the insulin market considered here, 74.9

percent of claims for insulin require a copayment only. 16.7 percent of claims have no patient out-of-




                                                      25
                       Table 4: Verifying Shock Exogeneity: Firm-specific Shock Tests
                                                              (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
 Variable                                                Full Sample        Eli Lilly        Sanofi       Novo Nordisk
 Phase 3 Shocks
     1st Pipeline Shockt                                     -0.726           -0.109         -1.567            0.609
                                                            (0.795)          (1.437)        (0.950)           (1.538)
        2nd Pipeline Shockt                                  -1.147           -1.726         -1.112
                                                            (0.912)          (1.065)        (1.681)
        3rd Pipeline Shockt                                2.285**                          4.467**             1.936
                                                            (1.053)                         (1.723)            (1.460)
        4th Pipeline Shockt                                2.263**           4.192*                             1.522
                                                            (1.142)          (2.167)                           (1.638)
 Time                                                      0.715***         0.668***        0.833***          0.466***
                                                           (0.0957)          (0.164)         (0.141)           (0.164)
 Time2                                                    0.0323***        0.0435***       0.0267***         0.0376***
                                                          (0.00636)        (0.00901)       (0.00801)         (0.00927)
 Quarter 2                                                   -0.643           -0.824          -0.408            -0.458
                                                            (0.455)          (0.777)         (0.740)           (0.714)
 Quarter 3                                                   -0.278          -0.0705          -0.283            -0.178
                                                            (0.492)          (0.839)         (0.810)           (0.749)
 Quarter 4                                                   -0.412           -0.120          -0.687            -0.181
                                                            (0.516)          (0.855)         (0.868)           (0.782)
 Health Plan Type
      Exclusive Provider Organization                      -3.436***       -4.266***       -4.248***           -1.326*
                                                             (0.308)         (0.513)         (0.394)           (0.698)
        Health Maintenance Organization                    -6.775***       -9.832***       -7.144***         -3.591***
                                                             (0.307)         (0.575)         (0.487)           (0.542)
        Non-capitated Point of Service (POS)               -3.508***       -3.589***       -4.506***         -1.678***
                                                             (0.301)         (0.429)         (0.510)           (0.539)
        Preferred Provider Organization                    -4.923***       -5.972***       -5.878***         -2.387***
                                                             (0.238)         (0.366)         (0.319)           (0.529)
        Capitated or Partially-capitated POS               -9.680***       -10.36***       -10.73***         -7.267***
                                                             (0.553)         (0.720)         (1.058)           (0.812)
        Consumer Driven Health Plan                        -7.624***       -8.043***       -8.479***         -5.903***
                                                             (0.306)         (0.536)         (0.490)           (0.541)
        High Deductible Health Plan                        -7.007***       -7.472***       -8.466***         -4.347***
                                                             (0.319)         (0.518)         (0.422)           (0.604)
 Constant                                                   22.80***        25.69***        21.38***          21.04***
                                                             (0.758)         (1.307)         (1.068)           (1.353)

 R-squared                                                  0.222            0.274          0.178              0.212
 F-statistic                                              410.81∗∗∗        201.25∗∗∗      254.20∗∗∗          209.75∗∗∗
 Observations                                             27,359,428       7,215,129      11,299,605         8,834,609
 Number of drugs                                              122              40             7                 31
 Note. All estimates are obtained using OLS with drug-level fixed effects. The dependent variable in all columns is the price
per mL, adjusted for inflation. Firm-stratification is provided in the column heading. Standard errors are clustered at the
drug-quarter level.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level
** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level
*** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level




                                                             26
                              Table 5: Differential Effects: Copayment or Coinsurance
                                                               (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                                                             Patient                             Patient
 Variable                                                     Price        Out-of-Pocket           Price       Out-of-Pocket
                                                                 Copayment Only                      Coinsurance Only
 Phase 3 Shocks
     1st Pipeline Shockt                                      -0.640          -0.226***            -0.342          -0.513***
                                                             (0.807)           (0.0488)           (1.004)            (0.165)
        2nd Pipeline Shockt                                   -1.223           -0.0810*          -1.934**            0.202**
                                                             (0.952)           (0.0421)           (0.917)            (0.100)
        3rd Pipeline Shockt                                  2.103*             0.0906          4.374***             0.0570
                                                             (1.154)           (0.0641)           (0.811)            (0.103)
        4th Pipeline Shockt                                  2.376*            0.381***         3.831***            0.457***
                                                             (1.281)           (0.0708)           (0.866)            (0.115)
 Time                                                       0.797***           0.108***          0.561***           0.227***
                                                            (0.0970)          (0.00485)           (0.109)           (0.0152)
 Time2                                                     0.0300***        -0.00137***         0.0148***        -0.00202***
                                                           (0.00651)         (0.000312)         (0.00517)         (0.000683)
 Quarter 2                                                   -0.896*          -0.0610**            -0.404            -0.0170
                                                             (0.476)           (0.0264)           (0.551)           (0.0761)
 Quarter 3                                                    -0.504          -0.0612**            -0.410            0.0847
                                                             (0.505)           (0.0271)           (0.543)           (0.0685)
 Quarter 4                                                    -0.651          -0.156***            -0.840           -0.144**
                                                             (0.534)           (0.0279)           (0.527)           (0.0697)
 Health Plan Type
      Exclusive Provider Organization                      -4.329***          -1.255***           -1.485*          1.574***
                                                             (0.280)           (0.0579)           (0.774)           (0.149)
        Health Maintenance Organization                    -7.620***          -0.748***         -5.041***          2.719***
                                                             (0.292)           (0.0399)           (0.644)           (0.152)
        Non-capitated Point of Service (POS)               -4.234***          -0.443***         -5.532***          0.662***
                                                             (0.264)           (0.0346)           (0.659)          (0.0747)
        Preferred Provider Organization                    -4.678***          -0.194***          -1.833**          0.881***
                                                             (0.221)           (0.0278)           (0.722)          (0.0720)
        Capitated or Partially-capitated POS               -10.04***          -0.912***         -4.653***           0.321**
                                                             (0.504)           (0.0575)           (0.801)           (0.149)
        Consumer Driven Health Plan                        -8.173***          0.522***          -5.375***          0.741***
                                                             (0.288)           (0.0632)           (0.767)          (0.0838)
        High Deductible Health Plan                        -5.347***            -0.0595            -0.745          0.561***
                                                             (0.341)           (0.0571)           (0.798)           (0.102)
 Constant                                                   23.62***           3.267***         22.37***           2.345***
                                                             (0.768)           (0.0508)           (1.019)           (0.118)

 R-squared                                                   0.234             0.093              0.177             0.167
 F-statistic                                              299.51∗∗∗          368.12∗∗∗          159.93∗∗∗         335.91∗∗∗
 Observations                                             20,520,743         20,520,743         2,317,705         2,317,705
 Number of drugs                                              117               117                97                97
 Note. All estimates are obtained using OLS with drug-level fixed effects. The dependent variable is provided in the column
heading. All prices are inflation adjusted and given in constant 2010 US Dollars. Standard errors are clustered at the drug-quarter
level.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level
** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level
*** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level



                                                                27
pocket costs,12 neither copay nor coinsurance. The remaining 8.4 percent of claims is comprised mostly

of payments with coinsurance only (8.2 percent) and a combination of copayment and coinsurance (0.2

percent). Therefore, it is reasonable to expect less price sensitivity from consumers covered by a plan with

tiered copays instead of coinsurance. In this case, it may be advantageous to manufacturers to offer lower

prices to plans with coinsurance than those with copayments. We conduct another specification, allowing

prices to differ according to the structure of patient out-of-pocket costs. This will effectively serve as a proxy

to group patients by their price elasticity.

   In general, the effect of pipeline shocks on both price and patient out-of-pocket costs is qualitatively

similar for both claims requiring a copayment and claims requiring coinsurance. However, the size and

significance of pipeline shock effects is larger and more significant for claims with coinsurance compared to

claims with copayment. This result is surprising, given that we postulated that patients under coinsurance

would be more price sensitive than those facing copayment. The positive effect on price from the third

shock is approximately $2.27 more among claims with coinsurance, and the positive effect on price from

the fourth shock is about $1.45 more among coinsurance claims. Manufacturers may offer bigger discounts

and/or different rebates for certain plans with copayment since they comprise a larger part of the market.

Unfortunately, drug-level rebates are proprietary and the size of discounts cannot be assessed with claims

data. This could also reflect a larger degree of bargaining power for the manufacturer compared to the

insurer among plans with coinsurance. Without additional data on these contractural arrangements, it is

unclear what may be driving this difference.


5.2       The Effect of Pipeline News on Insulin Prices by Category

The preliminary market definition is quite wide, and assumes that all insulin drugs compete with one

another. A narrow market definition would specify that insulin products only compete with one another

within category. We classify drugs into three market categories − bolus, basal, and mixed. This terminology

is derived from the medical terminology which indicates how an insulin is absorbed and metabolized by the

body. These categories are defined by three factors, onset, peak, and duration, of the drug. Bolus insulins

tend to have a quick onset, moderate peaks, and moderate durations. Basal insulins tend to have slow

onset, longer peaks, and longer durations. Mixed insulins typically contain both a bolus and basal insulin,

and have a quick onset, long peak, and long duration. These characteristics of incumbent and potential

entrant drugs are presented in Table 6. A range is provided because each drug formulation is absorbed
 12 The   majority of these claims are for older versions of insulin provided at low costs.



                                                                28
                                            Table 6: Narrow Market Definition

               Category      Onset                  Peak                          Duration
               Bolus         ≈ 0.5 hrs or less      0.5 − 3.5 hrs                 2 − 8 hrs

               Basal         1 − 6 hrs              4 − 12 hrs or No Peak         7 − 24 hrs or more

               Mix           ≈ 0.5 hrs or less      0.5 − 12 hrs                  18 − 24 hrs or more

               Category      Incumbent Drugs                                      Entrant Drugs
               Bolus         Apidra, Humalog, Novolog,                            Afrezza
                             Humulin R, Novolin R
               Basal         Lantus, Levemir, Humulin N,                          Basaglar, Toujeo, Tresiba
                             Novolin N
               Mix           Humalog 50/50 and 75/25, Novolog            70/30,   Ryzodeg     70/30

                             Humulin 70/30, Novolin 70/30
               Note. Drugs listed in bold text are incumbent insulins.



somewhat differently, both between drugs and by different patients. For example, Humalog and Apidra

insulins have somewhat different peak, onsets, and durations, even though they are both used as “bolus”

insulins. Similarly, one patient may experience a rapid-acting insulin peak at one hour while another patient

experiences the peak at 1.5 hours using the same drug.

   Within category, insulins can usually be substituted, with the caveat that counseling/education may be

needed to help assure adequate glucose coverage and safety in the transition. Between categories, it’s difficult

to specify the degree of substitutability as it may depend on an individual patient’s insulin sensitivity or

resistance as well as an individual patient’s treatment therapy. Therefore, it is possible that manufacturers

only see potential competitors “within category” as a competitive threat. Insulins “between categories” are

often used in complementary ways. For example, consider these two treatment options. A patient can use

long-acting insulin to provide basal glucose control in conjunction with a rapid-acting insulin to provide

bolus control. A patient can also use only rapid-acting insulin delivered in small increments throughout

the day to provide both basal and bolus control. Both treatment options can achieve the treatment goal

of glucose control. Figure 6 demonstrates that 61.81 percent of patients in the sample fill a prescription

for both a basal and bolus insulin, suggesting the majority of patients use these between category drugs as

complements.13

   Phase 3 pipeline shocks were constructed similarly in this specification. Because only one bolus insulin

and one mix insulin were in the clinical trials phase of the drug development pipeline over this time frame,
 13 See   Table 10 in the Appendix for number of claims.



                                                                29
                                  Figure 6: Insulin Treatment Combinations


there is only one pipeline shock in each of these categories. There were three phase 3 pipeline shocks in

the basal category. Results from this specification are provided in Table 7. Note that the majority of the

large and significant effects are isolated in the basal category. This matches the theory where we see that an

increase in the probability of entry can drive escalating prices. Since the basal insulin category is the only

category in which more than one potential entrant successfully clears phase 3 of drug development, it may

be the only category where incumbent manufacturers have a large degree of confidence that probability of

entry is likely. This specification also reveals that the specifics of the shock may matter substantially. The

driving shock in the basal category is the Basaglar shock.


5.3    Other Robustness Checks

We test whether our results are robust to several other confounders that may affect the pricing decision.

Regardless of how these factors affect the pricing decision, it is unlikely that these factors are timed exactly to

the timing of drug development phase clearance. Therefore, we are not generally concerned about whether

the omission of these factors misidentifies the pipeline shocks. However, we run robustness checks for a

number of potential concerns. First, we control for supplemental indications for incumbent drugs, which

may increase price. Supplemental indications typically expand the number of patients that can be treated

with the drug by shifting the demand curve to the right. These supplemental indications also significantly

increase drug price, but previous estimates of the effect of pipeline shocks are robust to this specification.


                                                        30
   Table 7: Phase 3 Pipeline Shocks and Competition within Category
                                                    (1)                 (2)
 Variable                                          Price       Patient Out-of-Pocket

 Bolus Category
        Afrezza Pipeline Shockt                    1.899               -0.277***
                                                  (1.455)               (0.0876)

 Observations                                  9,909,100               9,909,100
 Number of drugs                                   45                     45

 Basal Category
        Tresiba Pipeline Shockt                    -0.521               0.173***
                                                  (1.320)               (0.0629)
        Basaglar Pipeline Shockt                  3.330**                0.168*
                                                  (1.448)               (0.0912)
        Toujeo Pipeline Shockt                      2.222               0.395***
                                                  (1.652)               (0.0868)

 Observations                                  14,561,425             14,561,425
 Number of drugs                                   41                     41

 Mix Category
                    70
        Ryzodeg     30   Pipeline Shockt       -1.712***                0.0984*
                                                (0.514)                 (0.0523)

 Observations                                  2,888,902               2,888,902
 Number of drugs                                   35                     35
 Note. All estimates are obtained using OLS with drug-level fixed effects. The dependent
variable is provided in the column heading. Standard errors are clustered at the drug-quarter
level. All regressions include health plan indicators, time trends and quarter binaries.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level
** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level
*** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level




                                             31
Second, we test whether the passage of the BPCI in 2010 had a significant affect on price. Previous results

are also robust to this specification. Third, mail-order discounts, often for a 90-day supply, may also play a

role in pricing. To test for the robustness of the price effects of pipeline shocks, we also account for whether a

prescription was filled for 90 days or for 30 days. Price effects due to pipeline shocks are robust to this as well.

Fourth, estimated price effects are also robust to using the medical consumer price index to adjust prices

for inflation. Fifth, we also test a specification in which time trends differ at the brand-level to account for

differing within-brand pricing strategy trends. Price effects of pipeline shocks are robust to this robustness

check as well.

   Sixth, we also consider whether pipeline shocks from earlier phases have similar effects. As previously

mentioned, the vast amount of uncertainty associated with drug development likely reduces the information

that an existing competitor can glean about potential competition from earlier phases. Price effects from

phase 3 pipeline shocks are robust to including pipeline shocks from phase 2 and phase 1. In addition, there

are no significant price effects from phase 2 or phase 1 pipeline shocks. Seventh, we evaluate whether results

are driven by outliers. Previous results are also robust to excluding outliers from the analysis, and nearly

identical in both magnitude and significance. An alternative approach to considering the role of outliers

would be to consider whether price responses at the median are the same as those on average, using quintile

regressions with fixed effects as illustrated in Powell (2014) and Powell and Wagner (2014). Unfortunately,

these methods are developed for panel data, and would require collapsing claims-level data into drug-level

panel data, loosing a considerable amount of price variation. Since results are robust to the exclusion of

outliers, it is unlikely that this approach will be informative. Lastly, we assess the role of Affordable Care

Act (ACA) demand expansion on these price increases. Recent work by Berndt, Conti and Murphy (2017)

finds both a reduction in the number of generic drug suppliers and an increase in the price of generic drugs

following the implementation of the ACA. To consider this effect, we reframe time trends to include a pre-

ACA and post-ACA time trend. Using pre- and post-ACA trends magnifies the size and significance of all

the pipeline shocks except for the third shock. The price effect from the third shock becomes insignificant,

though remains positive. The first and final shock increase price by $2.40 and $3.43, respectively, and are

both significant at the one percent level in this specification. Results from this specification are presented

in Table 11 in the Appendix.




                                                        32
5.4    Limitations

Despite rigorous considerations of these issues, there are other factors that may influence pricing strategies

that are either not observed or not considered in our empirical analysis. Drug-level rebate size and formulary

tier status, negotiated between manufacturers and payers using pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs), are key

unobservables. If manufacturers truly compete over the size of the rebates to receive favorable status on

formulary tiers, and not over the payments or list price of their products, then this analysis may not correctly

measure the competitive effects of new branded drugs in the pipeline. Unfortunately, this information is

proprietary and it is not possible to estimate drug-level measures for either of these unobservables. The

database used in the analysis contains claims from over 100 payers, making it infeasible to obtain formulary

tier status or rebates at the drug-level. It may be possible to back out manufacturer-level rebate sizes,

but this will do little to assess the impact of rebate size or formulary status on the pricing decision. One

factor that is observable but not included in the analysis is research and development (R&D) costs. Though

research and development costs can be observed at the firm level and an approximate per drug R&D cost

can be estimated as in DiMasi, Grabowski and Hansen (2016), there is no way to isolate a drug-specific

R&D cost. In addition, it is unlikely to bias estimates on the effect of pipeline pressure. Research and

development costs are sunk costs and should not be considered in the pricing decision. However, research

and development costs do create a significant barrier to potential entry which thereby impacts competition

and the pricing decision. Therefore, these may both be limitations of the analysis, and therefore suggest

important areas of further research.


5.5    Policy Implications for Biosimilar Drugs

Our results suggest that potential biosimilar entry may be perceived differently than other branded ther-

apeutic substitutes. Understanding the implications for these differences requires additional institutional

details. The pricing of large molecule drugs, or biologics, like insulin may differ from pricing decisions for

small molecule drugs. A biologic is a pharmaceutical drug product manufactured in, extracted from, or

semi-synthesized from biological sources. These large molecule drugs are more difficult to replicate, reducing

the likelihood that biosimilar entry will occur. According to the FDA, “a biosimilar is a biological product

that is highly similar to and has no clinically meaningful differences from an existing FDA-approved reference

product,” where the reference product is a biologic already approved by the FDA. A biosimilar must demon-

strate that both its structure and function are similar to the reference product. It must also demonstrate

that there are “no clinically meaningful differences from the reference product in terms of safety, purity, and


                                                      33
potency (safety and efficacy).” For a biosimilar to be deemed “interchangeable” with a reference product,

it must meet additional requirements. Biosimilars are approved through a different abbreviated pathway

that avoids duplicating costly clinical trials. However, prior to 2010, there was no regulatory pathway for

biosimilar approval. The Biologics Price Competition and Innovation (BPCI) Act of 2009 was signed into

law on March 23, 2010.

   However, Basaglar is not approved as a biosimilar product. It was approved through an abbreviated

pathway after submitting a 505(b)(2) application (Food and Drug Administration 2015). This application

relied on comparisons of Basaglar and Lantus, a previously FDA-approved basal insulin, and FDA find-

ings of safety and effectiveness for Lantus, or insulin glargine. According to the FDA, there is no insulin

glargine “reference product” under license with the Public Health Service Act. It is not clear whether the

manufacturer for Eli Lilly submitted a 505(b)(2) application because of this, or because studies for Basaglar

began prior to the BPCI approval. In addition, Basaglar’s FDA approval was delayed, due to a lawsuit

filed by the manufacturer of Lantus, which alleged numerous patent infringements.14 On the other hand,

Basaglar is considered a biosimilar by several European drug approval agencies. For these reasons, it would

be reasonable for an existing drug manufacturer to consider this product a biosimilar as it conducted clinical

trials in the pipeline. Therefore, it may also be reasonable to generalize our results as a typical response of

incumbents to potential biosimilar entry.

   These details highlight two important issues that inform the outlook for drug pricing with the entry

of biosimilars. First, there may considerable legal battles over patent infringement for the entry of many

biosimilars, which will likely encourage additional upward pressure on price. Pharmaceutical companies,

both incumbents and entrants, will be incentivized to cover costs associated with funding these lawsuits

by raising price. Second, it is unclear whether drug manufacturers will pursue biosimilar entry or pursue

alternative abbreviated pathways, such as the 505(b)(2). Basaglar did not conduct phase 2 clinical trials, as

illustrated in Table 8. If other abbreviated pathways can cut the costs of R&D, it may be more advantageous

to pursue those pathways. Finally, biosimilar entry may not be profitable if the market is saturated by enough

branded biologic substitutes. It is still too early to assess whether there will be a large degree of biosimilar

entry, actual or potential, and whether that competition will be enough to exert downward pressure on

price. Our results seem to suggest that given the institutional structure, potential biosimilar entry or other

follow-on entry could encourage incumbent drugs to increase price. However, this would require significant

reconsideration, as our model demonstrating this price increase incentive is partially driven by the share
 14 Sanofi-Aventis   US LLC et al v. Eli Lilly and Co, U.S. District Court, District of Delaware, No. 14-00884




                                                               34
θ that switch to the new product. In the case of a biosimilar that is “interchangeable” with a reference

product, a patient may be switched to the biosimiliar in part due to price. In this case, the market share

loss following biosimilar entry may be greater than we assess, possibly off-setting the potential revenue gains

from increasing price in the first period. For the curious reader, our model could be extended to structure θ

as a function of price or copayment which could help assess the competitive effects of biosimilar entry.



6    Conclusion

In this study, we demonstrate both a strategic incentive for incumbent firms under patent to raise drug prices

as the likelihood of competition from another brand name patented drug increases, both theoretically and

empirically. Results suggest that pipeline pressure significantly increases the prices of incumbent drugs, and

potential biosimilar entry may drive this effect. Specifically, prices for insulin increase by around $30 per

patient for each of the later pipeline shocks in our analysis. However, this incentive explains a little less than

10 percent of the price increases observed from 2007-2015. Therefore, there is considerable work to be done

to assess the role of manufacturer-insurer bargaining power, and other important market characteristics like

drug rebates and formulary tier status that likely play a role in increasing prices. Future work should also

consider the differential welfare impact on patients with high deductibles and larger out-of-pocket costs and

patients without insurance.




                                                       35
References

Abrantes-Metz, Rosa M., Christopher P. Adams, and Albert Metz. 2004. “Pharmaceutical Devel-

  opment Phases: A Duration Analysis.” Federal Trade Commission, Bureau of Economics Working Paper

  Series, Working Paper No. 274.

Aghion, Philippe, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, Peter Howitt, and Susanne Prantl. 2009.

  “The Effects of Entry on Incumbent Innovation and Productivity.” Review of Economics and Statistics,

  91(1): 20–32.

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.” The American

  Economic Review, 53(5): 941–973.

Baumol, William J., John C. Panzar, and Robert D. Willig. 1982. Contestable Markets and the

  Theory of Industrial Structure. New York:Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Bennette, Caroline S., Catherine Richards, Sean D. Sullivan, and Scott D. Ramsey. 2016.

  “Steady Increase in Prices for Oral Anticancer Drugs After Market Launch Suggests a Lack of Competitive

  Pressure.” Health Affairs, 35(5): 805–812.

Berndt, Ernst R., Rena M. Conti, and Stephen J. Murphy. 2017. “The Landscape of US Generic

  Prescription Drug Markets, 2004-2016.” NBER Working Paper Series, Working Paper No. 23640.

Berndt, Ernst R., Thomas G. McGuire, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2011. “A Primer on the Eco-

  nomics of Prescription Pharmaceutical Pricing in Health Insurance Markets.” NBER Working Paper Se-

  ries, Working Paper No. 16879.

Berry, Steven T. 1992. “Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry.” Econometrica, 60(4): 889–

  917.

Bhattacharya, Jayanta, and William B. Vogt. 2003. “A Simple Model of Pharmaceutical Price Dy-

  namics.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2): 599–626.

Brekke, Kurt R., Chiara Canta, and Odd Rune Staume. 2016. “Reference pricing with endogenous

  generic entry.” Journal of Health Economics, 50: 312–329.

Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Peter C. Reiss. 1991. “Entry Competition in Concentrated Markets.”

  Journal of Political Economy, 99(5): 977–1009.


                                                   36
Bunch, David S., and Robert Smiley. 1992. “Who Deters Entry? Evidence on the Use of Strategic

  Entry Deterrents.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(3): 509–521.

Capps, Cory, David Dranove, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2003. “Competition and market power in

  option demand markets.” RAND Journal of Economics, 34(4): 737–763.

Ching, Andrew T. 2010. “A Dynamic Oligopoly Structural Model for the Prescription Drug Market after

  Patent Expiration.” International Economic Review, 51(4): 1175–1207.

Claxton, Gary, Matthew Raw, Michelle Long, Anthony Damico, Bradley Sawyer, Gregory

  Foster, Heidi Whitmore, and Lindsey Schapiro. 2016. “Employer Health Benefits: 2016 Annual

  Survey.” The Kaiser Family Foundaiton and Health Research and Educational Trust.

Danzon, Patricia M., and Li-Wei Chao. 2000. “Does Regulation Drive Out Competition in Pharma-

  ceutical Markets.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 43(2): 311–358.

Dasgupta, P., and J.E. Stiglitz. 1988. “Potential Competition, Actual Competition, and Economic

  Welfare.” European Economic Review, 32: 569–577.

DiMasi, J.A., L. Feldman, A. Seckler, and A. Wilson. 2010. “Trends in Risks Associated with

  New Drug Development: Success Rates for Investigational Drugs.” Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics,

  87(3): 272–277.

DiMasi, Joseph A., Henry G. Grabowski, and Ronald W. Hansen. 2016. “Innovation in the phar-

  maceutical industry: New estimates of R&D costs.” Journal of Health Economics, 47: 20–33.

Express Scripts. 2015. “The 2015 drug trend report.”

Food and Drug Administration. 2015. “FDA approves Basaglar, the first “follow-on” insulin glargine

  product to treat diabetes.” FDA Press Release.

Frank, Richard G., and David S. Salkever. 1997. “Generic Entry and the Pricing of Pharmaceuticals.”

  The Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 6(1): 75–90.

Gaynor, Martin, Carol Propper, and Stephan Seiler. 2016. “Free to Choose? Reform, choice, and

  consideration sets in the English National Health Service.” American Economic Review, 106(11): 3521–

  3557.




                                                   37
Gaynor, Martin, Kate Ho, and Robert J. Town. 2015. “The industrial organization of health-care

  markets.” Journal of Economic Literature, 53(2): 235–284.

Generic Pharmaceutical Association. 2015. “Generic Drug Savings in the US.”

Geroski, P.A. 1995. “What do we know about entry?” International Journal of Industrial Organization,

  13: 421–440.

Grabowski, Henry G., and John M. Vernon. 1992. “Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price Competition in

  Pharmaceuticals after the 1984 Drug Act.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 35(2): 331–350.

Hartung, Daniel M., Dennish N. Bourdette, Sharia M. Ahmed, and Ruth H. Whitman. 2015.

  “The cost of multiple sclerosis drugs in the US and the pharmaceutical industry.” Neurology, 84: 2185–2192.

Hay, Michael, David W. Thomas, John L. Craighead, Celia Economides, and Jesse Rosenthal.

  2014. “Clinical development success rates for investigational drugs.” Nature Biotechnology, 32(1): 40–51.

Ho, Katherine. 2009. “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market.” American Economic Re-

  view, 99(1): 393–430.

Ho, Katherine, and Robin S. Lee. 2017. “Equilibrium Provider Networks: Bargaining and Exclusion in

  Health Care Markets.” NBER Working Paper No. 23742.

Howard, David H., Peter B. Bach, Ernst R. Berndt, and Rena M. Conti. 2015. “Pricing in the

  Market for Anticancer Drugs.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1): 139–162.

Hua, Xinyang, Natalie Carvalho, Michelle Tew, Elbert S. Huang, William H. Herman, and

  Philip Clarke. 2016. “Expenditures and Prices of Antihyperglycemic Medications in the United States:

  2002-2013.” Journal of American Medical Association, 315(13): 1400–1402.

Kesselheim, Aaron S., Jerry Avorn, and Ameet Sarpatwari. 2016. “The High Cost of Prescription

  Drugs in the United States: Origins and Prospects for Reform.” Journal of American Medical Association,

  316(8): 858–871.

Kola, Ismail, and John Landis. 2004. “Can the pharmaceutical industry reduce attrition rates?” Nature

  Reviews: Drug Discovery, 3: 711–715.

Kyle, Margaret K. 2007. “Pharmaceutical Price Controls and Entry.” The Review of Economics and

  Statistics, 89(1): 88–99.

                                                     38
Lakdawalla, Darius, and Neeraj Sood. 2009. “Innovation and Welfare Effects of Public Drug Insurance.”

  Journal of Public Economics, 91(1): 541–548.

Lu, Z. John, and William S. Comanor. 1998. “Strategic Pricing of New Pharmaceuticals.” The Review

  of Economics and Statistics.

Mazzeo, Michael J. 2002. “Product choice and oligopoly market structure.” RAND Journal of Economics,

  33(2): 221–242.

Morton, Fiona M. Scott. 1999. “Entry decisions in the generic pharmaceutical industry.” RAND Journal

  of Economics, 30(3): 421–440.

Nickell, Stephen J. 1996. “Competition and Corporate Performance.” Journal of Political Economy,

  104(4): 724–746.

Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. 2016. “ASPE Issue Brief: Observa-

  tions on Trends in Prescription Drug Spending.” Department of Health and Human Services.

Pakes, Ariel, Michael Ostrovsky, and Steven Berry. 2007. “Simple estimators for the parameters of

  discrete dynamic games (with entry/exit examples).” RAND Journal of Economics, 38(2): 373–399.

Perloff, Jeffrey M., Valerie Y Suslow, and Paul J. Seguin. 1995. “Higher Prices from Entry: Pricing

  of Brand-Name Drugs.” Working Paper: Competition Policy Center UC Berkley, WP Number CPC99-03.

Powell, David. 2014. “Did the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008 Reduce Labor Supply? Evidence from

  Quantile Panel Data Estimation.” RAND Working Paper Series No. WR-710-3.

Powell, David, and Joachim Wagner. 2014. “The Exporter Productivity Premium along the Produc-

  tivity Distribution: Evidence from Quantile Regression with Nonadditive Firm Fixed Effects.” Review of

  World Economics, 150(4).

Reekie, W. Duncan. 1978. “Price and Quality Competition in the United States Drug Industry.” The

  Journal of Industrial Economics, 26(3): 223–237.

Reiffen, David, and Michael R. Ward. 2005. “Generic Drug Industry Dynamics.” Review of Economics

  and Statistics, 87(1): 37–49.

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An

  Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4): 629–649.

                                                     39
Salop, Steven C. 1979. “Strategic Entry Deterrence.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings

  of the Ninety-First Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, 69(2): 335–338.

Santos, Rita, Hugh Gravelle, and Carol Propper. 2017. “Does Quality Affect Patients’ Choice of

  Doctor? Evidence from England.” The Economic Journal, 127: 445–494.

Selton, R. 1965. “Spieltheoretische Behandlung eines Oligopolmodells mit Nachfragetrgheit ? Teil I Bestim-

  mung des dynamischen Preisgleichgewichts.” Zeitschrift fr die gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 121: 301–324.

Tenn, Steven, and Brett W Wendling. 2014. “Entry Threats and Pricing in the Generic Drug Industry.”

  Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2): 214–228.

Tirole, Jean. 1988. The theory of industrial organization. MIT Press.

Yang, Wenya, Timothy M. Dall, Paul Gallo, Stacey L. Kowal, and Paul F. Hogan. 2013. “Eco-

  nomic Costs of Diabetes in the U.S. in 2012.” Diabetes Care, 36: 1033–1046.




                                                   40
A     Appendix

A.1    Derivations and Proofs

The following solution describes the steps used to obtain the entrant’s best response function in Equation 4.

                ∂Re                                        c2e
      F OCP2e :       = a − b1 c2e + b2 c2i + P2e · −b1             =0
                ∂P2e                                         P2e
                                                             c1i
                              a − b1 c2e + b2 c2i − P2e · b1        = 0 (Using Lemma ?? and Assumption 4)
                                                             P1i
                                       
                                c1i                      c1i                            c1i
                      a − b1         P2e + b2 c2i − b1       P2e    = 0 (Using c2e =        P2e )
                                P1i                      P1i                            P1i
                                                 c1i
                    θQ + c2i (b1 − b2 ) − 2b1        P2e + b2 c2i   = 0 (Replacing a from 2)
                                                 P1i
                  c1i                      c1i           c1i                            c1i
             θQ +     P2i (b1 − b2 ) − 2b1      P2e + b2     P2i    = 0 (Using c2i =        P2i )
                  P1i                      P1i           P1i                            P1i
                                          c1i            c1i
                                θQ + b1       P2i − 2b1      P2e    = 0 (Simplifying)
                                          P1i            P1i
                                                 θQP1i     1
                                                         + P2i      = P2e (Solving for P2e )
                                                 2b1 c1i   2

                                                       θQP1i    1
                                               P2e =           + P2i                                        (17)
                                                       2b1 c1i  2

The following solution describes the steps used to obtain the incumbent’s simplified second period maxi-

mization problem in Equation 9.

                                         
max P2i · Q2i = P2i · α − β1 c2i + β2 c2e
                             c1i           c1i                 c1i               c1i
              = P2i · α − β1      P2i + β2      P2e (Using c2i =     P2i and c2e =     P2e )
                             P1i            P1i                  P1i               P1i
                     h        c1i           c1i  θQP1i   1 i
              = P2i · α − β1      P2i + β2              + P2i (Using the entrant’s best response from Equation ??)
                             P1i            P1i 2b1 c1i   2
                     h        c1i           c1i  θQP1i   1 i
              = P2i · α − β1      P2i + β2              + P2i (Simplifying)
                             P1i            P1i 2b1 c1i   2




                                                          41
The following solution describes the steps used to obtain the incumbent’s best response function in Equation

11.

                       ∂Ri   h       c1i            c1i  θQP1i       1 i
          F OCP2i :         = α − β1     P2i + β2                 + P2i +
                       ∂P2i          P1i           P1i 2b1 c1i        2
                                                  h        c1i        c1i  1 i
                                            P2i · − β1         + β2              =0
                                                          P1i         P1i 2
                                              c1i            θQ          c1i
                                     α − 2β1      P2i + β2        + β2       P2i = 0 (Simplifying)
                                             P1i             2b1        P1i
                                                                             θQ        c1i          c1i
                                                                    α + β2       = 2β1     P2i − β2     P2i
                                                                             2b1       P1i          P1i
                                                                             θQ    c1i
                                                                    α + β2       =     (2β1 − β2 )P2i
                                                                             2b1   P1i
                                                                           θQ
                                                                  α + β2 2b  1
                                                            P1i                  = P2i
                                                                c1i (2β1 − β2 )

                                                                  θQ
                                                           α + β2 2b 1
                                              P2i = P1i                                                       (18)
                                                          c1i (2β1 − β2 )

The following solution describes the steps used to obtain a simplified version of the incumbent’s two period

decision problem in Equation 12

                                                  
max Ri = P1i · Q1i + (1 − ρ)P1i · Q1i + ρP2i · Q2i
P1i

       = P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + (1 − ρ)P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + ρP2i (α − β1 c2i + β2 c2e )
                                                                     P1i
       = P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + (1 − ρ)P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + ρω       (α − β1 c2i + β2 c2e )
                                                                     c1i
                              P1i
        (Replacing P2i = ω        )
                              c1i
                                                                     P1i         c1i          c1i     
       = P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + (1 − ρ)P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + ρω         α − β1     P2i + β2     P2e
                                                                     c1i          P1i          P1i
                        c1i               c1i
        (Using c2i =        P2i and c2e =     P2e )
                        P1i               P1i
                                                                     P1i         c1i          c1i h θQP1i  1 i
       = P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + (1 − ρ)P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + ρω         α − β1     P2i + β2             + P2i
                                                                     c1i          P1i          P1i 2b1 c1i  2
        (Using the Entrant’s BR)
                                                                     P1i         c1i P1i      c1i h θQP1i  1 P1i i
       = P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + (1 − ρ)P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + ρω         α − β1    ω    + β2             + ω
                                                                     c1i          P1i c1i      P1i 2b1 c1i  2 c1i
                          P1i
        (Using P2i = ω        )
                          c1i
                                                                     P1i                h θQ   1 i
       = P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + (1 − ρ)P1i · (α − β1 · c1i ) + ρω         α − β1 ω + β2       + ω
                                                                     c1i                   2b1  2
        (Simplifying)


                                                          42
The following solution describes the steps used to obtain Equation 14.

                    ∂Ri                            c1i            h                          c1i i
        F OCP1i :        = (α − β1 c1i ) + P1i − β1        + (1 − ρ) (α − β1 c1i ) + P1i − β1
                    ∂P1i                            P1i                                         P1i
                                                                                                 c 
                                                                     h θQ     1 i c1i − P1i P1i
                                                  +ρω α − β1 ω + β2         + ω                   1i
                                                                                                       =0
                                                                        2b1    2           c21i
                                                                                h θQ    1 i 0 
                         α − 2β1 c1i + (1 − ρ)(α − 2β1 c1i ) + ρω α − β1 ω + β2        + ω             =0
                                                                                   2b1   2       c21i

                                                                     α − 2β1 c1i + (1 − ρ)(α − 2β1 c1i ) = 0

                                                                           2α − 4β1 c1i − αρ + ρ2β1 c1i = 0


The following solution describes the steps using implicit function differentiation to derive the condition

presented in Equation 15.

                                  dP1i   −4β1 Pc1i
                                                1i
                                                   + ρ2β1 Pc1i
                                                            1i
                                                                 2β1 Pc1i
                                                                       1i
                                                                          (ρ − 2)
                                       =                       =
                                   dρ      −α + 2β1 c1i           2β1 c1i − α




The following solution describes the method used to solve for a range of elasticities for which the incumbent

has an incentive to increase price prior to entry.

                                                 β1 c1i
                                          ε=              <y
                                               α − β1 c1i
                                                     β1 c1i < y(α − β1 c1i )

                                            (y + 1)β1 c1i < yα
                                         y+1
                                             β1 c1i − α < 0
                                          y

                                                                                                   y+1
To find the range of elasticities for which 2β1 c1i − α < 0, simply solve for y by setting          y    = 2. This

inequality will be satisfied when ε = 1. In fact, it will be satisfied as long as |ε| ≤ 1.




                                                         43
             Table 8: Clinical Trial Details for Drugs in Development


Brand Name   Trial Label from Med Review       NCT ID          Phase    Study Start
  Afrezza           PDC-INS-0002             NCT00511979         1        Aug-99
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-015              NCT01021891         1         Jul-06
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-017              NCT00626249         1        Aug-07
  Afrezza                                    NCT00642538         1        Feb-08
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-131              NCT00721344         1        Apr-08
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-113              NCT00673621         1        May-08
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-114              NCT00674050         1        May-08
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-122              NCT00757367         1         Jul-08
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-167              NCT01365117         1        Jan-11
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-176              NCT01490762         1        Dec-11
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-177              NCT01544881         1        Mar-12
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-178              NCT01902121         1        Aug-13
  Afrezza            MKC-TI-179              NCT01982604         1        Nov-13
  Afrezza                                    NCT02470637         1        Jun-15
  Afrezza                                    NCT02485327         1         Jul-15
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-138                                   1
 Afrezza           MKC-TI-03B               NCT00419302          2       Oct-03
  Afrezza          PDC-INS-0008              NCT00511602         2       Dec-03
  Afrezza          MKC-TI-003B2              NCT00511719         2       Feb-04
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-010               NCT00754624         2       May-04
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-005               NCT00511732         2       Jun-04
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-016               NCT00934414         2       Aug-04
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-101               NCT00539396         2       Mar-05
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-118               NCT00570687         2       Sep-07
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-112               NCT00642681         2       Dec-07
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-116               NCT00662857         2       Apr-08
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-119               NCT00747006         2       Sep-08
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-026                                   2
 Afrezza           MKC-TI-103               NCT00332488          3       Dec-04
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-030               NCT00308737         3       Jun-05
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-014               NCT00539890         3       Nov-05
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-009               NCT00308308         3       Feb-06
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-102               NCT00309244         3       Feb-06
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-105               NCT00332826         3       Jun-06
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-126               NCT00741429         3       May-07
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-117               NCT00700622         3       May-08
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-139               NCT01798914         3       Oct-08
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-162               NCT01196104         3       Sep-10
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-164               NCT01201928         3       Oct-10
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-171               NCT01445951         3       Sep-11
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-175               NCT01451398         3       Nov-11
  Afrezza            MKC-129                     -               -
  Afrezza            MKC-143                     -               -
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-025                   -               -
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-027                   -               -
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-104                   -               -
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-110                   -               -
  Afrezza           MKC-TI-111                   -               -
                                       44
Brand Name   Trial Label from Med Review         NCT ID       Phase        Study Start
  Afrezza             MKC-TI-123                   -            -
  Afrezza             MKC-TI-140                   -            -
  Afrezza             MKC-TI-141                   -            -
  Afrezza             MKC-TI-142                   -            -
  Afrezza             MKC-TI-159                   -            -
  Afrezza            PDC-INS-0001                  -            -
  Afrezza           PDC-INS-0001A                  -            -
  Afrezza           PDC-INS-0001B                  -            -
  Afrezza           PDC-INS-0001C                  -            -
  Afrezza           PDC-INS-0002A                               -
  Afrezza            PDC-INS-0003                  -            -
  Afrezza           PDC-INS-0003A                  -            -
  Afrezza            PDC-INS-0004                  -            -
  Afrezza           PDC-INS-0004A                  -            -
  Afrezza            PDC-INS-0006                  -            -
  Afrezza            PDC-INS-0007                  -            -
  Afrezza            PDC-INS-0011                  -            -
 Afrezza                                                  NDA Submission    Mar-09
 Basaglar              ABEI                NCT01374178          1           Jun-11
 Basaglar              ABEA                NCT01476345          1           Nov-11
 Basaglar              ABEE                NCT01600950          1           May-12
 Basaglar              ABEM                NCT01634165          1           Jul-12
 Basaglar              ABEO                NCT01688635          1           Sep-12
 Basaglar              ABEV                NCT02955953          1           Nov-16
 Basaglar              ABEN                                     1
 Basaglar              ABEB                NCT01421147          3           Aug-11
 Basaglar              ABEC                 NCT01421459         3           Sep-11
 Basaglar              ABER                 NCT02302716         3           Dec-14
 Basaglar                                                 NDA Submission    Oct-13
  Toujeo             PKD11627               NCT01195454         1           Aug-10
  Toujeo             TDR11626               NCT01349855         1           Mar-11
  Toujeo             PKD12270               NCT01493115         1           Nov-11
  Toujeo             PDY12335               NCT01676233         1           Sep-12
  Toujeo             PKD13560               NCT01838083         1           Apr-13
  Toujeo                                    NCT02536859         1           Aug-15
  Toujeo            PDY12777               NCT01658579          2           Aug-12
  Toujeo            EFC11628               NCT01499082          3           Dec-11
  Toujeo             EFC11629               NCT01499095         3           Dec-11
  Toujeo             EFC12347               NCT01676220         3           Aug-12
  Toujeo             EFC12449               NCT01689129         3           Sep-12
  Toujeo             EFC12456               NCT01683266         3           Sep-12
  Toujeo             EFC12512               NCT01689142         3           Sep-12
  Toujeo            PDY14065                NCT02227212         3           Aug-14
  Toujeo             EFC13799               NCT02320721         3           Jan-15
  Toujeo                                    NCT02401243         3           Mar-15
  Toujeo             EFC13470               NCT02585674         3           Dec-15
  Toujeo             EFC13957               NCT02735044         3           Apr-16
  Toujeo             EFC12814               NCT02855684         3           Aug-16
  Toujeo                                                  NDA Submission    Apr-14

                                            45
Brand Name   Trial Label from Med Review     NCT ID       Phase   Study Start
   Toujeo             PKD10086
  Tresiba                 1876              NCT01868529    1       Jan-08
  Tresiba                 1991              NCT00961324    1        Jul-09
  Tresiba                 1988              NCT00966368    1       Aug-09
  Tresiba                 1989              NCT00976326    1       Aug-09
  Tresiba                 1994              NCT00964418    1       Aug-09
  Tresiba                 3765              NCT00964964    1       Aug-09
  Tresiba                 1977              NCT00992537    1       Oct-09
  Tresiba                 3538              NCT01002768    1       Oct-09
  Tresiba                 1990              NCT01006057    1       Nov-09
  Tresiba                 1995              NCT01030926    1       Dec-09
  Tresiba                 3762              NCT01043510    1       Jan-10
  Tresiba                 3678              NCT01076634    1       Feb-10
  Tresiba                 1993              NCT01114542    1       May-10
  Tresiba                 1987              NCT01154881    1       Jun-10
  Tresiba                 1992              NCT01151072    1       Jun-10
  Tresiba                 1996              NCT01135927    1       Jun-10
  Tresiba                 3857              NCT01173926    1        Jul-10
  Tresiba                 3769              NCT01193387    1       Aug-10
  Tresiba                 1999              NCT01437592    1       Sep-11
  Tresiba                 4000              NCT01623375    1       Jun-12
  Tresiba                 3999              NCT01704417    1       Oct-12
  Tresiba                 4227              NCT02536859    1       Aug-15
  Tresiba                1835              NCT00612040     2       Jan-08
  Tresiba                 1836              NCT00611884    2       Jan-08
  Tresiba                 3569              NCT00841087    2       Jan-09
  Tresiba                3579              NCT00982644     3       Sep-09
  Tresiba                 3582              NCT00972283    3       Sep-09
  Tresiba                 3583              NCT00982228    3       Sep-09
  Tresiba                 3668              NCT01006291    3       Nov-09
  Tresiba                 3580              NCT01046110    3       Jan-10
  Tresiba                 3585              NCT01074268    3       Feb-10
  Tresiba                 3586              NCT01059799    3       Feb-10
  Tresiba                 3724              NCT01068678    3       Feb-10
  Tresiba                 3672              NCT01068665    3       Mar-10
  Tresiba                 3718              NCT01076647    3       Mar-10
  Tresiba                 3770              NCT01079234    3       Mar-10
  Tresiba                 3839              NCT01135992    3       Jun-10
  Tresiba                 3846              NCT01326026    3       Mar-11
  Tresiba                 3923              NCT01364428    3       Jun-11
  Tresiba                 3948              NCT01388361    3       Sep-11
  Tresiba                 3561              NCT01513473    3       Jan-12
  Tresiba                 3874              NCT01569841    3       Apr-12
  Tresiba                 3943              NCT01570751    3       Apr-12
  Tresiba                 3944              NCT01664247    3       Oct-12
  Tresiba                 3587              NCT01849289    3       Jun-13



                                     46
 Brand Name     Trial Label from Med Review      NCT ID          Phase        Study Start
    Tresiba                  4060              NCT01880736         3            Jun-13
    Tresiba                  3995              NCT02034513         3            Jan-14
    Tresiba                  3998              NCT02030600         3            Jan-14
   Tresiba                                                   NDA Submission     Sep-11
 Ryzodeg70/30              1718                NCT01865279         1            Dec-05
 Ryzodeg70/30              1719                NCT01865292         1            Aug-06
 Ryzodeg70/30              1738                NCT01865305         1            Sep-06
 Ryzodeg70/30              1740                NCT01865318         1            Sep-06
 Ryzodeg70/30              1788                NCT01865331         1            Dec-06
 Ryzodeg70/30              1790                NCT01868555         1            Dec-07
 Ryzodeg70/30              1959                NCT01868568         1            Apr-08
 Ryzodeg70/30              1985                NCT01868581         1            May-08
 Ryzodeg70/30              3539                NCT00993096         1            Sep-09
 Ryzodeg70/30              1977                NCT00992537         1            Oct-09
 Ryzodeg70/30              1983                NCT01051102         1            Jan-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              1978                NCT01134224         1            May-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              1980                NCT01125553         1            May-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              1982                NCT01138488         1            Jun-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              3857                NCT01173926         1             Jul-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              1981                NCT01174303         1            Aug-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              3834                NCT01455142         1            Oct-11
 Ryzodeg70/30              1979                NCT01590836         1            Apr-12
 Ryzodeg70/30              1984                NCT02844790         1             Jul-16
Ryzodeg70/30               1791               NCT00614055          2            Jan-08
 Ryzodeg70/30              1792                NCT00613951         2            Jan-08
 Ryzodeg70/30              3570                NCT00842361         2            Jan-09
Ryzodeg70/30               3594               NCT00978627          3            Aug-09
 Ryzodeg70/30              3592                NCT01009580         3            Nov-09
 Ryzodeg70/30              3590                NCT01045707         3            Jan-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              3593                NCT01045447         3            Jan-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              3597                NCT01059812         3            Feb-10
 Ryzodeg70/30              3896                NCT01272193         3            Jan-11
 Ryzodeg70/30              3844                NCT01365507         3            Jun-11
 Ryzodeg70/30              3940                NCT01513590         3            Jan-12
 Ryzodeg70/30              3941                NCT01680341         3            Aug-12
 Ryzodeg70/30              3996                NCT01713530         3            Feb-13
 Ryzodeg70/30              4003                NCT01814137         3            Mar-13
 Ryzodeg70/30              3816                NCT01835431         3            Oct-13
 Ryzodeg70/30              4243                NCT02648217         3            Jan-16
 Ryzodeg70/30              3598                NCT02762578         3            May-16
 Ryzodeg70/30              4266                NCT02906917         3            Sep-16
Ryzodeg70/30                                                 NDA Submission     Sep-11




                                              47
                      Table 9: National Drug Codes Insulin Claims

National Drug Code (NDC)   Proprietary Name                         Manufacturer
00002751001                HUMALOG                                  Eli Lilly & Company
00002751017                HUMALOG                                  Eli Lilly & Company
00002751101                HUMALOG MIX 75/25                        Eli Lilly & Company
00002751201                HUMALOG MIX 50/50                        Eli Lilly & Company
00002751559                HUMALOG                                  Eli Lilly & Company
00002751601                HUMALOG                                  Eli Lilly & Company
00002751659                HUMALOG                                  Eli Lilly & Company
00002771227                HUMALOG                                  Eli Lilly & Company
00002811001                ILETIN PZI                               Eli Lilly & Company
00002811101                ILETIN II PZI PORK                       Eli Lilly & Company
00002811201                ILETIN II PZI BEEF                       Eli Lilly & Company
00002814001                ILETIN PZI                               Eli Lilly & Company
00002821001                ILETIN REGULAR I                         Eli Lilly & Company
00002821101                ILETIN II REGULAR PORK                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002821201                ILETIN II REG. BEEF                      Eli Lilly & Company
00002821501                HUMULIN R                                Eli Lilly & Company
00002821517                HUMULIN R                                Eli Lilly & Company
00002821591                RELION HUMULIN R                         Eli Lilly & Company
00002821601                HUMULIN BR                               Eli Lilly & Company
00002821759                HUMULIN R                                Eli Lilly & Company
00002824001                ILETIN REGULAR I                         Eli Lilly & Company
00002831001                ILETIN NPH I                             Eli Lilly & Company
00002831101                ILETIN II NPH PORK                       Eli Lilly & Company
00002831201                ILETIN II NPH BEEF                       Eli Lilly & Company
00002831501                HUMULIN N                                Eli Lilly & Company
00002831517                HUMULIN N                                Eli Lilly & Company
00002831591                RELION HUMULIN N                         Eli Lilly & Company
00002831759                HUMULIN N                                Eli Lilly & Company
00002834001                ILETIN NPH I                             Eli Lilly & Company
00002841001                ILETIN LENTE I                           Eli Lilly & Company
00002841101                ILETIN II LENTE PORK                     Eli Lilly & Company
00002841201                ILETIN II LENTE BEEF                     Eli Lilly & Company
00002841501                HUMULIN L                                Eli Lilly & Company
00002844001                ILETIN LENTE I                           Eli Lilly & Company
00002850001                ILETIN II REGULAR PORK                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002850101                HUMULIN R CONCENTRATED U-500             Eli Lilly & Company
00002851001                ILETIN SEMILENTE                         Eli Lilly & Company
00002854001                ILETIN SEMILENTE                         Eli Lilly & Company
00002861001                ILETIN ULTRALENTE                        Eli Lilly & Company
00002861501                HUMULIN U                                Eli Lilly & Company
00002864001                ILETIN ULTRALENTE                        Eli Lilly & Company
00002871501                HUMULIN 70/30                            Eli Lilly & Company
00002871517                HUMULIN 70/30                            Eli Lilly & Company
00002871591                RELION HUMULIN 70/30                     Eli Lilly & Company
00002871759                HUMULIN 70/30                            Eli Lilly & Company
00002872559                HUMALOG PEN                              Eli Lilly & Company
00002873001                HUMULIN N PEN                            Eli Lilly & Company
00002873059                HUMULIN N PEN                            Eli Lilly & Company


                                          48
National Drug Code (NDC)   Proprietary Name                    Manufacturer
00002877001                HUMULIN 70/30 PEN                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002877059                HUMULIN 70/30 PEN                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002879359                HUMALOG MIX 50/50                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002879459                HUMALOG MIX 75/25 PEN               Eli Lilly & Company
00002879701                HUMALOG MIX 75/25                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002879759                HUMALOG MIX 75/25                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002879801                HUMALOG MIX 50/50                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002879859                HUMALOG MIX 50/50                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002879901                HUMALOG                             Eli Lilly & Company
00002879959                HUMALOG                             Eli Lilly & Company
00002880359                HUMULIN 70/30 KWIKPEN               Eli Lilly & Company
00002880559                HUMULIN N KWIKPEN                   Eli Lilly & Company
00002951501                HUMULIN 50/50                       Eli Lilly & Company
00003183310                NOVOLIN R                           Novo Nordisk Inc
00003183315                NOVOLIN R                           Novo Nordisk Inc
00003183410                NOVOLIN N                           Novo Nordisk Inc
00003183415                NOVOLIN N PENFILL                   Novo Nordisk Inc
00003183510                NOVOLIN L                           Novo Nordisk Inc
00003183710                NOVOLIN 70/30                       Novo Nordisk Inc
00003183715                NOVOLIN 70/30 PENFILL               Novo Nordisk Inc
00003244110                INSULIN, PURIFIED SEMILENTE PORK    Novo Nordisk Inc
00003244510                INSULIN, PURIFIED ULTRALENTE BEEF   Novo Nordisk Inc
00003352115                INSULIN                             Squibb-Novo Inc
00024586903                TOUJEO                              Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00024587490                AFREZZA                             Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00024588236                AFREZZA                             Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00024588463                AFREZZA                             Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00024589463                AFREZZA                             Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00069005019                EXUBERA COMBINATION PACK 12         Pfizer
00069005053                EXUBERA COMBINATION PACK 15         Pfizer
00069005085                EXUBERA KIT                         Pfizer
00069070737                EXUBERA                             Pfizer
00069072437                EXUBERA                             Pfizer
00088221905                LANTUS SOLOSTAR                     Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00088222033                LANTUS                              Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00088222052                LANTUS                              Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00088222060                LANTUS SOLOSTAR                     Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00088250033                APIDRA                              Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00088250052                APIDRA                              Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00088250205                APIDRA SOLOSTAR                     Sanofi-Aventis US LLC
00169001771                NOVOLIN 70/30                       Novo Nordisk Inc
00169004471                NOVOLIN R                           Novo Nordisk Inc
00169004571                NOVOLIN N                           Novo Nordisk Inc
00169007011                VELOSULIN BR                        Novo Nordisk Inc
00169010001                INSULIN PURIFIED                    Novo Nordisk Inc
00169011101                VELOSULIN BR                        Novo Nordisk Inc
00169020001                INSULIN PURIFIED                    Novo Nordisk Inc
00169022201                INSULATARD HUMAN INSULIN            Novo Nordisk Inc
00169030001                INSULIN PURIFIED                    Novo Nordisk Inc
00169033301                MIXTARD HUMAN INSULIN 70/30         Novo Nordisk Inc

                                         49
National Drug Code (NDC)   Proprietary Name                Manufacturer
00169183302                RELION/NOVOLIN R                Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183311                NOVOLIN R                       Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183317                NOVOLIN R PENFILL               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183318                RELION/NOVOLIN R                Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183402                RELION/NOVOLIN N                Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183411                NOVOLIN N                       Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183417                NOVOLIN N PENFILL               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183418                RELION/NOVOLIN N                Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183511                NOVOLIN L                       Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183702                RELION/NOVOLIN 70/30            Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183711                NOVOLIN 70/30                   Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183717                NOVOLIN 70/30 PENFILL           Novo Nordisk Inc
00169183718                RELION/NOVOLIN 70/30            Novo Nordisk Inc
00169231321                NOVOLIN R INNOLET               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169231421                NOVOLIN N INNOLET               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169231721                NOVOLIN 70/30 INNOLET           Novo Nordisk Inc
00169244010                INSULIN PURIFIED REGULAR PORK   Novo Nordisk Inc
00169244210                INSULIN PURIFIED LENTE PORK     Novo Nordisk Inc
00169244710                INSULIN PURIFIED NPH PORK       Novo Nordisk Inc
00169255013                TRESIBA                         Novo Nordisk Inc
00169266015                TRESIBA                         Novo Nordisk Inc
00169330312                NOVOLOG                         Novo Nordisk Inc
00169347318                NOVOLIN R PENFILL               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169347418                NOVOLIN N PENFILL               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169347718                NOVOLIN 70/30 PENFILL           Novo Nordisk Inc
00169351215                INSULIN STANDARD REGULAR        Novo Nordisk Inc
00169352215                INSULIN STANDARD NPH            Novo Nordisk Inc
00169352815                INSULIN STANDARD LENTE          Novo Nordisk Inc
00169355215                INSULIN STANDARD SEMILENTE      Novo Nordisk Inc
00169357215                INSULIN STANDARD ULTRALENTE     Novo Nordisk Inc
00169368213                NOVOLOG MIX 70/30               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169368512                NOVOLOG MIX 70/30               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169368712                LEVEMIR                         Novo Nordisk Inc
00169369619                NOVOLOG MIX 70/30               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169633910                NOVOLOG FLEXPEN                 Novo Nordisk Inc
00169643810                LEVEMIR FLEXTOUCH               Novo Nordisk Inc
00169643910                LEVEMIR                         Novo Nordisk Inc
00169750111                NOVOLOG                         Novo Nordisk Inc
00403296118                HUMULIN N                       Compumed Pharmaceuticals Inc
00403344918                HUMULIN R                       Compumed Pharmaceuticals Inc
23490668700                INSULIN HUMAN REGULAR           Palmetto State Pharmaceuticals
35356010200                HUMALOG                         Quality Care Products LLC
49999099310                HUMULIN                         Quality Care Products LLC
49999099410                LANTUS                          Quality Care Products LLC
54569165101                ILETIN NPH I                    A-S Medication Solutions LLC
54569165102                ILETIN NPH I                    A-S Medication Solutions LLC
54569165200                ILETIN II REG. PORK             A-S Medication Solutions LLC
54569165202                ILETIN II REG. PORK             A-S Medication Solutions LLC
54569231800                HUMULIN N                       A-S Medication Solutions LLC
54569231801                HUMULIN N                       A-S Medication Solutions LLC

                                         50
National Drug Code (NDC)   Proprietary Name                Manufacturer
54569231900                HUMULIN R                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569231901                HUMULIN R                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569255700                HUMULIN L                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569255701                HUMULIN L                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569281600                INSULIN PURIFIED LENTE PORK     A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569281700                INSULIN PURIFIED REGULAR PORK   A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569289100                ILETIN PORK NPH                 A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569289101                ILETIN PORK NPH                 A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569291800                NOVOLIN 70/30                   A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569291801                NOVOLIN 70/30                   A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569291802                NOVOLIN 70/30                   A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569295100                ILETIN REGULAR I                A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569295101                ILETIN REGULAR I                A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569346700                HUMULIN 70/30                   A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569346701                HUMULIN 70/30                   A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569383300                NOVOLIN R                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569383301                NOVOLIN R                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569383302                NOVOLIN R                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569383400                NOVOLIN L                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569383401                NOVOLIN L                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569383500                NOVOLIN N                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569383501                NOVOLIN N                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569383502                NOVOLIN N                       A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569532100                HUMALOG MIX 75/25               A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569560500                LANTUS                          A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569630000                LEVEMIR                         A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569630100                LEVEMIR                         A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569630101                LEVEMIR                         A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569643500                HUMALOG                         A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569646200                LANTUS SOLOSTAR                 A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569646201                LANTUS SOLOSTAR                 A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569657000                LEVEMIR FLEXTOUCH               A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569658400                NOVOLOG                         A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569658500                HUMALOG                         A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569658600                NOVOLOG                         A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54569658700                NOVOLOG FLEXPEN                 A-S Medication Solutions   LLC
54868011200                LEVEMIR                         Physicians Total Care
54868142801                ILETIN NPH I                    Physicians Total Care
54868142901                HUMULIN N                       Physicians Total Care
54868208901                ILETIN REGULAR I                Physicians Total Care
54868238001                NOVOLIN N                       Physicians Total Care
54868274600                HUMULIN 70/30                   Physicians Total Care
54868277700                NOVOLOG                         Physicians Total Care
54868347400                NOVOLIN 70/30                   Physicians Total Care
54868359800                NOVOLIN R                       Physicians Total Care
54868361900                HUMULIN R                       Physicians Total Care
54868438100                HUMALOG MIX 75/25               Physicians Total Care
54868462600                LANTUS                          Physicians Total Care
54868510800                HUMALOG                         Physicians Total Care
54868520100                NOVOLOG MIX 70/30               Physicians Total Care

                                         51
National Drug Code (NDC)   Proprietary Name               Manufacturer
54868532700                NOVOLOG MIX 70/30              Physicians Total Care
54868532701                NOVOLOG MIX 70/30              Physicians Total Care
54868576500                LANTUS                         Physicians Total Care
54868582400                HUMULIN 50/50                  Physicians Total Care
54868583600                HUMALOG                        Physicians Total Care
54868588300                LEVEMIR                        Physicians Total Care
54868589900                HUMALOG PEN                    Physicians Total Care
54868605400                NOVOLOG FLEXPEN                Physicians Total Care
54868623100                LANTUS SOLOSTAR                Physicians Total Care
55045350601                HUMULIN R                      Dispensing Solutions Inc
55045350801                NOVOLIN 70/30                  Dispensing Solutions Inc
55045360201                HUMALOG                        Dispensing Solutions Inc
55045362401                HUMULIN 70/30                  Dispensing Solutions Inc
55045368501                LANTUS                         Dispensing Solutions Inc
58016478801                HUMULIN N                      Southwood Pharm Inc
59060183302                NOVOLIN R                      Novo Nordisk Inc
59060183402                NOVOLIN N                      Novo Nordisk Inc
59060183702                NOVOLIN 70/30                  Novo Nordisk Inc
59060231404                RELION NOVOLIN N INNOLET       Novo Nordisk Inc
59060231704                RELION NOVOLIN 70/30 INNOLET   Novo Nordisk Inc
66143751005                LISPRO-PFC                     Midwest IV
68115070905                NOVOLIN R PENFILL              Dispensexpress Inc
68115072810                HUMULIN R                      Dispensexpress Inc
68115072905                HUMULIN N PEN                  Dispensexpress Inc
68115074610                HUMALOG                        Dispensexpress Inc
68115083910                LANTUS                         Dispensexpress Inc
68258598301                HUMALOG MIX 75/25              Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258889903                NOVOLOG FLEXPEN                Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258892703                LEVEMIR                        Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258892803                NOVOLOG                        Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258893001                NOVOLOG MIX 70/30              Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258893103                LANTUS SOLOSTAR                Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258896701                NOVOLOG                        Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258897701                LEVEMIR                        Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258898501                HUMULIN N                      Dispensing Solutions Inc
68258898601                NOVOLIN N                      Dispensing Solutions Inc




                                       52
               Table 10: Insulin Combinations

Combinations    Prescription Claims   Percentage of Claims
Bolus Only           2,672,920                9.24
Basal Only           5,851,299               20.23
Both                17,878,294               61.81
Other                2,521,207                8.72
Total               28,923,720                100




         Figure 7: Average Residuals over Time




                            53
                 Table 11: Price Effects using Pre- and Post-ACA Time Trends
                                                                    (1)                     (2)
                                                           Original Time Trends       ACA Time Trends
 Phase 3 Shocks
     1st Pipeline Shockt                                           -0.726                    2.405***
                                                                  (0.795)                     (0.473)
        2nd Pipeline Shockt                                        -1.147                   -3.304***
                                                                  (0.912)                     (1.081)
        3rd Pipeline Shockt                                      2.285**                       1.527
                                                                  (1.053)                     (0.952)
        4th Pipeline Shockt                                      2.263**                     3.433***
                                                                  (1.142)                     (1.041)
 Time                                                            0.715***
                                                                 (0.0957)
 Time2                                                          0.0323***
                                                                (0.00636)
 pre aca                                                                                    0.214***
                                                                                            (0.0502)
 post aca                                                                                   1.879***
                                                                                             (0.130)
 Quarter 2                                                         -0.643                    -0.896*
                                                                  (0.455)                    (0.468)
 Quarter 3                                                         -0.278                     0.0643
                                                                  (0.492)                    (0.493)
 Quarter 4                                                         -0.412                     0.0656
                                                                  (0.516)                    (0.491)
 Health Plan Type
      Exclusive Provider Organization                           -3.436***                  -3.362***
                                                                  (0.308)                    (0.311)
        Health Maintenance Organization                         -6.775***                  -6.822***
                                                                  (0.307)                    (0.307)
        Non-capitated Point of Service (POS)                    -3.508***                  -3.542***
                                                                  (0.301)                    (0.299)
        Preferred Provider Organization                         -4.923***                  -4.964***
                                                                  (0.238)                    (0.238)
        Capitated or Partially-capitated POS                    -9.680***                  -9.704***
                                                                  (0.553)                    (0.553)
        Consumer Driven Health Plan                             -7.624***                  -7.621***
                                                                  (0.306)                    (0.307)
        High Deductible Health Plan                             -7.007***                  -7.024***
                                                                  (0.319)                    (0.319)
 Constant                                                        22.80***                   19.45***
                                                                  (0.758)                    (0.636)
 R-squared                                                         0.222                      0.222
 Observations                                                   27,359,428                 27,359,428
 Number of drugs                                                    122                        122
 Note. All estimates are obtained using OLS with drug-level fixed effects. The dependent variable is inflation-
adjusted price per mL in both specifications. Standard errors are clustered at the drug-quarter level.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level
** Statistically significant at the 5 percent level
*** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level




                                                      54
