NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO BAN THE BOX LAWS INCREASE CRIME?
Joseph J. Sabia
Taylor Mackay
Thanh Tam Nguyen
Dhaval M. Dave
Working Paper 24381
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24381

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018, Revised April 2019

The authors thank Jennifer Doleac, Stan Vueger, Sebastian Tello, and participants at the 2017
Southern Economic Association, National Tax Association, and Association of Public Policy
Analysis & Management meetings and 2018 Eastern Economic Association meetings for useful
comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. We also thank Samuel Safford and
Nick Ozanich for excellent editorial assistance. Dr. Sabia acknowledges grant funding for this
project received from the Charles Koch Foundation while a faculty member at San Diego State
University and the University of New Hampshire. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Joseph J. Sabia, Taylor Mackay, Thanh Tam Nguyen, and Dhaval M. Dave. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Ban the Box Laws Increase Crime?
Joseph J. Sabia, Taylor Mackay, Thanh Tam Nguyen, and Dhaval M. Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 24381
March 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. J01,J08,K14,K31
ABSTRACT
Ban-the-box (BTB) laws, which prevent employers from asking prospective employees about
their criminal histories at initial job screenings, are intended to increase employment
opportunities and reduce economic incentives for crime. This study is the first to explore the
relationship between BTB laws and crime. Using agency-by-month data from the National
Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS), we find that BTB laws are associated with a 10
percent increase in criminal incidents involving Hispanic male arrestees. This finding is
supported by parallel analysis using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997
(NLSY97) and is consistent with BTB law-induced job loss due to employer-based statistical
discrimination. We find no evidence that BTB laws increase property crime among African
American men despite their also facing statistical discrimination. Supplemental analyses from
the American Community Survey (ACS) suggest that barriers to welfare participation among
Hispanic men may explain this result. Our estimates suggest that BTB laws generate $401
million in annual crime costs.
Joseph J. Sabia
San Diego State University
Department of Economics
Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182
and University of New Hampshire,
IZA & ESSPRI
jsabia@sdsu.edu
Taylor Mackay
University of California, Irvine
Department of Economics
Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
tmackay@uci.edu

Thanh Tam Nguyen
University of New Hampshire
Department of Economics
Peter T Paul College of Business & Economics
Durham, NH 03824
tn1028@wildcats.unh.edu
Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and IZA
and also NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

1. Introduction
More than 2.2 million Americans are incarcerated (Bureau of Justice Statistics 2016),
representing 24 percent of the world’s prison population (World Prison Brief 2017). Between
2000 and 2015, the male incarceration rate rose from 904 to 1,600 inmates per 100,000
population, with African Americans and Hispanics consistently representing a disproportionate
share of inmates (Bureau of Justice Statistics 2016, 2001). 1 Real public spending on
incarceration reached over $80 billion in 2013, with the total costs of the criminal justice system
reaching over $250 billion (Executive Office of President of the United States 2016).
The recidivism rate among ex-offenders is quite high. Over three-quarters (77 percent) of
released prisoners are rearrested within five years (National Institute of Justice 2014). The lack
of labor market opportunities for those with criminal records has been posited as one rationale
for high recidivism rates (Executive Office of President of the United States 2016).
Observational studies show that those with criminal records are less likely to be employed
(Grogger 1995; Pager 2003; Pager et al. 2009) and earn less (Nagin and Waldfogel 1998; Geller
et al. 2006) than their non-incarcerated counterparts. While this relationship can be explained, at
least in part, by difficult-to-measure personal characteristics (Grogger 1995), recent audit
experiments suggest a causal link (Pager et al. 2009).
With the goal of improving labor market opportunities of ex-offenders, 33 states and the
District of Columbia — along with over 150 cities and counties — have implemented “ban-thebox” (BTB) laws, which require employers to remove questions regarding the prospective
employee’s criminal history from job applications (National Employment Law Project 2017).
Proponents argue that by withholding information about criminal histories from initial job

1

African Americans and Hispanics represent over 50 percent of the U.S. prison population despite representing just
12 percent and approximately 20 percent, respectively, of the U.S. population (Raphael and Stoll 2013).

1

application screenings, employers may be more willing to hire those with criminal records
because their perceptions of a criminal record may be changed by social engagement with the
applicant (Doleac and Hansen, forthcoming; National Employment Law Project 2017). On the
other hand, employers may react to less information on an applicant’s criminal history by
engaging in statistical discrimination against demographic groups with (perceived) higher rates
of criminal arrests. 2
There are a number of channels through which BTB laws may affect crime. If BTB laws
are effective in increasing employment among those with criminal records, this could reduce the
gains to criminal activity, resulting in less crime, particularly for economically motivated crimes.
On the other hand, if BTB laws induce statistical discrimination against racial or ethnic
minorities with higher perceived risks of criminal activity, BTB laws could have the unintended
consequence of increasing crime rates among low-skilled minorities who have fewer job options.
BTB laws may also affect criminal behavior of those who are less likely to have criminal records
(e.g. older or more highly educated individuals) if firms engage in labor-labor substitution
toward such individuals. Finally, BTB laws could also generate moral hazard if such laws lower
the future cost of crime commission by reducing the likelihood that criminal histories will
become known to prospective employers. 3
Despite policymakers’ hope that BTB laws would reduce economic incentives for crime,
next to nothing is known about the impact of BTB laws on criminal activity. To our knowledge,
this study is the first to explore this question. Using data from the National Incident Based

2
In addition, the higher administrative costs imposed on firms could result in firms choosing to hire fewer
employees of all race/ethnicities or differentially fewer racial minorities, to whom it might devote disproportionately
larger shares of resources for additional background checks.
3

However, if individuals are forward looking and anticipate statistical discrimination as a response to BTB laws,
then this belief may induce more current crime commission.

2

Reporting System (NIBRS) from 2004 to 2014, we find that BTB laws are associated with a 10
percent increase in property crime offenses committed by working age Hispanic men. This
result is also observed in parallel analysis using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (1997). This finding is consistent with BTB law-induced statistical discrimination
reducing employment for low-skilled Hispanic men. However, we find no evidence that BTB
laws increased property crime among working age African American men, a population that also
faces job loss due to statistical discrimination. Supplemental analysis using the American
Community Survey (ACS) suggests two possible explanations for this race/ethnicity-specific
difference in crime response. First, we observe differential take-up of means-tested public
assistance programs in response to BTB-induced employment reductions. While low-skilled
African American men are more likely to participate in welfare programs, principally the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), following BTB enactment, low-skilled
Hispanic men are not. This may be due to differential barriers to participation such as language
difficulties, immigration status fears, or cultural/family factors. Second, we uncover some
suggestive evidence that BTB law-induced statistical discrimination may induce outmigration of
likely undocumented immigrants, who may be less prone to criminal activity than their native
counterparts. Together, the findings from this study add to growing evidence on the unintended
consequences of BTB laws. Our estimates suggest that BTB laws induce approximately 70,000
additional property crimes, generating $401 million (in 2018 dollars) in social costs (McCollister
et al. 2010).

2. Background and Literature
2.1 Background

3

Approximately one-third of all U.S. adults have some type of criminal record (Bureau of
Justice Statistics 2014). A 2012 survey by the Society of Human Resources Management found
that 69 percent of employers used criminal background checks for some or all of their hiring
decisions, representing a large increase over the last two decades (Holzer, Raphael and Stoll,
2006; Society for Human Resources Management 2012).
Following release, ex-offenders may face difficulties finding employment for a variety of
reasons (Holzer, Raphael and Stoll 2003). Time spent incarcerated prevents individuals from
gaining work experience, may depreciate previously accumulated labor market skills, and may
interrupt schooling investments (Western, Kling and Weiman 2001). In addition, imprisonment
may also lead to an erosion of social capital, reducing the likelihood of finding future
employment (Sampson and Laub 1993). Moreover, employers may use a prospective worker’s
prior criminal conviction as an observable indicator of lower average productivity or higher
expected liability costs from reoffending (Raphael 2011a; Freeman 2008; Blumstein and
Nakamura 2009). 4,5 A widely cited 2003 survey of California employers found that 71 percent
of respondents said that they would “probably not” or “definitely not” hire an applicant with a
criminal background (Raphael 2011b).
While some of the adverse labor market effects of incarceration may be partly offset by
in-prison schooling and job training programs (Kling 2006; Landersø 2015), ex-offenders still
have worse labor market outcomes than their non-incarcerated counterparts (Grogger 1995;
Pager 2003; Pager et al. 2009; Geller et al. 2006). An audit study by Pager et al. (2009) finds

4

Several studies show that employers may overestimate the magnitudes of these associations (Roberts et al. 2007;
Blumstein and Nakamura 2009).

5

Insuring against employee misconduct and malfeasance through “fidelity bonds” is often not possible if the
employee has a criminal record (Stafford 2006).

4

that randomly assigning a criminal record to otherwise identical job applications is associated
with a 50 percent lower likelihood of an interview request or job offer. Observational studies
estimate earnings differentials between those with and without incarceration records to be 10 to
40 percent (Geller et al. 2006; The Pew Charitable Trusts 2010). These differentials appear
largest for those over age 30 and grow over time (Nagin and Waldfogel 1998). Among
offenders, longer prison sentences are negatively related to labor market outcomes. MuellerSmith (2014) exploits randomized judge assignments in Harris County, Texas and finds that
longer sentences are associated with reductions in both employment and earnings.
Criminal behavior may also respond to economic conditions (Becker 1968). Local labor
market opportunities, including employment (Bushway, Cook, and Phillips 2010; Levitt 2004;
Lin 2008; Machin and Meghir 2004; Öster and Agell 2007; Raphael and Winter-Ebmer 2001;
Schnepel 2018) and wages (Agan and Makowsky 2018; Fone, Sabia and Cesur 2019; Gould et
al. 2002; Yang 2017) have been found to be negatively related to crime to crime.
Studies specifically examining the effect of labor market opportunities on recidivism
have reached a similar conclusion. Using data on 1.7 million offenders released from California
prisons from 1993 to 2008, Schnepel (2018) finds that construction and manufacturing job
availability is negatively related to recidivism rates. Similarly, Yang (2017) utilizes
administrative data on more than 4 million ex-offenders in 43 states between 2000 and 2013 and
finds that offenders released to counties with higher low-skilled wages are less likely to
recidivate. Finally, Wang et al. (2010) pool data on more than 40,000 male offenders released
from Florida prisons from 2000 to 2001 and find that African American ex-offenders are more
likely to engage in subsequent violent crime in response to higher African American
unemployment rates, while white ex-offenders are more likely to reoffend in property crime in

5

response to rising unemployment. The authors interpret this finding as evidence that African
American ex-offenders may face elevated prejudice-driven frustration that manifests itself in
“expressive criminal behavior” such as violent crime.

2.2 Prior Literature on BTB Laws
In response to difficulties ex-offenders face in securing gainful employment and the
increase in recidivism that could result, 33 U.S. states and the District of Columbia have adopted
“ban the box” laws, which seek to strategically withhold information on job applicants’ criminal
histories from prospective employers at first interview. 6 The first BTB law, adopted by Hawaii
in 1998, applied to both public and private firms hiring new employees. Under the Hawaii
statute, employers are not permitted to inquire into any job applicant’s criminal history until a
“conditional offer of employment” was made (National Employment Law Project 2017).
Moreover, if a criminal conviction occurred within the previous decade (or if incarceration
occurred at any point), the conditional employment offer can only be rescinded if it can be
shown that the conviction bears a “rational relationship” to the duties and responsibilities of the
position.
Following the adoption of the Hawaii statute, 32 additional states and the District of
Columbia — along with over 150 cities and counties — adopted a BTB law. Estimates suggest
that approximately 211 million Americans, roughly two-third the U.S. population, live in a
jurisdiction covered by a BTB law (National Employment Law Project 2017). 7

6

Other initiatives include reducing the breadth of crimes for which incarceration is a prescribed punishment,
increasing human capital acquisition among those who are incarcerated (see, for example, Hall et al. 2016),
improving employer contacts with inmates (Center for the Study of Social Policy 2012), reducing the number of
jobs for which licensure is required (Hall et al. 2016), and juvenile justice reform.

7

Eleven states, the District of Columbia, and 17 localities have adopted BTB laws that apply to both private and
public employers. Twenty-two (22) states have adopted BTB laws that apply only to public employers or to private

6

Several studies in the economics literature have examined the labor market effects of ban
the box laws. 8 There is both experimental and quasi-experimental evidence that BTB laws
reduce employment among male racial/ethnic minorities, a consequence of statistical
discrimination by employers. Agan and Starr (2018) carry out a large-scale experiment in which
they randomly assign a criminal record to otherwise identical fictitious online job applications
and send them to two sets of employers — those who previously included a box on their
applications for criminal histories and those who did not — before and after BTB laws were
enacted. Prior to the implementation of BTB laws, the authors find that whites who applied to
affected employers in New York City and New Jersey were 7 percent more likely to receive
callbacks for employment than African Americans. After the passage of BTB laws, the African
American-white callback gap increased over six fold to 43 percent. This suggests that BTB laws
induce employers without information on applicants’ criminal histories to statistically
discriminate against demographic groups with a higher perceived probabilities of having
criminal records. 9 Not
Doleac and Hansen (forthcoming) reach a similar conclusion using quasi-experimental
methods. Drawing CPS data from 2004 to 2014 and exploiting temporal variation in BTB
enactment across jurisdictions, the authors find that BTB laws decrease the employment of less-

employers with government contracts. However, as discussed below, public BTB laws may have important effects
in the private sector (see footnote 19). Still other BTB laws include broader “fair-chance” employment provisions
(including Hawaii) that require employers to consider the job-relatedness of a conviction, mitigating circumstances,
and evidence of rehabilitation (National Employment Law Project 2017).
8

See also Mungan (2017) for a theoretical discussion.

9

This finding is also consistent with prior work that found that increased availability of criminal records information
is positively related to employment opportunities for low-skilled African American males (Holzer et al. 2006;
Finlay, 2009; Stoll, 2009)

7

educated (no college degree) Hispanic men ages 25-to-64 by approximately 3 to 4 percent and
African American men ages 15-to-34 by 5 percent.
On the other hand, using data from the 2007 to 2014 American Community Survey
(ACS) and Origin-Destination Employment Statistics from the Longitudinal EmployerHousehold Dynamics series, Shoag and Vueger (2017) find that BTB laws are associated with a
4 percent increase in employment among African American men living in census tracts with high
crime rates. They interpret this finding as evidence that BTB laws are effective in increasing
employment opportunities for vulnerable individuals. Shoag and Vueger (2017) also find
evidence of upskilling by African American men, as well as negative employment spillovers to
African American women, who are much less likely to have criminal records than men.
Finally, three studies explore the effect of BTB laws on employment of those with
criminal records. Craigie (2017) uses individual-level self-reported data from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 to estimate the relationship between public sector BTB laws
and public sector employment among those with criminal convictions. Craigie (2017) finds that
public BTB laws are associated with an increase in public sector employment among convicts.
However, pre-treatment employment trends do not appear to be parallel between BTB and nonBTB jurisdictions (see Figures 2 and 3, pp. 28-29); thus it is not clear whether the estimated
policy impact should be causally interpreted. 10
Two other studies use administrative data to overcome concerns with measurement error
in self-reported crime data. Rose (2018) examines a Seattle BTB law and, using other cities in
Washington as a counterfactual, finds that employment among those with criminal records did
not change after the policy was enacted. Jackson and Zhao (2017) study a BTB reform in

10

In addition, public sector BTB laws may affect private sector employment (see Doleac and Hansen, Forthcoming
and footnote 19), as well as criminal behavior.

8

Massachusetts, and find that BTB reduced employment for those who were ex-offenders prior to
the reform relative to those who offended later.
Only one study of which we are aware has specifically examined the impact of BTB laws
on crime. D’Alessio et al. (2015) study the 1998 Hawaii BTB legislation and find that following
the passage of the law, the percent of all prosecuted defendants in Hawaii who were repeat
offenders fell by 57 percent. However, because this study relies on a before-after estimator, it is
unclear whether this estimate may be contaminated by time-varying factors.

3. Data
Our analyses use both administrative and survey data from two main sources — the
National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) and the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth 1997 (NLSY97) — to estimate the relationship between BTB laws and crime. Each of
these datasets, which we briefly discuss below, offers distinct advantages designed to
complement the others, and we draw conclusions from the weight of the evidence across the
separate analyses.
Our primary data source is the National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). We
draw agency-by-month data from the NIBRS between 2004 and 2014. Local, state, and federal
agencies generate and report information for the NIBRS to the FBI, based on administrative
records of criminal incidents reported to these agencies. To ensure data quality, our main
analysis sample consists of a balanced panel of agencies and months, though broader definitions
of sample selection (such as agencies that reported in at least half the years covering sample
period or agencies serving counties of at least 20,000 population) produced a similar pattern of

9

results. We generate counts of criminal incidents committed by male arrestees by age and
race/ethnicity. 11
An important advantage of the NIBRS data is that we are able to measure crimes
committed by demographic subgroups disaggregated by age, including working-age African
American and Hispanic men. The most notable drawback of the NIBRS is its limited coverage
across the United States. As of 2014, 37 states and the District of Columbia participated in the
NIBRS, representing a coverage of roughly 93 million U.S. residents (FBI National Press Office
2015). However, by 2012, just 15 states report all of their crime data through the NIBRS (FBI
2012). Additionally, while the NIBRS data do include detailed information on criminal incidents
(including characteristics of both the victim and arrestee), there are no data on education levels,
which prevents an examination of racial minorities of lower skill levels. Moreover, there are no
data on prior arrests, which do not allow us to disaggregate the impacts of BTB laws on
recidivism versus first-time crime commission. However, examining the effect of BTB laws on
net crime seems a more relevant policy parameter given that crime committed by first-time
offenders may be affected via statistical discrimination-induced employment reductions.
Table 1A shows means of agency-by-month criminal incidents involving male arrestees,
by age and race/ethnicity. While average incident counts are higher for non-Hispanic white
males relative to African American and Hispanic males, when these counts are adjusted for the
respective sizes of age- and race/ethnicity-specific subpopulations, crime rates are 1.3 to 3.4

11

We also experiment with collecting information on offenders involved in incidents for which they are not arrested.
The results are qualitatively similar.

10

times higher for Hispanic and African Americans relative to non-Hispanic whites. 12 Across
race/ethnicity crime rates are also higher for younger as compared to older individuals.
We supplement our administrative crime data with self-reported individual-level
longitudinal data drawn from the NLSY97. The NLSY97, sponsored by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS), consists of a national sample of youths who were 12-to-16 years of age as of
December 31, 1996. We focus on young working-age adults over the period between 2004 and
2014, drawn from Rounds 7-16 of the NLSY97.
These data offer a number of distinct advantages. First, the data are nationally
representative and allow us to measure not only criminal arrests, but also self-reported criminal
behavior undetected by law enforcement. Second, the use of longitudinal data permits us to
control for individual-level heterogeneity via estimation of individual fixed effects models.
Third, the data contain information on the respondent’s educational attainment, which allows us
to assess whether any potential effects are concentrated among the least educated minorities,
whose employment prospects may be most adversely impacted through statistical discrimination.
The NLSY97 also has some important disadvantages, including a limited sample of about
9,000 youth. Hence, there are relatively few Hispanic and African American men by county and
survey wave, which is likely to lead to less precise estimates of policy impacts and also reduces
statistical power among finer cuts of the sample. Furthermore, while survey data may pick up
criminal behaviors not captured administratively, measurement error from self-reported criminal
histories (i) may contribute to imprecision in estimates, and (ii) capture changes social stigma for
criminal behavior, which could be affected by BTB laws (Doleac 2017). In addition, there is

12

Given that NIBRS estimates are not representative of the US population (or any specific state), we present
unweighted estimates. Weighting the regressions by county-specific population or agency-specific population
served produces a similar pattern of results.

11

evidence that measurement error in crime in the NLSY is related to race/ethnicity (Kirk and
Wakefield 2018).
Additionally, owing to the longitudinal cohort design, the age range in the NLSY97 does
not perfectly coincide with the NIBRS analyses. During the analysis period from 2004 to 2014,
NLSY respondents are between the ages of 19 and 34. Nevertheless, this age range is salient for
analyzing the effects of BTB laws given that criminal activity typically peaks during the late
teens to early 20s (Loeber and Farrington 2014) and young adults are also forming or have
formed strong labor force attachment. One limitation of this cohort design is that restricting the
age range by definition also restricts the analysis period; hence, differential effects across the age
distribution may also reflect heterogeneity over time and/or differences due to the identifying
policy variation.
Each of our NLSY-based crime outcomes is dichotomous in nature: (i) Arrest, set equal
to 1 if the respondent reported being arrested since their prior interview, and set equal to 0
otherwise 13, (ii) Minor Theft, set equal to 1 if the respondent stole something worth less than $50
and 0 otherwise, (iii) Major Theft, set equal to 1 if the respondent stole something worth $50 or
more and 0 otherwise, (iv) Other Property Crime, set equal to 1 if the respondent had fenced,
possessed, received or sold stolen property, and 0 otherwise, (v) Destroy Property, set equal to 1
if the respondent “purposely damaged or destroyed property not belonging to [him/her]” and 0
otherwise, and (vi) Assault, set equal to 1 if the respondent had attacked or assaulted someone.

13

Respondents also provide data on the year and month of the arrest, though these are not always available for all
respondents. The BLS makes available event history files for each respondent containing information on the
number of arrests by year/month. Following Round 7, arrest dates are imputed based on the midpoint of the
reference period since the date of the last interview (see www.nlsinfo.org). In alternate analyses, we utilized data
from the arrest event history files to match the BTB policy data based on month/year of arrest. Our estimates remain
robust. Since the remainder of the criminal activity measures are available only based on date of last interview, we
present analyses for arrests using the same reference period for consistency and ease of comparison across models.

12

We also construct a composite measure of Any Property Crime, capturing criminal activities (ii)
through (iv). 14
In Table 1B, we present weighted means for the variables from the NLSY97 for our
analysis sample. Consistent with the patterns found in the NIBRS, we find that arrest rates are
consistently highest among African American males, followed by Hispanic males and then nonHispanic white males. Furthermore, crime declines with age, with both arrests and participation
in various criminal activities significantly higher among adults ages 19-to-26 compared with
older adults ages 27-to-34. This is consistent with the age distribution of crime, such that
criminal activity typically peaks between late adolescence into early adulthood and then declines
(Loeber and Farrington 2014; Farrington 1986). Arrests and criminal engagement are also
substantially lower for females. 15,16
Finally, to explore mechanisms through which BTB laws may affect crime, we draw data
on less-skilled working age males with a high school diploma or less using repeated crosssections of the American Community Survey (ACS) between 2005 and 2015 (corresponding to
calendar years 2004 to 2014). 17 The ACS data, administered by the U.S. Census Bureau, are
designed to provide estimates for smaller geographic units than states, including counties and

14

Beginning in Round 8, questions regarding criminal behaviors (property crime, assault, etc.) were no longer asked
of all respondents, but rather only those who had ever reported being arrested and a control group of approximately
10% of respondents (see: www.nlsyinfo.org). Wave fixed effects, included in all models, capture this change in the
sampling frame, though our estimates remain robust to restricting the analyses to Round 8 onwards.
15

The mean prevalence of being arrested among females in the NLSY97 ranged from 1.9 percent (Hispanics ages
19-34) to 2.1 percent (both non-Hispanic Whites and African Americans). In comparison (see Table 1B), arrest
rates among males ages 19-34 were three to five times higher, ranging from 6.1 percent (non-Hispanic Whites) to
6.4 percent (Hispanics) to 10.1 percent (non-Hispanic African Americans).
16

Note that arrest rates derived from the NLSY97 are an order of magnitude lower than those derived from the
FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports. This may reflect underreporting and measurement error as well as the NLSY sample
being representative of the non-institutionalized population, excluding those who are under detention or
incarcerated.
17

We use the ACS data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (http://usa.ipums.org/usa/).

13

census tracts. These data include information on several channels of interest, including
employment and means-tested public program participation. Specifically, we measure whether
the respondent was employed year round in the prior year (Year-Round Employ), weeks of
employment in the prior year (Weeks), and, conditional on employment, the natural log of annual
hours worked (Annual Hours). We also measure whether the respondent participated in meanstested public assistance programs (Supplemental Security Income, General Assistance,
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or Temporary Assistance for Needy Families/Aid to
Families with Dependent Children), with particular attention to the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) program. 18 Finally, we explore selective outmigration of Hispanic
immigrants in response to BTB laws, using county-by-year data on the number of male Hispanic
immigrants (from Mexico or Central America) with a high school diploma or less per 1,000
working-age population. The means of each of these potential channels are shown in Table 1C.

IV. Methods

18
Year-Round Employment is a dichotomous variable set equal to 1 if the respondent worked for at least 50 weeks in
the previous year and 0 otherwise. Weeks measures the total number of weeks the respondent worked in the previous
year. Starting in 2008, the ACS reports weeks worked in intervals of 0 week, 1-13 weeks, 14-26 weeks, 27-39
weeks, 40-47 weeks, 48-49 weeks, and 50-52 weeks. For consistency, we assign the interval means for all the
respondents. Ln(Annual Hours) is the natural log of the product of weeks worked in the previous year and usual
weekly hours of work. Public Program is a dichotomous indicator set equal to 1 if (i) the respondent received
income from Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), or General
Assistance (GA) or (ii) any member of the respondent’s household received benefits from Food Stamp or
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) in the past year, and 0 otherwise. (Medicaid receipt is only
available in the ACS data beginning in 2008. In alternate analyses over the period from 2008 through 2014, we find
a pattern of results similar to that reported here.) In our sample, the average program participation rates are 26.7,
18.6 and 11.7 percent for working age African American men, Hispanic men and white men, respectively (Table
1C). We also focus on SNAP, set equal to 1 if the respondent or any member of his household received SNAP in the
previous year, and 0 otherwise.

14

We begin by using agency-level month-specific crime data from the NIBRS from 2004 to
2014, focus on criminal incidents involving Hispanic or African American male arrestees, and
estimate a Poisson model of the following form 19:

Cjcst =Ejcst [exp(β0 + β1BTBcst + Xcst β2 + Zst β3 + αj + τt + εjcst)]

(1)

where Cjcst is the crime count among males in agency j located in county c in state s at month-byyear t (in months from 1 to 132). Exposure for each unit is represented by Ejcst, which can be
proxied by the estimated population served by the reporting agency. BTBcst is an indicator set
equal to 1 if there is a BTB law in effect in county c at time t due to a state law, a county law, or
a city BTB law. 20 The vector Xcst includes county-level controls, including the share of
population that was African American and Hispanic, the average age of the population, and the
natural log of personal per capita income; the vector Zst is a vector of state-level observables,

19

The Poisson model accommodates fixed effects well and does not suffer from the incidental parameters, in
contrast to the negative binomial model. If, in equation (1), exp(εjcst) follows a gamma distribution with mean of 1
and variance σ, then (1) represents a negative binomial model; if σ is assumed to equal 0, then the negative binomial
becomes a Poisson regression model (Grootendorst 2002). We have experimented with a negative binomial
regression, with a similar pattern of results.
20

If the law were enacted mid-month, BTBcst is set equal to 0 for that month and 1 thereafter. The results using the
value of the share of month t that the law was in effect in county c are highly similar. Our primary measure of a
BTB law is whether any law was enacted, whether applying to the public or private sectors. As Doleac and Hansen
(forthcoming, pp. 11-12) note:
“Public BTB laws can aﬀect both public and private sector employment. These policies were typically
implemented due to public campaigns aimed at convincing employers to give ex-oﬀenders a second
chance. Public BTB policies were intended in part to model the best practice in hiring, and there is
anecdotal evidence that this model – in combination with public pressure – pushed private ﬁrms to adopt
BTB even before they were legally required to. Several national private ﬁrms such as Wal-Mart, Target,
and Koch Industries, voluntarily "banned the box" on their employment applications during this period, in
response to the BTB social movement….Public BTB laws might also aﬀect private sector employment
because workers are mobile between the two sectors, and likely sort themselves based on where they feel
most welcome.”
Twenty (20) of 111 BTB laws enacted between 2004 and 2014 bind for both public and private employers while the
vast majority only bind for public employers. Results that separate out effects of each type of law are discussed
below.

15

including the percent of the population ages 25 and over with a Bachelor degree, the natural log
of per-capita police expenditures, the natural log of per capita police employees, right-to-carry
laws, the minimum wage, the state EITC refundable credit rate, an indicator for Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) all vehicle exemption, and a set of immigration policies
(E-Verify mandates, 287(g) agreements, Secure Communities). 21 Finally, αj is a vector of
agency fixed effects and τt is a set of month-by-year fixed effects. The marginal effect, [exp(β1)1] x 100 can be interpreted as the percent change in E(Cjcst) associated with a one-unit change in
the ban-the-box law.
Next, we turn to self-reported longitudinal data from the NLSY97, and in our most
saturated specification, estimate an individual fixed effects model of the following form:

Cicst = β0 + β1BTBcst + Xicst β2 + Pst β3 + αc + νi + τt + εist

(2)

where Cicst measures the criminal activity of individual i residing in county c in state s in year t,
BTBcst is an indicator for whether there is a BTB law in effect in the respondent’s county, and
Xicst is a set of individual observables comparable to those described above. While we estimate
these models with fixed effects at the level of the policy variation (county of residence; αc) for
comparison with the NIBRS analysis, in extended specifications, we also fully exploit the
longitudinal nature of the data and alternately include person fixed effects, νi. This captures all

21

Means of the independent variables are presented in Appendix Table 1. County-level demographic controls are
generated using population data from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results
(SEER) Program. The county-level personal per capita income data are collected from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. The share of the state population ages 25 and over with a Bachelor degree is generated using data from the
Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Groups; the state per-capita police expenditures and per capita police
employees are collected from the Bureau of Justice Statistics; the concealed carry permit laws are collected from
www.usacarry.com and the state minimum wages are collected from the Department of Labor. The personal per
capita income, per-capita police expenditures and minimum wages are in current dollars.

16

observed and unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity across individuals, including joint fixed
determinants of criminal and labor market activities. 22 As discussed above, the use of individual
data will allow us to explore heterogeneity in crime effects of BTB laws by race and other
factors.
Identification of β1 in equations (1) through (3) comes from state, city, and countyspecific changes in BTB laws. Over the period from 2004 to 2014, 12 states, 78 cities, and 21
counties enacted BTB laws. Figure 1 shows the counties in which a BTB law was enacted
(either at the state, city, or county-level) from 2004 to 2014. Effective dates for these laws as
well as the sources of identifying variation across each of our datasets is available in Appendix
Table 2. In our NIBRS analysis sample, 69 counties contribute identifying variation; in the ACS,
157 counties contribute to identifying variation; and in the NLSY97, 74 counties do so.
The credibility of our identification strategy rests on the parallel trends assumption. We
take a number of tacks to test the credibility of this assumption. First, we conduct an event study
analysis where we examine if crime was trending differently in treatment versus comparison
jurisdictions prior to the enactment of BTB laws:

𝑗𝑗

Cjcst =Ejcst [exp(γ0 + ∑3𝑗𝑗=−4,𝑗𝑗≠−1 γ BTBcst + Xcst γ4 + Zst γ5 + αj + τt + εjcst)]
𝑗𝑗

(3)

𝑗𝑗

where BTBcst is a set of mutually exclusive indicators set equal to 1 if county c implemented a
−4
is an indicator for four or more years prior to BTB
BTB law j years from year t. BTBcst

3
enactment, and BTBcst
analogously accounts for three or more years following enactment.

22

The person fixed effects can also account for any (stable) reporting errors or biases across individuals.

17

Second, we test the sensitivity of estimates of β1 to the inclusion of controls for countyspecific quadratic time trends to disentangle the effects of BTB laws from unobservables
trending at the county level:

Cjcst =Ejcst [exp(β0 + β1BTBcst + Xcstβ2 + Zstβ3 + αj + τt + ηc*t + ηc*t2 + εjcst)]

(4)

Finally, we estimate placebo-type tests by focusing on populations whose criminal
behavior should be less, or at least differently, affected by BTB laws: non-Hispanic white males
and females. While these demographic groups might be affected by BTB laws through laborlabor substitution by employers, and could be impacted through moral hazard-related channels,
the effects of BTB laws on crime for these groups are second-order, and hence should be smaller
or of the opposite sign.

IV. Results
Tables 2 through 8 show our main results. We focus on estimates of β1 in these tables.
Parameter estimates on the control variables are available upon request. In all regressions,
standard errors are clustered at the state-level (Bertrand et al. 2004; Doleac and Hansen,
forthcoming).

4.1 Main Results
Table 2 shows findings from our fixed effects Poisson regression. Panel I shows
estimates of β1 including only agency fixed effects, month-by-year fixed effects and county
demographic characteristics as controls; Panel II adds county- and state-specific economic and

18

crime policy variables to the right hand side of the regression; and Panel III adds county- and
state-specific social welfare and immigration policy controls. Across each of the panels, we find
that the magnitudes of estimates of β1 are similar, supportive of the validity of the research
design and providing suggestive evidence that BTB laws are enacted exogenously to male
criminal arrests.
Focusing on our preferred specification in Panel III, we find that BTB laws are associated
with an 8.1 percent [e(0.078) – 1] increase in the total number of criminal incidents (property plus
violent crimes) involving Hispanic male arrestees (column 1, row 1). This effect is driven by
property crimes (row 2), where we find a 12.0 percent increase in such incidents. An
examination of the age distribution of Hispanic male arrestees reflects that the property crime
increases are largest for working age individuals over the age of 25, those who have been found
to suffer employment loss in response to BTB laws (Doleac and Hansen, forthcoming). We find
that the enactment of a BTB law is associated with a 15.0 percent increase in property crimes for
those ages 25-to-34 (Panel III, column 3) and a 15.8 percent increase in property crimes for those
ages 35-to-64 (Panel III, column 4). These results are consistent with the hypothesis that BTB
laws induce statistical discrimination by potential employers that reduce employment among
low-skilled racial and ethnic minorities (Agan and Starr 2018; Doleac and Hansen, forthcoming).
These findings could also conceivably reflect moral hazard by reducing the expected
future costs of current criminal engagement. For instance, Bamberger and Donohue (1999) find
that workplace discipline practices involving “last chance agreements,” which govern discharged
employees’ reinstatement and reduce their costs of wrongdoing, can, via moral hazard, lead to
more wrongdoing and discharges. Moreover, empirical evidence in other contexts, including
workers’ compensation (Fortin and Lanoie 2000), health insurance (Dave and Kaestner 2009;

19

Dave et al. 2019) and automobile insurance (Cohen and Dehejia 2004), is generally supportive of
moral hazard effects.
In contrast to our finding that BTB laws are associated with an increase in property crime
for Hispanic men, we find little evidence that BTB laws affect violent criminal incidents, where
effects are uniformly smaller. This result suggests that economically motivated crimes are most
affected by BTB laws, consistent with an employment related channel.
The absence of property (and violent) crime effects for non-Hispanic white males
(columns 9 through 12), a population that does not suffer adverse employment effects from BTB
laws (Doleac and Hansen, forthcoming), suggests that the crime effects we observe for Hispanic
males are not simply capturing jurisdiction-specific time-varying unobservables.
Interestingly, however, when we examine African American men (columns 5 through 8),
we find no evidence that BTB laws affect property or violent crime. This finding persists even
among those ages 25-to-34, a population for whom Doleac and Hansen (forthcoming) found
evidence of statistical discrimination-induced employment declines. This raises an important
question: Why might there be differential criminal responses to BTB laws for Hispanic as
compared to African American men?
One explanation may be that less educated Hispanics denied job opportunities due to
BTB laws are more likely to be on the margin of crime commission than are similarly situated
African American men. This could be due to differences in familial or personal circumstances
that affect the need for economic resources. For example, according to the 2015 American
Community Survey, the average household size for less educated (high school diploma or less)
Hispanic men ages 25 and older is 4.0 compared to 2.5 for similarly aged and educated African
American men. Moreover, there are twice as many children under age 18 residing in households

20

with less-skilled Hispanic men as compared to less-skilled African American men (1.1 versus
0.5). On the other hand, the poverty rate among less-educated Hispanic men is substantially
lower than for less-educated African American men (18 versus 25 percent).
In addition, barriers to participation in means-tested public assistance programs may
deepen the negative economic effects of BTB laws. For instance, there is evidence that language
barriers may be an important deterrent to take-up of means-tested public assistance programs
among Hispanics (Dillender 2017). Federal law requires that individuals must be US citizens or
lawful permanent residents to qualify for public assistance programs such as the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), and Medicaid (Siskin 2016). 23 In addition, eligible
immigrant families may be deterred from benefits due to fears of disqualification for citizenship
or deportation (Kaushal et al. 2014, Perreira et al. 2012). For instance, Kaushal et al. (2014)
document higher prevalence of food insecurity and lower rates of SNAP participation among
eligible mixed-status Mexican families with both citizen and non-citizen members than eligible
Mexican families with all noncitizen members, a result consistent with the hypothesis of
immigration fears. 24
In Table 3, we use the ACS to examine the impact of BTB laws on employment and
means-tested public assistance receipt. In the first three panels, we confirm the CPS-based
findings of Doleac and Hansen (forthcoming) using the ACS. We find that BTB laws are
associated with a 2 to 6 percent reduction in the probability of prior year full-year employment,

23

An exception to this immigration status rule is emergency medical service for unauthorized aliens.

24

In addition, Kaushal et al. (2014) find that the 2004 U.S. Department of Agriculture outreach to inform Mexican
immigrants of their SNAP eligibility and benefit expansion under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
improve SNAP enrollment among mixed-status Mexican families.

21

annual weeks of work, and annual work hours among less educated Hispanic men ages 25 and
older and less educated African Americans ages 25-to-34.
Reintegration after leaving prison is difficult for many reasons, notably low income
levels, greater material hardship, and lower levels of physical and mental health immediately
following incarceration. Studies have highlighted the important role played by SNAP benefits
(and other safety net programs) in reducing material hardship and supporting reentry among
formerly incarcerated individuals. 25 Our estimates in Table 3 indicate that while less educated
African American males are more likely to participate in means-tested public assistance
programs, primarily the SNAP program, following the enactment of BTB laws, less educated
Hispanic men are not. These findings could suggest that barriers to program participation,
including language differences and immigration fears, deepen the negative economic
consequences of BTB laws, leading to more property crime among Hispanic relative to African
American men.
Another possible explanation for BTB-induced increases in crime among Hispanic males
is that BTB laws cause compositional changes in the Hispanic male population that result in a net
increase in crime. Prior research finds that likely undocumented Hispanic immigrants’ mobility
decisions are more elastic with respect to local labor market conditions than are mobility
decisions of low-skilled natives (Cadena and Kovak 2016), and that likely undocumented
immigrants are less likely to commit crime than natives (Ewing et al. 2015). Thus, if BTB laws
induce outmigration of likely undocumented Hispanic male immigrants, this could explain an
increase in Hispanic crime in BTB jurisdictions.

25

See, for instance, McKernan et al. (2018) and Western (2018). Also see:
https://www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/3-6-18fa.pdf and https://thehill.com/opinion/criminaljustice/395405-strong-safety-net-is-crucial-to-americans-in-life-after-prison.

22

In the final row of Table 3, we examine the impact of BTB laws on the share of the
working age population that are less-educated Hispanic males (columns 1 through 4), lesseducated male Hispanic immigrants (columns 5 through 8), and less-educated male Hispanic
immigrants from Mexico and Central America (columns 9 through 12). First, consistent with
Doleac and Hansen’s (2017) findings on African American men, we find no evidence that BTB
laws affect the share of the county population that are Hispanic males. However, when we turn
to male Hispanic immigrants (columns 5 through 12), we find some suggestive evidence that
BTB laws are associated with a reduction in the share of the population that are Hispanic
immigrants. While imprecisely estimated (and not statistically distinguishable from zero at
conventional levels), we find that BTB laws are associated with a 4 to 10 percent reduction in the
share of the working age population comprised of low-skilled Hispanic immigrant men ages 34
and younger. This result is driven by less-skilled Mexican and Central American immigrants, a
population who are more likely to be unauthorized immigrants who enter the U.S. for
employment opportunities (Orrenius and Zavodny 2016). Thus, selective migration of lessskilled Hispanic immigrants, a population with a lower propensity to engage in criminal activity
than natives (Chaflin 2015; Butcher and Piehl 2008) in response to BTB laws may be another
channel at work.

4.2 Event Study Analyses
Next, we explore whether the crime effects of BTB laws are masking heterogeneous
short- and longer-run effects. In Table 4, we present coefficients on the year of BTB enactment,
each of the two years following the law’s enactment, and three or more years following the law’s
enactment. For Hispanic men ages 25 and older, we find that property crimes increase starting

23

one year after the adoption of a BTB law, with larger magnitudes in the shorter-run (one and two
years after the law change). Note, however, that because different jurisdictions identify long-run
and short-run coefficients, these differences could also be explained by heterogeneous treatment
effects. For African American and non-Hispanic white males, there is little evidence that BTB
laws are associated with increases in property or violent crimes in both the short- and long-run.
In Figure 2, we present event study analysis of the effect of BTB laws on property crime
for Hispanic men and non-Hispanic white men, with one year prior to the enactment of the BTB
law as the reference period. We focus on criminal incidents involving male arrestees ages 25
and older, the age group for whom we find evidence of BTB-induced increases in property
crime. 26 Our findings in Figure 2 show no evidence that property or violent crimes among
Hispanic and non-Hispanic white males were trending differently in treatment and comparison
jurisdictions prior to the enactment of BTB laws. Consistent with the findings in Table 4, the
event study in Panel A shows that BTB laws are associated with increases in property crimes for
Hispanic males following the law’s enactment, a pattern of findings consistent with a causal
impact of BTB laws. For Non-Hispanic white men (Figure 2, Panel B), our results suggest no
evidence of an increase in property crime following the implementation of BTB laws.
In Panel C of Figure 2, we present an event study analysis from a difference-indifference-in-differences-type model that examines the effect of BTB laws on property crimes
committed by Hispanic males relative to non-Hispanic white males. This approach will control
for unmeasured jurisdiction-level heterogeneity common across race/ethnicity groups. The event
study in Panel C continues to show increases in property crime following the enactment of BTB
laws for Hispanic males ages 25 and older relative to similarly aged non-Hispanic white men.

26

Separate event studies for 25-to-34 and 35-to-64 year-olds show a similar pattern of results and are available upon
request.

24

In Figure 3, we show comparable event studies for violent crime. We continue to find
little evidence that violent crimes were trending differently in treatment and comparison
jurisdictions prior to the adoption of BTB laws. We find no evidence that violent criminal
incidents involving Hispanic or non-Hispanic white males changed following the enactment of
BTB laws. Finally, in Figure 4, we present event studies for African American men. Consistent
with our results in Table 4, we find little evidence of significant changes in property crime or
violent crime involving African American male arrestees following the enactment of BTB laws,
though the effects are imprecisely estimated, especially in the longer-run.

4.3 Sensitivity Tests
In Table 5, we conduct a number of robustness checks of the above findings. In Panel I,
we use a larger sample of agencies that report crime data for more than five years during the
sample period between 2004 to 2014. Consistent with our findings in Table 2, our estimates
suggest BTB laws are associated with a 12 to 14 percent increase in crime among Hispanic men
ages 25 and older, driven by property crimes.
In Panel II of Table 5, we restrict the sample to those agencies reporting at least one
crime per period, effectively focusing on locales with relatively higher shares of each
demographic group. Using ordinary least squares (OLS) models with the dependent variable
redefined as the natural log of the crime rate per 1,000 population, we find a qualitatively similar
pattern of results to those presented above. In Panel III of Table 5, we explore the sensitivity of
our estimates to aggregating our balanced panel to the agency-by-year level. Unsurprisingly, the
results are very similar to those using monthly agency-level crime data in Table 2.

25

In the final panel of Table 5 (Panel IV) we explore the robustness of our findings to the
inclusion of controls for county-specific time trends in our two-way fixed effects specification.
The results continue to point to evidence that BTB laws are associated with an increase in
property crime among Hispanic men ages 25 and older. Event study analyses based on this more
saturated specification, shown in Figure 5, are consistent with a causal interpretation of results.
Next, we explore whether the property crime effects of BTB laws extend to females, a
population for whom there is less evidence of statistical discrimination (Doleac and Hansen,
forthcoming), but for whom moral hazard or labor-labor substitution is still possible. In Figure
6, we present event study analyses for females. The results from these event studies show no
evidence that BTB laws are associated with changes in property crime for Hispanic, African
American, or non-Hispanic white females. 27
Together, the NIBRS-based results show that BTB laws have the unintended
consequences of increasing property crimes committed by Hispanic males ages 25 and older.
Table 6 examines the specific crimes driving this result. We find BTB laws are associated with a
15 to 18 percent increase in larcenies among working age individuals ages 25 and older, and a 22
percent increase in burglaries for those ages 25 to 34. Only for Hispanic men under age 25 is
there evidence of BTB-induced increases in motor vehicle theft. For African American and non-

27

Event study analyses for violent crime, available upon request, show little evidence that BTB laws significantly
affected female violent crime.

26

Hispanic white males, we find little evidence of changes in specific crimes in response to BTB
laws. 28, 29

4.3 NLSY97 Results
In our final section, we explore the effects of BTB laws on crime using individual-level
data from the NLSY97. In Table 7, we examine the impact of BTB laws on self-reported arrests,
with odd-numbered columns showing results from individual fixed effects models and evennumbered columns showing results from models that include both individual and county fixed
effects. 30 We find that BTB laws are associated with an increase in the probability of being
arrested, on the order of about one to two percentage points, though these estimates are very
imprecise for the broader age group of 19-to-34. In the main, our findings are largely consistent
with our NIBRS-based findings and suggest that BTB laws have unintended consequences that
increase criminal activity among working age Hispanic males.
In Panel II, we restrict our attention to those aged 19-to-26, an age group for which the
prevalence of criminal behaviors is relatively high. For the NLSY97 cohort, the prevalence of

28
In results available upon request, we also examine whether the crime effects of BTB laws differ by the breadth of
their statutory coverage. During our sample period, the vast majority of enacted BTB laws applied only to public
employers. However, these laws may also affect private firms by causing them to voluntarily “ban the box” or
through worker mobility between public and private sectors (Doleac and Hansen, forthcoming). Consistent with
their results, we find that the property crime effect for Hispanic men is driven by BTB laws applying to public
employers.
29
Because of the limited coverage of the NIBRS across the United States, we also explored data from the Uniform
Crime Reports (UCR) over the period from 2004 to 2014. In contrast to the NIBRS, county-level UCR data cover
roughly 98 percent of the US population in all 50 states and the District of Columbia (FBI 2015) and, when
weighted, are representative of the U.S. population. While the UCR would permit greater policy variation for
identification, the chief disadvantage of the UCR is that these data do not allow for disaggregation of adult crimes
by age, gender and race/ethnicity. Because the impacts of BTB laws differ across these dimensions (Doleac and
Hansen, forthcoming) and do not measure ethnicity (e.g. Hispanic identification) of arrestees, we relegate this
analysis to Appendix Table 3.
30

The latter controls account for both spatial and individual (time-invariant) heterogeneity, including any fixed
factors that affect locational choices and sorting.

27

arrest for 19-to-26 year olds is significantly higher relative to older males 27-to-34 years of age
(7.3% vs. 4.5% for Hispanics; 11.3% vs. 7.7% for African Americans; and 6.9% vs. 4.3% for
whites). While models in Panel II of Table 7 show a consistent and significant increase in the
probability of an arrest for Hispanic males under age 27, there is little effect for those ages 27
and older (Panel III). Estimates are fairly robust across both specifications. Again, we do not
find any significant effects for younger African American men. Importantly, estimates for
younger white males are close to zero and do not suggest any meaningful shifts in arrests
associated with the BTB laws, suggesting that statistical discrimination in employment may be
an important mechanism for Hispanic males.
To further probe whether BTB laws are affecting certain types of crime, in Table 8, we
estimate the effects of these laws on active criminal participation based on reported engagement
in various criminal behaviors. We specifically consider effects on economically motivated
criminal engagement, a broad measure of “property crime”, and then consider specific
components (minor theft, major theft, other property crime, destroy property) underlying this
measure available in the NLSY97. We qualify our discussion by noting that these estimates are
highly imprecise due to the drop in sample size by more than half compared with the analyses for
arrests. 31 Among Hispanic males, there is a suggestive increase in property crime on the order of
about 0.6 (ages 19-to-34) to 1.8 (ages 19-to-26) percentage points, an approximately 18 percent
increase relative to the sample mean.
This overall increase masks some heterogeneity across specific types of property crime.
Most notably, we find that BTB laws may have reduced minor theft, especially among younger
Hispanic males (by about 1.1 percentage-points), but increased major theft (defined in the

31

As noted above, this is due to the change beginning in Round 8 in the universe of respondents who report on their
criminal behaviors.

28

NLSY97 as stealing anything valued at $50 or greater) and other property crime (receiving and
selling stolen merchandise, for instance), thus shifting criminal behaviors to more intense
property crime. Effects on destroying property are close to zero in magnitude. Hence, the net
increase in property crime for Hispanic males is reflective of a strong increase in major theft and
in other forms of property crime, which more than compensate for any decline in minor theft.
We do not find any consistent or significant patterns for African American males. 32
Given that BTB laws affect the labor market prospects of individuals with a propensity to
commit crime, we would expect first-order effects, if any, on crimes with an economic
motivation. However, for reasons noted earlier, there may also be spillover or second-order
effects on violent crime. When we turn to assaults, we find no evidence that BTB is associated
with an increase in the probability of attacking or assaulting someone for younger Hispanic
males.
There is less evidence of statistical discrimination among female minorities in the
literature (Doleac and Hansen, forthcoming), consistent with gender-based crime patterns.
Females are far less likely to commit crimes, and racial/ethnic differences in criminal behavior is
substantially lower among females. It is validating that estimates reported in Appendix Table 5
generally confirm this prediction across all measures of criminal behavior from the NLSY97.
Finally, owing to the cohort design of the NLSY97, most of the sample is low-educated
and many have not completed their education. For instance, among Hispanic males ages 19-to34, only eight (8) percent of the analysis sample have attained at least some college education,
and over 22 percent have less than a high school education. In unreported results available upon

32

In Appendix Table 4, we present results with controls for county fixed effects at the level of the policy variation
(county of residence). These models conserve degrees of freedom, and are very similar in terms of both patterns and
magnitudes, and in some cases a bit more precise over the main models that control for both person and county fixed
effects.

29

request, we assessed whether effects of the BTB laws are higher among the least-educated males
by including an interaction between the law and an indicator for less than a high school
education. 33 One might expect larger crime effects for less educated individuals for whom
Doleac and Hansen (forthcoming) found BTB law-induced adverse employment effects were
concentrated.
For arrests, the broader measure of property crime, as well as minor and major theft, we
find significantly larger and positive effects for low-educated Hispanic males. In fact, for
property crime, it appears that all of the effect is driven by less-than-high school educated males,
consistent with the hypothesis that statistical discrimination may be an important mechanism at
work. 34,35

V. Conclusions
Advocates for BTB laws argue that such laws may serve to increase labor market
opportunities for ex-offenders and reduce incentives for criminal activity. However, recent

33

We use a very strict definition of low-educated, having attained less than a high school degree, since the sample is
ages 19 and above. Hence, virtually all individuals in this age range should have completed high school.
34

We test for differential effects across educational attainment through an interaction term and by alternately
stratifying the sample based on high school completion. These specifications suggest that BTB laws are associated
with a statistically significant 4 percentage points increase in arrests among Hispanic males (ages 19-34) with less
than a high school education; for higher educated Hispanic males, the effect is insignificant and essentially nil
(coefficient of -0.007). Among younger Hispanics (ages 18-26), less-than-high school educated males are about 2 to
9 percentage points more likely to be arrested relative to higher educated males, as a result of the BTB laws. The
effects of BTB laws on property crime, minor theft, and major theft produce a qualitatively similar pattern of results.
35

We also conducted analyses on employment outcomes from the NLSY97. For younger African American males,
we find that the BTB laws are associated with about a 6 pct. points decline in private sector employment (p-value =
0.19) but no decline in any employment, suggestive of a shift in the composition of jobs. Some estimates are also
suggestive of an increase in the number of jobs worked, possibly reflecting (in conjunction with the decline in
private sector employment) a shift from the formal to the informal sector. For younger Hispanic males, there are no
significant or strong effects on employment at the extensive margin, though estimates are suggestive of about a 67% decrease in the number of weeks worked [p=value = 0.24] among those employed. For whites we do not find
any strong effects on employment at the extensive margin but a significant 11% increase in weeks worked at the
intensive margin.

30

studies suggest that these laws may have important unintended consequences, chiefly, statistical
discrimination in employment against male racial minorities. This study is the first to examine
the effect of BTB laws on crime.
Using data drawn from the National Incident-Based Reporting System, we find that BTB
laws are associated with a 10 percent increase in criminal incidents involving working-age
Hispanic men, driven by property crimes. This result is consistent with economically motivated
crimes due to statistical discrimination-driven diminished employment opportunities and,
perhaps, moral hazard. However, we find no evidence of BTB-induced increases in property
crime involving working age African American men, a population that also faces diminished job
opportunities due to statistical discrimination. Supplemental analysis using the American
Community Survey (ACS) suggests two possible explanations for this race/ethnicity-specific
difference in crime response: barriers to public assistance receipt among Hispanic men and,
perhaps, outmigration of less criminally prone Hispanic immigrants.
The magnitudes of our effects suggest that BTB laws are associated with an important
unintended consequence that may generate important social costs. Using per-offense social cost
of property crime from McCollister et al. (2010), we obtain back-of-the-envelope additional
costs of $401 million (2018 dollars) for property crime involving Hispanic men ages 25 and
older. 36 The findings from this study add to some emerging evidence that BTB laws, while well-

36

Data on property crimes committed over the 2004-2014 period are obtained using the FBI’s Crime in the United
States reports (available from: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2016/crime-in-the-u.s.-2016/topicpages/tables/table-1). We then use the 2004-2014 UCR’s Arrests by Age, Sex, and Race files to calculate the share
of property crime arrests involving men ages 25-to-64. To generate an estimate of the number of crimes committed
by men ages 25-to-64, we multiply the crime counts in the 2004-2014 period from the FBI’s Crime in the United
States report with the share of property crime arrests involving men ages 25-to-64 from the UCR’s Arrests by Age,
Sex, and Race files. Next, we estimate the number of crimes committed by Hispanic men ages 25-to-64 by
multiplying the estimated crimes committed by men ages 25-to-64 with the percent of arrests involving Hispanic
male adults (available at https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2014/crime-in-the-u.s.-2014/tables/table-43). Using our
findings from Table 2 (Panel III, columns 3 and 4) where we find BTB is associated with a 15.0 to 15.8 percent
increase in property crimes among Hispanic males ages 25-to-64, we estimate 69,790 additional property crimes

31

intentioned, may harm certain individuals that they are intended to benefit by further
perpetuating the cycle of criminality.

following the enactment of BTB laws. Finally, we use the per crime cost of a property offense of $5,739 (in 2018
dollars) from McCollister et al. (2010) to obtain the total BTB-induced property crime cost of $401 million.

32

References
Agan, Amanda, and Sonja Starr. 2018. "Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Statistical
Discrimination: A Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(1): 191-235.
Agan, Amanda Y, and Michael D. Makowsky. 2018. “The Minimum Wage, EITC, and Criminal
Recidivism.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 25116. 1-56. Available at:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25116
Anderson, D. Mark. 2014. “In School and Out of Trouble? The Minimum Dropout Age and
Juvenile Crime.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 96(2): 318-331.
Bamberger, Peter and Linda Donohue. 1999. “Employee Discharge and Reinstatement: Moral
Hazards and the Mixed Consequences of Last Chance Agreements.” ILR Review 53(1): 3-20.
Becker, S. Gary. 1968. "Crime and punishment: An economic approach," Journal of Political
Economy 76(2): 169–217.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 249-275.
Blumstein, Alfred, and Kiminori Nakamura. 2009. "Redemption in the presence of widespread
criminal background checks," Criminology 47(2): 327-359.
Bushway, Shawn D., Philip J. Cook, and Matthew Phillips. 2010. “The Net Effect of the
Business Cycle on Crime and Violence,” Working Paper.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2016. “Correctional Populations in the United States, 2015,”
Available at: https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/cpus15.pdf
Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2014. “Survey of State Criminal History Information Systems,
2012,” Available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/244563.pdf
Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2001. “Prisoners in 2000,” Available at:
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/p00.pdf
Butcher, Kristin F. and Anne Morrison Piehl. 2008. “Crime, Corrections, and California What
Does Immigration Have to Do with It?” Public Policy Institute of California Population Trends
and Profiles 9(3).
Cadena, Brian C., and Brian K. Kovak. 2016. “Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor Markets:
Evidence from the Great Recession.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(1):
257–90.
Center for the Study of Social Policy. 2012. “Results-Based Public Policy Strategies for
Promoting Workforce Strategies for Reintegrating Ex-Offenders.” Available at:
33

http://www.cssp.org/policy/papers/Promoting-Workforce-Strategies-for-Reintegrating-ExOffenders.pdf
Chaflin, Aaron. 2015. "The Long-run Effect of Mexican Immigrants on Crime in U.S. Cities:
Evidence from Variation in Mexican Fertility Rates, "American Economic Review 105(5): 220225.
Cohen, A. and Dehejia, R. 2004. “The Effect of Automobile Insurance and Accident Liability
Laws on Traffic Fatalities,” Journal of Law and Economics, 47(2): 357-393.
Craigie, Terry-Ann. 2017. “Ban the Box, Convictions, and Public Sector Employment,”
Available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2906893
D’Alessio, J. Stewart, Lisa Stolzenberg, and Jamie L. Flexon. 2015. "The Effect of Hawaii’s Ban
the Box Law on Repeat Offending," American Journal of Criminal Justice 40(2): 336-352.
Dave, D., and R. Kaestner. 2009. “Health Insurance and Ex Ante Moral Hazard: Evidence from
Medicare.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics. 9: 367.
Dave, D.M., Kaestner, R. and Wehby, G.L. 2019. “Does public insurance coverage for pregnant
women affect prenatal health behaviors?” Journal of Population Economics. 32(2): 419-453.
Dillender, Marcus. 2017. “English Skills and the Health Insurance Coverage of Immigrants.”
American Journal of Health Economics 3 (3): 312–45.
Doleac, Jennifer. 2017. “Empirical evidence on the effects of Ban the Box policies,” Testimony
before the U.S. House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
Doleac, L. Jennifer, and Benjamin Hansen. Forthcoming. “The Unintended Consequences of
“Ban the Box”: Statistical Discrimination and Employment Outcomes When Criminal Histories
Are Hidden.” Journal of Labor Economics.
Doleac, Jennifer L., and Benjamin Hansen. 2017. “Moving to Job Opportunities? The Effect of
‘Ban the Box’ on the Composition of Cities.” American Economic Review 107 (5): 556–59.
doi:10.1257/aer.p20171002.
Ewing, Walter A., Daniel Martinez, and Rubén G. Rumbaut. 2015. “The Criminalization of
Immigration in the United States.” Washington, DC: American Immigration Council Special
Report, July 2015. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631704
Executive Office of President of the United States. 2016. “Economics Perspectives on
Incarceration and the Criminal Justice System,” Available at:
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/CEA%2BCriminal
%2BJustice%2BReport.pdf

34

Federal Bureau of Investigation National Press Office. 2015. “FBI Releases 2014 Crime
Statistics from the National Incident-Based Reporting System.” Available at:
https://www.fbi.gov/news/pressrel/press-releases/fbi-releases-2014-crime-statistics-from-thenational-incident-based-reporting-system
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2012. “NIRBS Participation by State.” Available at:
https://ucr.fbi.gov/nibrs/2012/resources/nibrs-participation-by-state
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2015. “About the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program.”
Available at: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2014/crime-in-the-u.s.-2014/resourcepages/about-ucr.pdf
Farrington, David P. 1986. “Age and Crime,” Crime and Justice: An Annual Review of Research,
7: 189-250.
Finlay, Keith. 2009. “Effect of employer access to criminal history data on the labor market
outcomes of ex-offenders and non-offenders.” In Autor, D. H., editor, Studies of Labor Market
Intermediation: 89–125.
Fone, Zachary S., Joseph J. Sabia, and Resul Cesur. 2019. “Do Minimum Wage Increases
Reduce Crime?” NBER Working Paper 25647. Available at:
https://www.nber.org/papers/w25647.pdf
Fortin, B. and P. Lanoie, 2000. “Incentive Effects of Worker's Compensation : A Survey” ”, in
G. Dionne, (eds.) Handbook of Insurance, North Holland.
Freeman, Richard. 2008. "Incarceration, criminal background checks, and employment in a low
(er) crime society," Criminology & Public Policy 7(3): 405-412.
Geller, Amanda, Irwin Garfinkel, and Bruce Western. 2006. "The effects of incarceration on
employment and wages: An analysis of the Fragile Families Survey," Center for Research on
Child Wellbeing. Working Paper.
Gould, D. Eric, Bruce A. Weinberg, and David B. Mustard. 2002. "Crime rates and local labor
market opportunities in the United States: 1979–1997," Review of Economics and
statistics 84(1): 45-61.
Grogger, Jeffery. 1995. “The effect of arrests on the employment and earnings of young
men,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 51-71.
Grootendorst, Paul V. 2002. “A Comparison of Alternative Models of Prescription Drug
Utilization.” In Andrew M. Jones and Owen O’Donnell (eds.), Econometric Analysis of Health
Data, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, pp. 73-86.

35

Hall, Taylor L., Nikki R. Wooten, and Lena M. Lundgren. 2016. "Postincarceration policies and
prisoner reentry: Implications for policies and programs aimed at reducing recidivism and
poverty." Journal of Poverty 20(1): 56-72.
Holzer, J. Harry, Steven Raphael, and Michael A. Stoll. 2006. "Perceived criminality, criminal
background checks, and the racial hiring practices of employers," Journal of Law and
Economics 49(2): 451-480.
Holzer, Harry J., Steven Raphael, and Michael A. Stoll. 2003. "Employment barriers facing exoffenders," Urban Institute Reentry Roundtable: 1-23.
Jackson, Osborne, and Bo Zhao. 2017. “The Effect of Changing Employers’ Access to Criminal
Histories on Ex-Offenders’ Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from the 2010-2012
Massachusetts CORI Reform.” Federal Reserve of Boston Research Department Working Paper
16-30.
Kaushal, Neeraj, Jane Waldfogel, and Vanessa R. Wight. 2014. “Food Insecurity and SNAP
Participation in Mexican Immigrant Families: The Impact of the Outreach Initiative.” B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 14 (1): 203–40.
Kirk, David S., and Sara Wakefield. 2018. “Collateral Consequences of Punishment: A
Critical Review and Path Forward.” Annual Review of Criminology 1(1).
Kling, R. Jeffrey. 2006. "Incarceration length, employment, and earnings," American Economic
Review 96(3): 863-876.
Landersø, Rasmus. 2015. "Does Incarceration Length Affect Labor Market Outcomes?," Journal
of Law and Economics 58(1):205-234.
Levitt, D. Steven. 2004. "Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s: Four factors that explain
the decline and six that do not," Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1): 163-190.
Lin, Ming-Jen. 2008. "Does unemployment increase crime? Evidence from US data 1974–
2000," Journal of Human Resources 43(2): 413-436.
Loeber, R., and D.P. Farrington. 2014. “Age-crime curve,” In: Bruinsma, G., Weisburd, D.
(eds.): Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice. New York: Springer, pp. 12-18.
Machin, Stephen, and Costas Meghir. 2004. "Crime and economic incentives," Journal of
Human Resources 39(4): 958-979.
McCollister, Kathryn E., Michael T. French, and Hai Fang. 2010. “The Cost of Crime to Society:
New Crime-Specific Estimates for Policy and Program Evaluation.” Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 108: 98-109.

36

McKernan, S. M., C. Ratcliffe, and J. Iceland. 2018. “Policy Efforts to Reduce Material
Hardship for Low-Income Families.” Urban Institute.
https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/99294/policy_efforts_to_reduce_material_h
ardship_1.pdf. Accessed 3-15-2019.
Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2014. "The criminal and labor market impacts of
incarceration," Unpublished Working Paper.
Mungan, Murat. 2017. “Statistical (and Racial) Discrimination, ‘Banning the Box,’ and Crime
Rates.” Working Paper, George Mason University. Available at:
http://eale.org/content/uploads/2017/04/statistical-and-racial-discrimination.pdf
Nagin, Daniel, and Joel Waldfogel. 1998. "The effect of conviction on income through the life
cycle," International Review of Law and Economics 18(1): 25-40.
National Employment Law Project 2017. “Ban the Box U.S. Cities, Counties, and States Adopt
Fair-Chance Policies to Advance Employment Opportunities for People with Past Convictions.”
Available at: http://www.nelp.org/content/uploads/Ban-the-Box-Fair-Chance-State-and-LocalGuide.pdf
National Institute of Justice. 2014. “National Statistics on Recidivism,” Available at:
https://www.nij.gov/topics/corrections/recidivism/Pages/welcome.aspx#statistics. Accessed
September 2017.
Orrenius, Pia M., and Madeline Zavodny. 2016. “Do State Work Eligibility Verification Laws
Reduce Unauthorized Immigration?” IZA Journal of Migration 5. Available at: doi:https://linkspringer-com.unh.idm.oclc.org/journal/volumesAndIssues/40176.
Öster, Anna, and Jonas Agell. 2007. "Crime and unemployment in turbulent times," Journal of
the European Economic Association 5(4): 752-775.
Pager, Devah, Bruce Western, and Bart Bonikowski. 2009. "Discrimination in a low-wage labor
market a field experiment," American Sociological Review 74(5): 777-799.
Pager, Devah. 2003. “The mark of a criminal record,” American Journal of Sociology, 108(5):
937-975.
Perreira, Krista M., Robert Crosnoe, Karina Fortuny, Juan Manuel Pedroza, Kjersti Ulvestad,
Christina Weiland, and Hirokazu Yoshikawa, and Ajay Chaudry. 2012. “Barriers to Immigrants
Access to Health and Human Service Programs” Available at: https://aspe.hhs.gov/basicreport/barriers-immigrants-access-health-and-human-services-programs
Raphael, Steven, and Rudolf Winter‐Ebmer. 2001. "Identifying the effect of unemployment on
crime," Journal of Law and Economics 44(1): 259-283.
Raphael, Steven. 2011a. "Incarceration and prisoner reentry in the United States," The ANNALS
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 635(1): 192-215.
37

Raphael, Steven. 2011b. “Improving Employment Prospects for Former Prison Inmates:
Challenges and Policy.” in Cook, Phillip J.; Ludwig, Jens and Justin McCrary (eds.) Controlling
Crime: Strategies and Tradeoffs, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Il: pp 521-572.
Raphael, Steven, and Michael Stoll. 2013. Why Are So Many Americans in Prison? New York:
Russell Sage Foundation
Roberts, W. Brent, Peter D. Harms, Avshalom Caspi, and Terri E. Moffitt. 2007. "Predicting the
counterproductive employee in a child-to-adult prospective study," Journal of Applied
Psychology 92(5): 1427.
Rose, Evan K. 2018. “Does Banning the Box Help Ex-Offenders Get Jobs? Evaluating the
Effects of a Prominent Example.” Working paper. Available at:
https://ekrose.github.io/files/btb_seattle_0418.pdf
Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. 1993. Crime in the Making: Pathways and Turning
Points through Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schnepel, Kevin T. 2018. “Good Jobs and Recidivism,” Economic Journal 128(608): 447-469.
Shoag, Daniel, and Stan Veuger. 2016. "Banning the Box: The Labor Market Consequences of
Bans on Criminal Record Screening in Employment Applications.” Available at:
https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/shoag/files/banning-the-box-september-2016.pdf
Siskin, Alison. 2016. “Noncitizen Eligibility for Federal Public Assistance: Policy Overview.”
Available at: https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL33809.pdf
Society for Human Resource Management. 2012. “The Use of Criminal Background Checks in
Hiring Decisions.”
Stafford, Christopher. 2006. "Finding Work: How to Approach the Intersection of Prisoner
Reentry, Employment, and Recidivism." Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law and Policy 13(2):
261-282.
Stoll, Michael A. 2009. “Ex-Offenders, Criminal Background Checks, and Racial Consequences
in the Labor Market." University of Chicago Legal Forum 2009(1), Article 11. Available at:
http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/uclf/vol2009/iss1/11
The Pew Charitable Trusts. 2010. “Collateral Costs: Incarceration’s Effect on Economic
Mobility,” Washington, DC: The Pew Charitable Trusts.
Wang, Xia, Daniel Mears, and Williem D. Bales. 2010. “Race-Specific Employment Contexts
and Recidivism.” Criminology, 48(4):1171-1211.

38

Western, Bruce, Jeffrey R. Kling, and David F. Weiman. 2001. “The Labor Market
Consequences of Incarceration,” Crime Delinquency 47: 410–27.
Western, Bruce. 2018. Homeward: Life in the year after prison. Russell Sage Foundation.
World Prison Brief. 2017. “Prison Population Total,” Available at:
http://www.prisonstudies.org/highest-to-lowest/prison-populationtotal?field_region_taxonomy_tid=All. Accessed September 2017.
Yang, Crystal S. 2017. “Local Labor Markets and Criminal Recidivism.” Journal of Public
Economics, 147: 16-29.

39

Figure 1. Enactment of Ban the Box Laws, 2004-2014

Notes: Enactment years obtained from Doleac and Hansen (Forthcoming). State BTB laws are shaded in gray.
County and city BTB laws are shaded in black.

40

Figure 2. Event Study Analysis of BTB Laws and Property Crime for Hispanic
and Non-Hispanic White Men, Ages 25-to-64

Notes: Estimates are generated using data from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System. Dash lines are 95
percent confidence intervals. Each regression has controls for agency fixed effects, time fixed effects, a set of state-level controls
(including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal
police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and
county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male, African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal
per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level.

41

Figure 3. Event Study Analysis of BTB Laws and Violent Crime for Hispanic
and Non-Hispanic White Men, Ages 25-to-64

Notes: Estimates are generated using data from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System. Dash lines are 95
percent confidence intervals. Each regression has controls for agency fixed effects, time fixed effects, a set of state-level controls
(including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal
police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and
county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male, African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal
per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level.

42

Figure 4. Event Study Analysis of BTB Laws and Crime for African American Men,
Ages 25-to-64
Property Crime

Violent Crime

Notes: Estimates are generated using data from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System. Dash lines are 95
percent confidence intervals. Each regression has controls for agency fixed effects, time fixed effects, a set of state-level controls
(including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal
police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and
county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male, African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal
per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level. The imprecise
estimates of the lagged effects of BTB laws for African American men are due to the small number of counties (18 to 36 counties
or 93 to 114 agencies) that contribute to the identification.

43

Figure 5. Event Study Analysis of BTB Laws and Male Crime
with Controls for County-Specific Time Trends, Ages 25-to-64
Property Crime

Violent Crime

Notes: Estimates are generated using annual agency-level data from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System.
Dash lines are 95 percent confidence intervals. Each regression has controls for agency fixed effects, year fixed effects, countyspecific quadratic time trends, a set of state-level controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree,
nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall
issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male,
African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities).
Standards errors are clustered at the state level. The imprecise estimates of the lagged effects of BTB laws for African American
men are due to the small number of counties (18 to 36 counties or 93 to 114 agencies) that contribute to the identification.

44

Figure 6. Event Study Analysis of BTB Laws and Female Property Crime, Ages 25-to-64

Notes: Estimates are generated using annual agency-level data from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System.
Dash lines are 95 percent confidence intervals. Each regression has controls for agency fixed effects, year fixed effects, countyspecific quadratic time trends, a set of state-level controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree,
nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall
issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male,
African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities).
Standards errors are clustered at the state level. The imprecise estimates of the lagged effects of BTB laws for African American
men are due to the small number of counties (18 to 36 counties or 93 to 114 agencies) that contribute to the identification.

45

Table 1A. Means of Agency-by-Month Crime Counts, NIBRS

Ages

Total crime
Property crime
Violent crime

N

All
(1)

Hispanic Men
18-24
25-34
(2)
(3)

35-64
(4)

All
(5)

African American Men
18-24
25-34
35-64
(6)
(7)
(8)

Non-Hispanic White Men
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

0.632
(2.775)
0.439
(2.011)
0.202
(1.031)

0.307
(1.399)
0.224
(1.075)
0.087
(0.503)

0.219
(1.041)
0.142
(0.731)
0.082
(0.466)

0.148
(0.790)
0.100
(0.587)
0.050
(0.327)

2.261
(12.076)
1.525
(8.040)
0.774
(4.636)

1.003
(5.466)
0.677
(3.518)
0.343
(2.290)

0.591
(3.226)
0.359
(1.993)
0.246
(1.489)

0.799
(4.520)
0.568
(3.368)
0.242
(1.422)

3.996
(9.082)
3.073
(7.295)
0.965
(2.409)

1.660
(3.817)
1.364
(3.274)
0.311
(0.887)

1.323
(3.376)
1.017
(2.779)
0.322
(0.947)

1.275
(3.274)
0.898
(2.508)
0.391
(1.124)

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804 243,804 243,804 243,804

Notes: Means of crime counts are generated using agency-level data drawn from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System. Standard deviations are
in parentheses. Because each incident includes information on up to 3 arrestees of potentially the same race/ethnicity that may differ by age, the sum of crime counts
for each individual age group may exceed the count for the pooled sample.

46

Table 1B. Crime Rates and Selected Characteristics, NLSY97
Hispanic Males
African American Males

Sample

Arrested
Any property crime
Steal < $50
Steal ≥ $50
Destroy property
Other property
crime
Assault

Age
Married
Less than high
school
High School
Some College
College

Observations

Non-Hispanic White Males

Ages 19-34

Ages 19-26

Ages 27-34

Ages 19-34

Ages 19-26

Ages 27-34

Ages 19-34

Ages 19-26

Ages 27-34

(1)
0.064
(0.245)
0.082
(0.275)
0.043
(0.204)
0.026
(0.160)
0.039
(0.194)
0.025
(0.156)
0.080
(0.271)

(2)
0.073
(0.261)
0.097
(0.297)
0.051
(0.220)
0.030
(0.171)
0.046
(0.209)
0.029
(0.167)
0.088
(0.283)

(3)
0.045
(0.207)
0.039
(0.193)
0.022
(0.148)
0.015
(0.121)
0.014
(0.118)
0.010
(0.100)
0.049
(0.216)

(4)
0.101
(0.301)
0.075
(0.264)
0.033
(0.180)
0.021
(0.144)
0.036
(0.188)
0.025
(0.157)
0.079
(0.270)

(5)
0.113
(0.316)
0.091
(0.287)
0.040
(0.196)
0.025
(0.157)
0.043
(0.202)
0.030
(0.171)
0.086
(0.281)

(6)
0.077
(0.266)
0.034
(0.181)
0.016
(0.125)
0.010
(0.100)
0.014
(0.117)
0.008
(0.091)
0.053
(0.223)

(7)
0.061
(0.238)
0.077
(0.267)
0.040
(0.197)
0.019
(0.135)
0.041
(0.198)
0.017
(0.131)
0.058
(0.234)

(8)
0.069
(0.254)
0.089
(0.285)
0.045
(0.207)
0.021
(0.142)
0.047
(0.211)
0.020
(0.141)
0.066
(0.249)

(9)
0.043
(0.202)
0.040
(0.195)
0.025
(0.157)
0.012
(0.109)
0.014
(0.118)
0.005
(0.072)
0.022
(0.147)

24.658
(3.723)
0.217
(0.412)
0.186
(0.389)
0.699
(0.459)
0.040
(0.196)
0.075
(0.263)

22.526
(2.284)
0.153
(0.360)
0.207
(0.405)
0.717
(0.451)
0.029
(0.168)
0.048
(0.213)

29.035
(1.765)
0.346
(0.476)
0.144
(0.352)
0.663
(0.473)
0.062
(0.241)
0.130
(0.337)

24.635
(3.713)
0.126
(0.332)
0.205
(0.404)
0.693
(0.461)
0.030
(0.171)
0.071
(0.257)

22.527
(2.288)
0.068
(0.252)
0.237
(0.425)
0.695
(0.460)
0.025
(0.156)
0.043
(0.202)

29.018
(1.764)
0.246
(0.431)
0.140
(0.347)
0.689
(0.463)
0.041
(0.197)
0.131
(0.337)

24.621
(3.708)
0.236
(0.425)
0.096
(0.295)
0.676
(0.468)
0.047
(0.211)
0.181
(0.385)

22.515
(2.284)
0.152
(0.360)
0.106
(0.308)
0.730
(0.444)
0.039
(0.193)
0.125
(0.331)

29.001
(1.757)
0.410
(0.492)
0.074
(0.262)
0.564
(0.496)
0.064
(0.244)
0.298
(0.457)

9367

6374

2993

11555

7801

3754

21898

15035

6863

Notes: Weighted means are reported from Rounds 1-16 (1997-98 through 2013-14) of the NLYS97. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Observations
reported represent the maximum sample size. Sample size is smaller for some variables due to missing information (see text).

47

Table 1C. Labor Market and Demographic Outcomes, ACS

Ages

All
(1)

Hispanic Men
18-24
25-34
(2)
(3)
0.418
(0.493)

0.669
(0.47)

African American Men
18-24
25-34
35-64
(6)
(7)
(8)

All
(9)

Non-Hispanic White Men
18-24
25-34
35-64
(10)
(11)
(12)

35-64
(4)

All
(5)

0.658
(0.474)

0.419
(0.493)

0.240
(0.427)

0.453
(0.498)

0.479
(0.5)

0.572
(0.495)

0.362
(0.481)

0.633
(0.482)

0.617
(0.486)

39.371
(19.45)

26.586
(23.605)

18.689
(21.579)

29.12
(23.11)

28.817
(23.878)

35.333
(21.4)

28.021
39.142
(21.525) (19.135)

36.439
(21.468)

Annual Employment

0.612
(0.487)

Weeks

37.666
28.818 41.013
(20.141) (22.372) (17.687)

Annual Hours

1843.71 1489.43 1893.08 1938.68 1670.88 1159.30 1692.89
(707.21) (825.39) (658.66) (649.01) (823.21) (839.47) (792.4)

1840.90 1875.35 1295.36 1938.25 2026.75
(753.28) (817.91) (890.01) (761.57) (732.78)

Public Program

0.186
(0.389)

0.192
(0.394)

0.201
(0.401)

0.176
(0.381)

0.269
(0.443)

0.292
(0.455)

0.29
(0.454)

0.252
(0.434)

0.123
(0.328)

0.111
(0.314)

0.168
(0.374)

0.114
(0.317)

SNAP

0.184
(0.387)

0.191
(0.393)

0.199
(0.399)

0.173
(0.378)

0.263
(0.44)

0.289
(0.453)

0.284
(0.451)

0.244
(0.43)

0.118
(0.323)

0.109
(0.311)

0.163
(0.369)

0.108
(0.311)

N

745,604 157,438 189,023

399,143

440,432

93,191

83,177

264,064 1,856,073 327,979

290,116 1,237,978

Low-Skilled Mexican and Central
Low-Skilled Hispanic Immigrant Men
American Immigrant Men
Ages
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Hispanic Men per 1,000
30.52
4.54
10.33
15.64
27.78
4.14
9.67
13.97
Population Ages 18-64
(28.08)
(4.31)
(9.41)
(15.59)
(27.65)
(4.21)
(9.28)
(15.37)
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095
Notes: Weighted means are generated using data drawn from the 2005 to 2015 American Community Survey (ACS). Standard deviations are in parentheses.
Low-Skilled Hispanic Men
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
64.53
13.35
18.40
32.78
(58.11) (11.92) (15.87)
(31.23)
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095

48

Table 2. Estimated Relationship Between Ban-the-Box Laws and Crime, NIBRS
Ages

All
(1)

Hispanic Men
18-24
25-34
(2)
(3)

African American Men
Non-Hispanic White Men
35-64
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Panel I: Baseline Estimates with Demographic Controls
0.116*
0.006
0.018
0.002
0.004
0.025
0.038
0.069
-0.036
(0.062)
(0.114)
(0.093)
(0.123) (0.131) (0.058)
(0.053)
(0.064) (0.064)

Total crime

0.089*
(0.052)

0.044
(0.055)

0.126**
(0.061)

Property crime

0.116**
(0.056)

0.053
(0.059)

0.152** 0.179*** -0.049
(0.070)
(0.068)
(0.120)

Violent crime

0.041
(0.060)

0.061
(0.067)

0.081
(0.066)

Total crime

0.079
(0.051)

0.044
(0.051)

0.115*
(0.060)

Property crime

0.117**
(0.054)

0.060
(0.051)

0.153** 0.163***
(0.068)
(0.063)

Violent crime

0.003
(0.064)

0.028
(0.076)

0.050
(0.064)

Total crime

0.078
(0.052)

Property crime

0.038
(0.069)

0.052
(0.061)

0.087
(0.076)

-0.043
(0.079)

-0.020
0.119
0.117
0.111
0.137
0.020
(0.065)
(0.121)
(0.113)
(0.130) (0.125) (0.049)
Panel II: Panel I + Crime & Economic Controls
0.086
0.008
0.023
-0.007
0.009
0.006
(0.056)
(0.119)
(0.101)
(0.122) (0.135) (0.070)

0.032
(0.048)

0.055
(0.050)

0.007
(0.060)

0.038
(0.057)

0.034
(0.081)

-0.063
(0.079)

0.057
(0.062)

0.058
(0.093)

-0.066
(0.096)

-0.002
(0.054)

-0.037
(0.055)

0.050
(0.052)

-0.074
0.076
0.074
0.061
0.108
-0.023
-0.006
(0.064)
(0.110)
(0.106)
(0.115) (0.115) (0.052)
(0.055)
Panel III: Panel II + Social Welfare & Immigration Policy Controls
0.112*
0.076
0.014
0.028
-0.000
0.013
-0.004
0.023
(0.062)
(0.057)
(0.113)
(0.094)
(0.117) (0.131) (0.066)
(0.054)

0.020
(0.073)

-0.064
(0.075)

0.113**
(0.055)

0.066
(0.052)

0.140**
(0.067)

0.147**
(0.065)

-0.020
(0.121)

0.006
(0.097)

-0.037
(0.124)

-0.029
(0.140)

0.011
(0.075)

0.041
(0.058)

0.037
(0.084)

-0.067
(0.091)

Violent crime

0.009
(0.064)

0.028
(0.077)

0.067
(0.066)

-0.073
(0.062)

0.068
(0.106)

0.065
(0.100)

0.055
(0.113)

0.101
(0.111)

-0.021
(0.052)

-0.016
(0.056)

0.011
(0.052)

-0.035
(0.056)

N

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

-0.033
(0.127)

-0.025
(0.094)

-0.005
(0.103)

-0.059
(0.127)

-0.052
(0.131)

-0.053
(0.138)

-0.038
(0.143)

0.025
(0.080)

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Poisson estimates are generated using agency-level data drawn from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System. Each regression has controls for agency fixed
effects, time fixed effects. Demographic controls include the percentage of county population that are male, African American, Hispanic, county-level average age, and share of state
population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree. Economic controls include the log of state personal per capita income, minimum wages, and refundable EITC rates. Crime policy controls include
logs of nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, and shall issue laws. Social welfare & immigration policy controls include SNAP vehicle exemption, E-verify,
287(g) program, and Secure Communities. Standards errors are clustered at the state level.

49

Table 3. Ban-the-Box Laws, Labor Market Outcomes and Immigrant Mobility, ACS
Ages
Annual Employment

All
(1)
-0.009
(0.006)

Hispanic Men
18-24
25-34
(2)
(3)
-0.015* -0.015*
(0.008)
(0.008)

35-64
(4)
-0.007
(0.007)

All
(5)
-0.005
(0.004)

African American Men
18-24
25-34
35-64
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.005
-0.024**
-0.003
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.006)

Non-Hispanic White Men
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
0.002
-0.004
0.012**
-0.001
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.003)

Weeks

-0.160
(0.257)

-0.893**
(0.350)

-0.241
(0.353)

-0.083
(0.278)

-0.256
(0.244)

0.156
(0.549)

-1.441***
(0.476)

0.009
(0.235)

0.073
(0.170)

-0.227
(0.502)

0.357
(0.230)

0.026
(0.120)

Ln(Annual Hours)

-0.019*
(0.010)

-0.048*
(0.025)

-0.010
(0.010)

-0.019** -0.016
(0.008)
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.034)

-0.042
(0.028)

-0.009
(0.012)

-0.006
(0.006)

-0.020
(0.017)

0.012
(0.010)

-0.007
(0.004)

Public Program

0.010
(0.007)

0.007
(0.012)

0.006
(0.007)

0.012
(0.008)

0.022***
(0.006)

0.008
(0.010)

0.028**
(0.011)

0.024***
(0.006)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.006
(0.006)

-0.000
(0.006)

0.002
(0.004)

SNAP

0.010
(0.007)

0.006
(0.012)

0.006
(0.007)

0.012
(0.007)

0.020***
(0.006)

0.010
(0.010)

0.024**
(0.010)

0.021***
(0.006)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.005
(0.006)

0.001
(0.006)

0.002
(0.004)

N

745,604

157,438

189,023

399,143

440,432

93,191

83,177

264,064 1,856,073 327,979

Low-Skilled Hispanic Men
Ages
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Men per 1,000
-0.253
-0.231
-0.062
0.040
Population Ages 18-64 (0.951)
(0.277)
(0.648)
(0.210)
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095

Low-Skilled Hispanic Immigrant Men
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.947
-0.437
-0.448
-0.061
(1.036)
(0.327)
(0.629)
(0.276)
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095

290,116 1,237,978

Low-Skilled Mexican and Central
American Immigrant Men
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
-0.704
-0.412
-0.329
0.037
(1.012)
(0.329)
(0.613)
(0.248)
4,095
4,095
4,095
4,095

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Weighted OLS estimates are generated using data drawn from the 2005 to 2015 American Community. Each regression has controls for county fixed effects, time fixed
effects, a set of individual-level controls (age, marital status, and number of children in the household), a set of state-level controls (including share of state population ages
25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP
vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male, African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per
capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level.

50

Table 4. Lagged Effects of BTB Laws on Crime, NIBRS
Ages

Year of law change
1 year after
2 year after
3 plus years after

Year of law change
1 year after
2 year after
3 plus years after

Year of law change
1 year after
2 year after
3 plus years after

N

All
(1)

Total Crime
18-24
25-34
(2)
(3)

0.041
(0.051)
0.083
(0.053)
0.128**
(0.057)
0.122*
(0.071)

0.062
(0.046)
0.000
(0.056)
0.097
(0.069)
0.073
(0.068)

-0.002
(0.061)
0.052
(0.135)
-0.006
(0.169)
0.002
(0.181)

0.005
(0.048)
0.057
(0.116)
0.016
(0.147)
0.054
(0.161)

0.001
(0.039)
0.030
(0.091)
-0.015
(0.086)
-0.077
(0.087)

0.032
(0.034)
0.048
(0.080)
0.012
(0.073)
-0.044
(0.076)

243,804

243,804

Property Crime
35-64
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Panel I: Hispanic Men
0.071
0.007
0.076
0.088*
0.114
0.054
(0.069) (0.054) (0.052) (0.048) (0.074) (0.063)
0.121* 0.129** 0.127**
0.025
0.132* 0.239***
(0.062) (0.063) (0.059) (0.061) (0.070)
(0.072)
0.165*** 0.107* 0.164*** 0.114 0.212*** 0.165**
(0.062) (0.063) (0.060) (0.070) (0.071) (0.070)
0.153*
0.127
0.127*
0.028
0.151*
0.190*
(0.086) (0.094) (0.074) (0.067) (0.089) (0.107)
Panel II: African American Men
0.009
-0.002
-0.018
0.015
-0.016
-0.037
(0.063) (0.072) (0.067) (0.055) (0.069) (0.074)
0.027
0.065
0.028
0.040
0.008
0.033
(0.134) (0.155) (0.154) (0.121) (0.154) (0.182)
-0.035
-0.020
-0.069
-0.057
-0.104
-0.064
(0.180) (0.189) (0.178) (0.151) (0.180) (0.200)
-0.051
-0.020
-0.071
-0.021
-0.118
-0.098
(0.188) (0.207) (0.160) (0.142) (0.168) (0.180)
Panel III: Non-Hispanic White Men
0.029
-0.054
0.019
0.049
0.051
-0.050
(0.044) (0.045) (0.045) (0.037) (0.051) (0.053)
0.059
-0.024
0.057
0.076
0.078
-0.007
(0.107) (0.096) (0.100) (0.086) (0.118) (0.113)
0.018
-0.090
-0.003
0.026
0.039
-0.100
(0.093) (0.097) (0.100) (0.074) (0.107) (0.122)
-0.087
-0.136
-0.089
-0.044
-0.101
-0.189
(0.085) (0.109) (0.098) (0.082) (0.096) (0.127)
243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

All
(9)

Violent Crime
18-24
25-34
(10)
(11)

35-64
(12)

-0.034
(0.071)
-0.002
(0.062)
0.060
(0.064)
0.115
(0.081)

0.017
(0.079)
-0.041
(0.072)
0.070
(0.088)
0.185*
(0.112)

0.008
(0.083)
0.106*
(0.063)
0.080
(0.063)
0.151
(0.097)

-0.114*
(0.068)
-0.098
(0.075)
0.008
(0.078)
0.022
(0.096)

0.022
(0.056)
0.092
(0.112)
0.096
(0.167)
0.138
(0.228)

-0.018
(0.047)
0.091
(0.121)
0.141
(0.160)
0.206
(0.212)

0.041
(0.064)
0.070
(0.112)
0.064
(0.191)
0.052
(0.223)

0.080
(0.070)
0.120
(0.102)
0.070
(0.165)
0.162
(0.254)

-0.045
(0.035)
-0.013
(0.070)
-0.002
(0.067)
-0.002
(0.087)

-0.028
(0.038)
-0.020
(0.068)
0.015
(0.083)
-0.017
(0.091)

-0.017
(0.044)
0.047
(0.080)
0.001
(0.070)
0.017
(0.076)

-0.061
(0.041)
-0.033
(0.065)
-0.028
(0.069)
0.016
(0.103)

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Poisson estimates are generated using agency-level data drawn from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System. Each regression has controls for agency fixed
effects, time fixed effects, a set of state-level controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal police
expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male,
African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level.

51

Table 5. Sensitivity of Relationship Between Ban-the-Box Laws and Crime, NIRBS

Ages

Property crime
Violent crime

Hispanic Men (Women)
African American Men (Women)
Non-Hispanic White Men (Women)
18-24
25-34
35-64
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Panel I: Restricting to Agencies Reporting in at Least Half the Sample Period (6 Years)
0.118*** 0.055
0.131** 0.193*** -0.029
-0.024
-0.043
-0.018
0.052
0.070
0.092
-0.031
(0.044)
(0.044)
(0.060)
(0.053)
(0.116)
(0.092)
(0.122) (0.135) (0.071)
(0.061)
(0.079) (0.083)
All
(1)

0.035
(0.043)

0.038
(0.049)

0.083
(0.052)

0.005
(0.041)

-0.004
(0.041)

0.008
(0.038)

0.023
(0.045)

-0.025
(0.046)

527,357

527,357

527,357

527,357

527,357

527,357

0.078***
(0.028)
35,337

0.046
(0.028)
23,451

0.071*
(0.036)
17,915

527,357 527,357 527,357 527,357 527,357 527,357
Panel II: Positive Crime Estimates Using OLS Specification
0.088**
-0.012
-0.024
-0.021
-0.025
-0.032
(0.031)
(0.026)
(0.029)
(0.040) (0.034) (0.022)
13,470
62,660
43,050
31,282
37,634 132,808

-0.006
(0.018)
98,055

-0.006
(0.025)
83,151

-0.037
(0.023)
78,472

-0.000
(0.026)
22,448

-0.026
(0.037)
12,385

0.023
(0.038)
12,182

-0.009
(0.041)
8,337

-0.024
(0.018)
45,245

0.001
(0.015)
45,640

-0.008
(0.019)
51,706

Property crime

0.121*
(0.067)

0.055
(0.066)

0.151**
(0.073)

0.031
0.005
0.025
0.050
-0.013
(0.036)
(0.034)
(0.036) (0.033) (0.018)
44,707
27,941
24,257
23,989
87,523
Panel III: Annual Agency-Level Male Crime
0.177** -0.030
-0.006
-0.055
-0.037
0.005
(0.079) (0.143)
(0.114)
(0.148) (0.165) (0.086)

0.035
(0.065)

0.030
(0.098)

-0.079
(0.106)

Violent crime

0.000
(0.070)

0.008
(0.079)

0.060
(0.078)

-0.074
(0.075)

-0.023
(0.066)

0.006
(0.063)

-0.038
(0.064)

N

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

Property crime

0.119*
(0.072)

0.107
(0.074)

20,284
20,284
20,284
20,284
20,284
20,284
20,284
20,284
Panel IV: Annual Agency-Level Male Crime with County-Specific Time Trends
0.182**
0.109
-0.003
0.002
-0.013
0.012
0.008
0.001
(0.091)
(0.107)
(0.052)
(0.059)
(0.077) (0.070) (0.036)
(0.024)

0.034
(0.067)

-0.38
(0.045)

Violent crime

-0.016
(0.079)

-0.059
(0.068)

0.060
(0.097)

-0.066
(0.104)

0.023
(0.068)

-0.040
(0.066)

0.042
(0.073)

0.082
(0.095)

-0.030
(0.056)

-0.072
(0.071)

-0.023
(0.054)

-0.072
(0.071)

N

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

20,284

Property crime
N
Violent crime
N

0.077
(0.086)

0.083
(0.123)

0.053
(0.083)

0.087
(0.116)

0.083
(0.095)

0.072
(0.131)

0.108
(0.086)

0.106
(0.130)

-0.025
(0.061)

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Poisson estimates are generated using agency-level data drawn from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System. Each regression has controls for agency fixed
effects, time fixed effects, a set of state-level controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal police
expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male,
African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level.

52

Table 6. Estimates of Relationship Between Ban the Box Laws and Specific Property Crimes, NIBRS

Ages
Larceny-theft

All
(1)
0.130**
(0.063)
[0.336]

Hispanic Men
18-24
25-34
(2)
(3)
0.079
0.139*
(0.059)
(0.072)
[0.168]
[0.107]

35-64
(4)
0.167**
(0.079)
[0.081]

All
(5)
-0.046
(0.123)
[1.063]

African American Men
18-24
25-34
(6)
(7)
-0.001
-0.076
(0.090) (0.130)
[0.435] [0.235]

35-64
(8)
-0.054
(0.143)
[0.440]

Non-Hispanic White Men
All
18-24
25-34
35-64
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
0.015
0.047
0.047
-0.075
(0.076) (0.058) (0.087) (0.094)
[2.293] [1.008] [0.742] [0.684]

Motor vehicle theft

0.085
(0.057)
[0.030]

0.197***
(0.076)
[0.018]

0.117
(0.075)
[0.010]

-0.114
(0.113)
[0.005]

0.022
(0.194)
[0.119]

0.090
(0.202)
[0.061]

-0.069
(0.207)
[0.032]

-0.077
(0.152)
[0.033]

0.003
(0.104)
[0.201]

-0.002
(0.066)
[0.086]

0.012
(0.131)
[0.071]

-0.016
(0.141)
[0.058]

Burglary

0.052
(0.062)
[0.079]

-0.024
(0.073)
[0.043]

0.197**
(0.094)
[0.027]

0.066
(0.071)
[0.015]

0.088
(0.105)
[0.364]

0.075
(0.091)
[0.194]

0.129
(0.094)
[0.097]

0.113
(0.132)
[0.100]

0.008
(0.080)
[0.641]

0.050
(0.072)
[0.302]

0.023
(0.092)
[0.229]

-0.069
(0.090)
[0.169]

Arson

0.025
(0.148)
[0.003]

0.097
(0.190)
[0.001]

-0.370
(0.305)
[0.001]

0.142
(0.396)
[0.001]

0.130
(0.161)
[0.009]

0.159
(0.146)
[0.004]

-0.040
(0.209)
[0.003]

0.232*
(0.132)
[0.003]

0.021
(0.130)
[0.027]

0.060
(0.166)
[0.013]

-0.170
(0.264)
[0.007]

0.103
(0.081)
[0.009]

N

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804

243,804 243,804 243,804 243,804

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Poisson estimates are generated using agency-level data drawn from the 2004 to 2014 National Incident-Based Reporting System. Each regression has controls for agency fixed
effects, time fixed effects, a set of state-level controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal police
expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male,
African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level. Means of
dependent variables are in brackets.

53

Table 7. Estimates of Relationship between Ban-the-Box Laws and Probability of Arrest,
NLSY97
Hispanic Men

BTB

N

BTB

N

(1)
0.020
(0.014)

(2)
0.011
(0.013)

7114

7114

African American
Men

Non-Hispanic White
Men

Panel I: Ages 19-34
(3)
(4)
-0.003
-0.008
(0.014)
(0.015)

(5)
-0.011*
(0.006)

(6)
-0.003
(0.006)

16736

16736

(5)
-0.007
(0.018)

(6)
0.004
(0.022)

10034

10034

Panel III: Ages 27-34
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.003
0.006
-0.012
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.011)

(6)
-0.008
(0.013)

8621

(1)
0.053**
(0.025)

(2)
0.053**
(0.022)

4188

4188

8621

Panel II: Ages 19-26
(3)
(4)
-0.021
-0.028
(0.024)
(0.028)
5055

5055

(1)
0.001
(0.019)

(2)
-0.003
(0.020)

N

2926

2926

3566

3566

6702

6702

Person fixed effects
County fixed effects

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

BTB

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Each regression also controls for indicators for age, educational
attainment (high school graduate, some college, college graduate or above), wave fixed effects, and a set of state-level
controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable EITC
rates, nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and
E-verify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male, African American, Hispanic, average
age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the
state level and reported in parentheses.

54

Table 8. Estimates of Relationship between Ban-the-Box Laws and Probability of Property and Violent Crime, NLSY97

Ages
Any Property crime

Minor Theft
Major Theft
Other Property Crime
Destroy Property

Assault

N

Hispanic Men
19-34
19-26
27-34
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.006
0.018
0.043
(0.017)
(0.071)
(0.035)

African American Men
19-34
19-26
27-34
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.0003
-0.033
-0.010
(0.014)
(0.027)
(0.024)

Non-Hispanic White Men
19-34
19-26
27-34
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.005
0.024
-0.033
(0.021)
(0.045)
(0.028)

-0.011
(0.012)
0.008
(0.011)
0.019
(0.021)
-0.006
(0.014)

-0.033
(0.042)
0.018
(0.053)
0.032
(0.050)
-0.015
(0.040)

0.0001
(0.021)
0.010
(0.023)
0.010
(0.033)
0.036
(0.045)

0.001
(0.0103)
0.0004
(0.008)
-0.004
(0.014)
-0.001
(0.020)

-0.002
(0.022)
0.004
(0.017)
-0.016
(0.034)
-0.018
(0.036)

-0.015
(0.017)
0.008
(0.019)
-0.014
(0.018)
0.015
(0.024)

0.005
(0.013)
0.006
(0.012)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.009
(0.021)

0.038
(0.036)
-0.008
(0.030)
0.011
(0.021)
-0.017
(0.026)

-0.031
(0.022)
0.016
(0.020)
-0.014
(0.015)
0.040
(0.039)

0.005
(0.022)

-0.001
(0.043)

0.041
(0.072)

-0.011
(0.027)

-0.053
(0.058)

-0.050
(0.044)

-0.012
(0.015)

-0.031
(0.034)

0.030
(0.021)

3090

1769

1321

4120

2332

1788

6806

4131

2675

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Each cell reports the effect of Ban-the-Box laws on the specific crime measure from a separate regression
model. Each regression also controls for wave fixed effects, county fixed effects, individual fixed effects, indicators for age, educational attainment (high school
graduate, some college, college graduate or above), a set of state-level controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal
minimum wages, refundable EITC rates, nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and Everify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male, African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income,
287(g) program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses.

55

Appendix Table 1. Means of Independent Variables, 2004-2014

BTB
Police expenditure per capita
Police employment per capita (in 1,000)
Shall-issue law
College degree
Share of male
Share of African American
Share of Hispanic
Average age
Personal per capita income
Minimum wage
EITC
E-verify
287(g) program
Secure Communities
SNAP Vehicle exemption
N

NIBRS
(1)
0.080 (0.271)
241.17 (39.95)
2.197 (0.434)
0.818 (0.386)
0.299 (0.061)
0.493 (0.013)
0.100 (0.132)
0.060 (0.067)
38.39 (2.766)
39,448.44
(7,284.40)
6.712 (1.002)
0.050 (0.801)
0.183 (0.377)
0.011 (0.103)
0.323 (0.468)
0.824 (0.374)

NLSY97
(2)
0.113 (0.317)
280.16 (83.56)
2.293 (0.628)
0.679 (0.467)
0.295 (0.050)
0.492 (0.012)
0.135 (0.141)
0.140 (0.149)
36.857 (2.373)
39,568.15
(6,183.47)
6.678 (1.010)
0.065 (0.114)
0.160 (0.360)
0.052 (0.213)
0.237 (0.410)
0.724 (0.439)

ACS
(3)
0.193 (0.383)
308.07 (81.74)
2.289 (0.620)
0.664 (0.472)
0.273 (0.961)
0.490 (0.009)
0.126 (0.111)
0.149 (0.136)
37.308 (2.624)
42,639.66
(11,274.86)
7.166 (0.937)
0.065 (0.110)
0.217 (0.408)
0.061 (0.230)
0.468 (0.485)
0.790 (0.402)

243,804

68,951

1,392,610

Notes: Unweighted means in column 1 are generated using data drawn from the 2004 to 2014 National IncidentBased Reporting System; and weighted means in columns 2 and 3 are generated using data from the 2004 to 2014
Uniform Crime Reports and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 97 Cohort. Standard deviations are in
parentheses.

56

Appendix Table 2. Effective Date of BTB Policies
State
California

Colorado
Connecticut

District of Columbia
Delaware
Florida

Georgia
Hawaii
Illinois
Indiana
Kentucky
Kansas
Louisiana
Maryland
Massachusetts

Michigan

Minnesota

Missouri

Nebraska
New Jersey

NIRBSa

ACS

NLSYc

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

State/County/City
State
Alameda
San Francisco
Santa Clara
State
State
Fairfield
Hartford
New Haven
New London
Washington
State
New Castle
Broward
Duval
Hillsborough
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Roswell
State
State
Cook, Du Page
Marion
Jefferson
Wyandotte
Orleans Parish
State
Baltimore
State
Middlesex
Suffolk
Worcester
Clinton
Genesee
Ingham
Kalamazoo
Muskegon
Washtenaw
Wayne
State
Hennepin
Ramsey
Boone
Cass, Clay, Jackson, Platte
St. Louis
State
Atlantic

57

Effective Date
06/2010
01/2007
10/2005
01/2005
08/2012
10/2010
10/2009
06/2009
02/2009
12/2008
01/2011
05/2014
12/2012
12/2014
11/2008
01/2013
01/2013
01/1998
01/2014
06/2007
05/2014
03/2014
11/2014
01/2014
10/2013
12/2007
08/2010
05/2007
07/2006
06/2009
04/2014
06/2014
04/2014
01/2010
01/2012
05/2014
09/2010
01/2009
12/2006
12/2006
12/2014
04/2013
10/2014
04/2014
12/2011

State

New Mexico
New York

North Carolina

Ohio

Oregon
Pennsylvania

Rhode Island
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia

Washington

Wisconsin

NIRBSa

ACS

NLSYc

No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

State/County/City
Essex
State
Bronx, Queens, Kings, New
York, Richmond
Erie
Monroe
Ulster
Westchester
Cumberland
Durham, Orange, Wake
Mecklenburg
Cuyahoga
Franklin
Hamilton
Lucas
Mahoning, Trumbull
Stark
Summit
Clackamas, Washington
Multnomah
Allegheny
Lancaster
Philadelphia
State
Providence
Hamilton
Shelby
Hays, Williamson
Travis
Alexandria City
Arlington
Charlottesville City
Danville City
Fredericksburg City
Newport News City
Norfolk City
Petersburg City
Portsmouth City
Richmond City
Virginia Beach City
Alexandria City
King
Pierce
Spokane
Dane
Milwaukee, Washington,
Waukesha

Source: Doleac and Hansen (2017).

58

Effective Date
09/2012
03/2010
03/2010
06/2013
05/2014
11/2014
11/2014
09/2011
02/2011
02/2014
09/2011
06/2012
08/2010
10/2013
03/2014
05/2013
09/2012
07/2014
10/2007
12/2012
10/2014
06/2011
07/2013
04/2009
01/2012
07/2010
10/2008
04/2008
03/2014
11/2014
03/2014
06/2014
01/2014
10/2012
07/2013
09/2013
04/2013
03/2013
11/2013
03/2014
04/2009
01/2012
07/2014
02/2014
10/2011

Appendix Table 3. Estimates of Relationship Between Ban-the-Box Laws and Crime, UCR
African American Adults
Ages 18+
(1)

White Adults
Ages 18+
(2)

Total crime

-0.019
(0.070)
[39.60]

-0.022
(0.032)
[51.95]

Property crime

-0.017
(0.080)
[25.48]

-0.022
(0.037)
[33.35]

Violent crime

-0.021
(0.056)
[14.12]

-0.013
(0.027)
[18.60]

N

188,848

188,848

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Poisson estimates are generated using a balanced panel of agencies and months in jurisdictions with
population exceeding 25,000 from the 2004-2014 Uniform Crime Reports (Anderson 2014). Each regression has
controls for agency fixed effects, time fixed effects, county-specific quadratic time trends, and a set of state-level
controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages, refundable
EITC rates, nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle
exemption, and E-verify), and county-level controls (the number of reporting agencies, the percentage of the
population that are male, African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g)
program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level. Means of the dependent
variable are in brackets.

59

Appendix Table 4. Sensitivity Checks of Relationship between Ban-the-Box Laws and Crime with only County FE, NLSY97

Ages
Any Property crime

Minor Theft
Major Theft
Other Property Crime
Destroy Property

Assault

N

Hispanic Men
19-34
19-26
27-34
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.010
0.006
0.040*
(0.026)
(0.083)
(0.023)

African American Men
19-34
19-26
27-34
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.002
-0.0001
0.003
(0.010)
(0.015)
(0.015)

Non-Hispanic White Men
19-34
19-26
27-34
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.014
-0.011
-0.011
(0.013)
(0.032)
(0.013)

-0.009
(0.010)
0.011
(0.010)
0.030*
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.023)

-0.025
(0.040)
0.036
(0.041)
0.024
(0.037)
0.003
(0.039)

0.002
(0.015)
0.005
(0.015)
0.002
(0.022)
0.033
(0.035)

0.002
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.007)
0.006
(0.010)
-0.005
(0.016)

-0.0001
(0.015)
0.005
(0.009)
0.016
(0.011)
-0.021
(0.022)

0.003
(0.015)
0.006
(0.015)
-0.009
(0.013)
0.009
(0.016)

-0.014
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.009)
-0.011
(0.011)
-0.004
(0.013)

-0.011
(0.032)
-0.015
(0.025)
0.001
(0.012)
-0.023
(0.022)

-0.011
(0.013)
0.009
(0.014)
-0.010
(0.013)
0.025
(0.026)

0.002
(0.025)

0.009
(0.032)

0.006
(0.043)

-0.018
(0.029)

-0.034
(0.048)

-0.018
(0.028)

-0.014
(0.016)

-0.036**
(0.017)

0.011
(0.014)

3090

1769

1321

4120

2332

1788

6806

4131

2675

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Each cell reports the effect of Ban-the-Box laws on the specific crime measure from a separate regression
model. Each regression also controls for wave fixed effects, county fixed effects, indicators for age, educational attainment (high school graduate, some college,
college graduate or above), a set of state-level controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages,
refundable EITC rates, nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and
county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male, African American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g)
program, and Secure Communities). Standards errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses.

60

Appendix Table 5. Estimates of Relationship between Ban-the-Box Laws and Criminal
Behaviors among Females, NLSY97
Females
Ages

19-34
(1)
-0.005
(0.004)

19-26
(2)
-0.014
(0.009)

Any Property crime

-0.002
(0.011)

-0.003
(0.023)

Minor Theft

0.002
(0.008)
0.008
(0.007)
0.0002
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.010)

0.010
(0.023)
0.017
(0.017)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.009
(0.013)

-0.002
(0.010)

0.0004
(0.025)

Arrested

Major Theft
Other Property Crime
Destroy Property

Assault

*** Significant at 1% level ** at 5% level * at 10% level
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Each cell reports the effect of Ban-the-Box laws on the specific
crime measure from a separate regression model. Each regression also controls for indicators for age, educational
attainment (high school graduate, some college, college graduate or above), wave fixed effects, and a set of statelevel controls (including share of state population ages 25+ with a bachelor degree, nominal minimum wages,
refundable EITC rates, nominal police expenditure per capita, police employment per capita, Shall issue laws, SNAP
vehicle exemption, and E-verify), and county-level controls (the percentage of the population that are male, African
American, Hispanic, average age, nominal personal per capita income, 287(g) program, and Secure Communities).
Standards errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. Sample sizes for models in column 1
range from 7839 to 33698, and those for models in column 2 range from 5290 to 19881.

61

