                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PENSION WEALTH, AGE-WEALTH
                                 PROFILES, AND THE
                             DISTRIBUTION OF NET WORTH




                                   Ann McDermed

                                   Robert Clark

                                   Steven Allen




                              Working Paper No. 2439




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 1987




This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on the Measurement of Saving,
Investment, and Wealth, March 27—28, 1987, in Baltimore, Maryland. We gratefully
acknowledge the receipt of the respondent portion of the SCF from Robert Avery
of the Federal Reserve Board and the pension-provider portion of the SCF from
the Survey Research Center, University of Michigan. We have benefited from
helpful discussions concerning these data with Robert Avery, Olivia Mitchell,
Richard Ippolito, Cordelia Reimers, Alan Gustman and Thomas Steinmeier. The
researchreported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #2439
                                                       November 1987


                          Pension Wealth, Age-Wealth Profiles,
                            and the Distribution of Net Worth



                                       ABSTRACT


       This study estimates the magnitude of pension wealth and compares pension

  wealth to net worth for households in the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finance

  (SCF). The SCF is the first data set to provide detailed information on both

  household finances and pension characteristics. The pension information is

  provided by the employer, so that it is much more detailed and likely to be

  more accurate than the pension data used in previous studies.

       Pension wealth was estimated under two sets of assumptions. Under the

  projected earnings approach, mean pension wealth is $98,291, which represents

  43 percent of mean net worth for households with pensions. Under the legal

  method of calculating pension wealth, mean pension wealth is $47,541, which

  represents 26 percent of mean net worth for households with pensions. Both

  estimates are much larger than those obtained in earlier studies.

       The study also examines how estimates of inequality in the wealth

  distribution change when pension wealth is added to household balance sheets.

  Using a variety of methods and assumptions, the distribution becomes more equal

  when the definition of wealth is expanded to include pension assets.




Ann McDermed                 Robert L. Clark              Steven G. Allen
Department of Economics      Department of Economics      Department of Economics
  and Business                 and Business                 and Business
North Carolina State U.      North Carolina State U.      North Carolina State U.
Box 8110                     Box 8110                     Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110       Raleigh, NC 27695-8110       Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
                                    I. Introduction



     The primary objective of this study is to develop improved estimates of

pension wealth. This will help determine how large pension wealth is relative

 to other components of wealth and how consideration of pension wealth affects

measures of the distribution of income and wealth. Data limitations have

prevented a comprehensive investigation of the pension wealth relative to other

components of household wealth. The 1983 Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF)

provides a unique opportunity to examine this issue because it contains

detailed information on household finances and both nonpension wealth, obtained

from household interviews, and pension wealth which can be calculated from

pension plan parameters, obtained from employers.

     We present two sets of estimates reflecting different models of the

pension contract. Under the implicit contract model of Ippolito (1985)   ,   mean

pension wealth is approximately $100,000 which represents 42.7 percent of mean

net worth of households with pension coverage. Under the explicit contract

model of Bulow (1982), the estimates of pension wealth are much lower; however,

mean pension wealth is still approximately $50,000. When pension wealth is

incorporated into estimates of the distribution of total wealth, measured

inequality is reduced.



                         II. What Is Pension Wealth?



    A worker covered by a defined benefit pension plan exchanges labor services

for current earnings and the promise of future income in the form of pension

benefits. The value of future pension benefits depends on the nature of the
                                                                                 2

labor contract, survival probabilities, market interest rates, and government

regulations. Two methods of calculating pension wealth have been proposed.

These are the legal method developed by Bulow and the projected earnings method

outlined in Ippolito. This section defines pension wealth and examines

the life cycle pattern of pension wealth implied by pension coverage when

wealth is calculated using these methods. The final part of this section

describes pension wealth for workers covered by defined contribution plans,

where there is less ambiguity about the nature of the pension contract.



Legal Method of Calculating Pension Wealth: Defined Benefit Plans

     Under the legal method of determining pension wealth, the employment

contract is assumed to be valid for a single period. Of course, the contract

may be renewed but the worker acts as if he will be terminated at the end of

each period. Therefore, he is willing to pay for only those pension benefits

that the firm is legally required to pay if the worker leaves the firm at the

end of the current period.

     For any specific worker, pension wealth is calculated by finding the

annual benefit that a worker would receive if he left the firm today. This

benefit depends on the plan benefit formula, the extent to which the worker is

vested in the plan, and for most plans, the worker's current years of service

and earnings history. Despite leaving the firm, the worker must wait until he

has reached the retirement age specified in the plan to actually receive any

benefits. Once started, benefits usually continue for the remainder of the

worker's life. Thus, the wealth value of these benefits is found by

determining the expected discounted value of a life annuity beginning at the

retirement age. Pension wealth is illiquid in the sense that it cannot be
                                                                                   3

 sold in total or in part, but individuals may be able to borrow against this

 asset.

      Even in this strict legal interpretation of the pension contract, there is

 some uncertainty as to whether the worker will receive the full value of his

pension wealth. The worker could die prior to reaching the retirement age and

receive no pension benefits. If married, the worker's surviving spouse

may be eligible for survivorship benefits based on the vested benefits of the

worker. The firm could terminate the plan due to financial difficulties. The

federally established insurance system, the Pension Benefit Guaranty

Corporation, does not fully guarantee vested benefits. Finally, the real value

of these future benefits depends on the rate of inflation and any

post-retirement increases in benefits. Despite these risks associated with the

determination of legal pension wealth, we believe that pension wealth

calculated in this manner should be a useful, approximate lower bound estimate

of true pension wealth.

     Coverage by a pension plan produces a predictable pattern of pension

wealth accumulation over the life of an individual. The magnitude of pension

wealth depends on plan generosity and worker characteristics and therefore will

vary across workers. Using the legal method, pension wealth is very low during

the early working years because workers have lower earnings, little credited

service, and must wait many years to receive benefits. However, pension wealth

rises rapidly as long as the worker remains with the firm. The growth in

pension wealth is due to increased years of service, higher earnings, and a

reduction in the number of years until retirement. Each of these factors

accelerates the growth rate of pension wealth over time and as a result the

rate of growth of pension wealth will exceed the rate of growth of earnings as
                                                                                 4

job tenure increases. This continues until the worker reaches the age of

eligibility for retirement benefits.

     If the worker remains on the job past the normal retirement age, his

pension wealth in most plans will decline with continued work and the rate of

decline will accelerate with advancing age (Clark and McDermed 1986; Kotlikoff

and Wise 1985). This results from the fact that most firms do not provide an

actuarial increase in benefits with postponed retirement. In addition,

approximately half of all pension participants are in plans which cease to

credit wage and service accruals after the normal retirement age. Thus, the

annual benefit may be frozen at the normal retirement age and with continued

employment, the worker will have fewer years to receive benefits producing the

decline in pension wealth.

     We have constructed a simulation model to illustrate this life cycle

pattern of wealth accumulation for a worker covered by a pension plan. The

worker is assumed to have been hired at age 25 with total compensation equaling

$20,000. Total compensation, which is divided into earnings and pension

compensation, grows at a rate of 5.5 percent per year. This is based on an

assumed real rate of growth of 1.5 percent per year and an inflation of 4

percent per year. Pension compensation, the growth in pension wealth

associated with the employment contract, is the change in pension wealth

with additional service and higher earnings. It does not include the change in

pension wealth associated with aging which is independent of the employment

contract.

     The normal retirement age is 65 and the plan offers no early retirement

benefits. There are no post-retirement adjustments in benefits and the plan

has immediate and full vesting. The plan continues to fully credit increases
                                                                                  5

in earnings and service as long as the worker remains with the firm. The

benefit is determined by multiplying .015 times years of service times average

earnings in the last five years. The market interest rate is 6 percent and

workers are assumed to face mortality probabilities as shown in the 1981

U.S. Life Table for white men.

     The results of the simulations are shown in Table 1. Starting with zero

pension wealth at age 25, the worker's wealth rises slowly at first and reaches

$13,945 at age 40. At this age, pension wealth represents about one third of

annual earnings. Between the ages of 40 and 65, pension wealth grows by over

100 percent per 5 years of work. The rate of growth of pension wealth declines

slightly with age during this time. At age 65, pension wealth totals $613,518

or 3.7 times annual earnings. Deflating this value to age 25 dollars indicates

a real pension wealth at age 65 of $128,000. In this example, increases in

earnings and service continue to raise pension wealth after age 65 but at a

rate slower than prior to the worker reaching the age of eligibility for full

pension benefits.

     Several additional points need to be emphasized concerning the life cycle

pattern of pension wealth. First, a vested worker leaving a firm does not lose

any of his accumulated pension wealth. However, if earnings do not rise with

the job change, the worker will accumulate less additional pension wealth with

the new employer than if he had remained on his initial job. Even if the

worker has the same earnings and both employers have the same pension plan,

wealth accumulation will be slower for the job changer because years of service

at the previous job will not be credited in the pension at the new job.

Second, after the worker retires, pension wealth falls systematically with
                                                                                 6

advancing age due to declines in life expectancy. Unanticipated increases in

the rate of inflation will also lower the pension wealth of retirees.



Projected Earnings Method of Determining Pension Wealth: Defined Benefit Plans

     An alternative method of calculating pension wealth assumes that the

worker and the firm enter into a long-term, implicit contract. The worker

promises to remain with the firm until retirement and to perform at the agreed

level of effort. The firm promises to continue to employ the worker as long as

he fulfills the terms of the contract. To enforce the contract, a firm

requires that workers pay for a pension value that is conditional on their

remaining with the firm. The "stay pension" exceeds the pension to which

workers are legally entitled which we will call the "leave pension." Firm

reputation in the labor market is assumed to be sufficient to keep the firm

from reneging on its obligations.

     In this model of the labor contract, workers are paid total compensation

equal to their value of marginal product in each period. Compensation consists

of earnings and pension compensation. The difference between this model and

the legal method is that pension compensation is based on pension wealth that

is conditional on the worker remaining with the firm until retirement. In each

period, pension wealth is based on the plan benefit formula, current years of

service and projected earnings in the final working years just prior to

retirement.

     Since projected future earnings are typically greater than current earnings,

the "stay pension" wealth based on projected earnings will exceed the "leave

pension" wealth which is the value derived using the legal method. Under an

implicit contract, workers pay for the stay pension but if they quit their job
                                                                                  7

or are laid off they receive only the leave pension. This difference

represents a capital loss in pension wealth associated with termination of

employment. Thus, pension wealth based on the projected earnings method

entails an additional form of risk for the worker, that is the risk of job

termination. This estimate of pension wealth should be an upper bound estimate

of the worker's true pension wealth.

     Pension wealth based on the projected earnings method of calculation also

follows a predictable life cycle pattern. As long as the worker remains with a

single firm, wealth rises until the age of eligibility for benefits. Compared

to pension wealth based on the legal method, wealth is higher early in the

worklife because it is based on projected final earnings rather than actual

earnings, but rises more slowly with job tenure, because projected final

earnings do not change over time. Pension compensation drops sharply at the

normal retirement age and may become negative if the worker remains with the

firm. The decline after the normal retirement age is due to the ending of the

implicit, long-term contract. The worker may remain with the firm after this

date but is assumed to be covered by an explicit, year-by-year contract. This

results in benefits and pension compensation based on the legal method and

actual earnings received after the termination of the implicit contract.

     If the worker leaves a job, his pension wealth drops sharply from the stay

pension to the leave pension. The magnitude of this capital loss rises during

the initial working years, peaks in the late 40s or early 50s, and then

declines. Of course, at the normal retirement age there is no loss from

leaving because the worker has completed the terms of the contract.

    A simulation example can be used to illustrate the life cycle pattern of

wealth accumulation using the projected earnings method. Using the same
                                                                                  8


pension and worker characteristics as described above, pension wealth at

various ages is shown in Table 2. After completing one year of work, pension

wealth is $2,822. This value rises with additional years of work and the rate

of increase rises slightly with job tenure. Pension wealth is more than one

year of earnings by age 40 when wealth is $51,752. Pension wealth grows by

about 70 percent per five years of employment growing to $690,677 at age 65.

Even though the two simulations assume that the worker has the same total

compensation in each year, pension wealth at age 65 differs slightly. This

result is from the small difference in annual earnings between the ages of 60

and 64. Annual earnings are endogenously determined by the algorithm and

differ throughout the worklife.

     Also shown in Table 2 is the capital loss associated with leaving the

job. This loss in pension wealth rises from $21,346 at age 35 to $105,082 at

age 55. The loss in pension wealth associated with job termination declines to

zero at age 65. A series of simulations illustrating the potential capital

loss over the worklife for various industry, occupation, and plans size groups

are shown in Allen, Clark and McDermed (1986).



Pension Wealth in Defined Contribution Plans

     Pension wealth for workers covered by a defined contribution plan is equal

to the value of the funds in their account. Each pay period, a firm using a

defined contribution plan contributes a specified sum into a pension account

for its workers. Employer contributions may be augmented by contributions by

the employee. The funds are invested and increase over time with additional

contributions and the compounding of rate of return on the funds. Future

benefits are determined entirely by the magnitude of the pension fund at
                                                                                  9


retirement. The firm's liability ends each period with the contribution.

Thus, pension wealth at each age is equal to the value of the pension fund.

Calculation of current pension wealth does not require any projection of future

earnings or rates of inflation. This value is not affected by potential job

changes. As such, the wealth of the worker is not subject to risks concerning

job change but the worker does bear all rate of return risks.



                            III. What Is Pension Saving?



      Pension saving is the change in pension wealth from one year to the next.

It includes pension compensation as well as the change in pension wealth

resulting from aging. The two methods of calculating pension wealth predict

somewhat different patterns of savings. Using the legal method, the dollar

value of pension saving rises rapidly with increased job tenure. In addition,

prior to the normal retirement age, the ratio of pension saving to total

compensation also rises rapidly. Table 1 shows that in our simulation example,

pension savings rise from $1,045 at age 35 to $81,030 at age 65. Using the

projected earnings method, the dollar value of pension saving and the ratio of

pension saving to total compensation increases with job tenure but at a slower

rate than that implied by the legal method. For example, pension saving at age

35 is $3,435 and rises to $67,183 at age 65 (results are not shown in Table

2).
                                                                                10

            IV. Which Method Should Be Used to Measure Pension Wealth?



     Both the legal and the projected earnings method have been proposed as the

appropriate procedure for estimating pension wealth. Which method best

captures the nature of the pension contract? Because they yield different

predictions concerning labor market behavior, the competing hypotheses can be

tested. Primarily these different predictions concern the rate of growth of

earnings and the propensity of workers covered by pensions to quit. The

predictions of the projected earnings method seem to conform to the reality of

observed labor market influences of pensions.

     Under the projected earnings method, workers stand to lose pension wealth

if they leave their current employer, which is consistent with the lower quit

rates observed for workers covered by pensions (Mitchell 1982; Allen, Clark,

and McDermed 1986; Ippolito 1987). The legal method predicts the growth rate

of earnings for workers covered by pensions should be lower than that for other

workers, whereas the projected earnings method predicts that pension coverage

has no effect on the growth of earnings. The evidence (Ippolito 1985; Clark

and McDermed 1987) is consistent with the latter interpretation. Another

implication of the legal method is that there should be large decreases in

earnings when workers become vested or become eligible for early retirement

(Kotlikoff and Wise 1985). There is no evidence of such earnings behavior. In

addition, many firms provide ad hoc post-retirement benefit increases that can

be justified only in terms of an implicit labor contract (Allen, Clark, and

Sumner, 1986).

     Despite this tentative conclusion that the available evidence tends to

support the implicit contracting theory of pension, we have calculated pension
                                                                               11

wealth using both of the methods described in this paper. The legal method

provides an approximate lower bound estimate of pension wealth and the

projected earnings method provides an upper bound. By comparing the range of

these estimates, we should have a reasonable estimate of the true magnitude of

pension wealth.



                          V. Household Wealth and the SCF



     The 1983 SCF is the latest in a series of surveys sponsored by the Federal

Reserve Board to measure the wealth holdings of households in the United

States. The survey contains comprehensive data on the assets and liabilities

of a representative sample of U.S. households. Additional personal and

employment characteristics are included in the survey (Avery, et.al.,

1984a,b). These data are sufficient to construct employment histories for most

respondents and their spouses. The actual data tape used in this study is an

early copy provided by the Federal Reserve Board. In addition to the household

responses to the SCF, this tape also contains a series of variables constructed

by the researchers at the Fed. Our analysis relies on their estimate of

nonpension net wealth as well as their imputations for missing responses.

     The SCF consists of two samples: a representative cross section sample

consisting of 3665 usable households and a special high income sample

containing 438 households. In this paper, we report results based on the

combined samples and employ weights provided by the Fed that convert the

combined sample to a representation of the U.S. household population as

measured by the 1980 census.
                                                                                 12

     The 1983 SCF sought to gather sufficient data to allow analysts to construct

the first accurate measures of pension wealth. To this end, there are numerous

questions on the survey pertaining to the type and level of pension benefits.

Respondents were asked whether they were covered by a pension, and if so,

whether it was a defined benefit or defined contribution plan. They were asked

the expected future value of benefits from a defined benefit plan and the date

when they expected to begin receiving them. For defined contribution plans,

they were asked the current value of their account. Respondents were asked

about other types of thrift and profit sharing plans. They were also asked

about any pensions on past jobs from which they expected to receive a benefit.

People currently receiving pension benefits were asked the annual value of

their benefit. From these questions alone, a measure of pension wealth can be

constructed. This approach has been used to estimate pension wealth from the

Retirement History Study by Quinn (1985) and from the President's Commission on

Pension Policy by Cartwright and Friedland (1985).

     The distinctive feature of the SCF, however, is that data were also gathered

from the pension plan sponsor concerning the plan characteristics. These data

were separately coded onto a pension-provider tape, which we received from the

Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan in conjunction with a

Department of Labor contract. These data consist of detailed plan

characteristics on the normal benefit formulas and how they apply to various

types of workers. Formulas for deferred vested participants, maximum benefits,

and social security offsets were also included.

     To determine the value of pension benefits on respondents' and spouses'

present jobs, we used these specific benefit formulas in conjunction with

required respondent characteristics. The methodology used to calculate pension
                                                                                 13

benefits and pension wealth is described below. This methodology is used only

for persons covered by a defined benefit plan on their current jobs. The

treatment of defined contribution plans on current jobs and the value of

benefits on past jobs is described in a separate section.



Calculation of Pension Benefits from Defined Benefit Plans on Current Jobs

     The calculation of pension benefits for defined benefit plans from the

pension-provider data required that the benefit formulas as coded in the data

be converted to computational algorithms. Most plans had several normal

retirement and deferred vesting formulas that applied to different types of

workers or applied to different periods of employment. These formulas were

often linear combinations and frequently required one to assess relative values

from alternative combinations of formulas. Eight of the plans had formulas

that were integrated with formulas from other plans. These plans were

eliminated from the analysis.

     The next step was to apply the algorithms to particular individuals. Work

and salary histories were constructed from the household data.   The value of

years of service used in the algorithms was determined from current job tenure

as reported by respondents. Salary histories and earnings projections were

based on two alternative assumptions about real earnings growth: a constant

5.5 percent annual growth rate, reflecting 1.5 percent economy-wide real wage

growth and 4 percent inflation (CGE) and the Fed's estimate of expected annual

occupation specific real wage growth controlled for industry, age, race, and

sex (FGE). The Fed's estimate also assumes that earnings grow 5.5 percent per

year in addition to the occupation specific component. Specifically each

person was assigned age-related earnings growth rates for ages less than 35, 35
                                                                                14

to 54 and 55 and over. These rates vary across the sample by race, sex,

industry, and occupation. Fed estimates of these occupation specific rates

were not available for the high income sample.

     Legal pension wealth based on an explicit labor contract is calculated

from benefits the worker would receive if the worker left the firm today.

Workers who are vested and leave a job are legally entitled to receive a

benefit based on the deferred vested benefit formulas rather than the normal

benefit formulas. Thus, all benefits using the legal method of determining

pension wealth are based on the deferred vested benefit data and assume that

the person begins benefits at the worker's expected retirement age. Vesting

status was determined from worker characteristics provided in the respondent

data and vesting requirements reported in the pension provider data. For

salary based formulas, earnings histories of the appropriate length were

constructed for each of the assumptions described above. Service years were

current job tenure in 1983. Workers who were not currently vested were assumed

to have zero legal pension wealth.

     For the projected earnings method, workers were assumed to remain with

their current employers until their expected retirement ages as given in the

respondent interviews. Therefore, projected earnings wealth was based on the

normal retirement formulas provided by the firm. If the worker was not

eligible for normal benefits at the reported retirement age, then the worker

was assumed to retire at the earliest age of eligibility for normal benefits.

Benefits in this method were based on earnings projected to retirement and

current years of service. Projected earnings wealth was calculated under each

of the two assumptions about earnings growth.
                                                                                15

     Each plan was checked to see if it had a maximum benefit formula or was

integrated with social security. If the plan had a maximum benefit, then the

benefit as calculated was restricted to this maximum. Social security

integration is done either by excess formulas that pay a higher fraction of

earnings above the social security wage base than for earnings below it or by

reducing the pension benefit by some fraction of the social security benefit.

     For the excess method, we projected the social security maximum taxable

earnings to grow at 5.5 percent per year (this is the assumption used in the

intermediate projections of the Social Security Administration). We then

calculated the average wage base that firms can legally use in conjunction with

the excess method. The plan formula indicates whether this level or some other

level will be used. We assumed that the excess formula will not be revised

during the respondent's worklife.

     The offset plans required us to calculate the social security benefit that

the worker expects to receive at retirement. Social security reductions were

based on projected social security benefits at the expected retirement age. We

assumed that the current social security offsets in the pension benefit

formulas would apply when the worker retired. Using the two growth

assumptions, earnings were projected to rise from their current level until

retirement. This work history was then used to calculate the worker's social

security primary insurance amount (PIA).

    We assumed that the social security benefit formula would not be revised but

as in 1983 the bend points of the formula would rise with the rate of growth of

taxable earnings. Earnings prior to age 60 were indexed by the maximum taxable

earnings at age 62 while earnings after age 62 were indexed by the rate of

growth of prices. The social security benefit calculated by this method was
                                                                                16

then introduced into the benefit formula. In most plans, the offset is some

fraction of the social security benefit that varies with earnings or years of

service subject to a maximum offset. In this analysis, we have ignored the

future changes in social security that were adopted in 1983.



Calculation of Pension Benefits for Defined Contribution Plans
and for Past Jobs

     In defined contribution plans, the firm and/or the employee contribute a

specified amount each pay period into an employee account. Benefits at

retirement are based on the amount of funds in the account. At any point in

time, pension wealth is the value of the employee's account. While there are

data on the pension-provider tape for defined contribution plans, this

information is less useful in determining future pension benefits. We could

have used these data along with assumptions concerning past contribution rates,

rates of growth of earnings, and rates of return to the pension fund to

estimate the current value of the pension account.

     Instead, we relied on answers to questions on the respondent tape concerning

the current value of the pension account. It is likely that most of the people

covered by defined contribution plans receive some type of annual statement

concerning the current value of their pension account. The estimate of this

form of pension wealth requires only this knowledge; it specifically does not

require the respondent to forecast future rates of growth in wages and prices

nor does it necessitate any evaluation of the prospects of leaving the firm.

Therefore, we take the respondent's own evaluation of current pension wealth as

the best estimate of its true value. All missing values concerning the funds

in the defined contribution accounts were imputed by researchers at the Fed.
                                                                                17

Since we are interested in pension wealth, we did not convert the value of the

pension account into any implied future benefit.

     Many respondents and their spouses expect to receive benefits from pensions

on previous jobs. For the most part, the pension-provider tape does not

contain information on the plan characteristics of pensions on past jobs.

However, individuals were asked about the pension benefits they expected to

receive from past jobs. We assumed that the respondents gave the value

of benefits that they expected to receive at retirement. For past jobs, this

may be a reasonably accurate estimate. Having already left the job, the

nominal benefit at retirement will not be affected by any further work nor will

it be influenced by future earnings or inflation. Departing workers may also

have been told the benefit to expect in their exit interviews with the firm.

If respondents answered that they were covered by a pension on their current

job but do not know either coverage or expected benefits from past jobs, we

assigned them their pension wealth from their current job alone.



Missing Values for Pension Benefits

     Some respondents reported that either they or their spouse were covered by a

pension on their current job but there are no data for these plans on the

pension-provider tape. For these workers, we imputed the value of their

pension benefit. A pension benefit equation was estimated for persons covered

by a pension on their present job and for whom we had calculated a benefit

using the procedure described above. The results from four regression

equations are shown in Table 3. The equations are for two benefits using the

legal method and two benefits using the projected earnings method. The

benefits for each method are based on our two assuiptions concerning the rate
                                                                                18

of growth of earnings. The FGE benefit equations are estimated using

respondents only from the cross-section sample since salary projections were

not made by the Fed for the high income sample.

     These benefit equations are interesting in their own right. To our

knowledge they are the first estimates of pension benefits based on a large

sample of data combining actual worker and plan characteristics. Explanatory

variables include a series of industry and occupational dichotomous variables

along with age, job tenure and salary. The relatively few statistically

significant differences among the industry and occupational coefficients is

somewhat surprising; however, it should be remembered that we controlled

for salary and tenure differences.

   When benefits are estimated using a constant 5.5 percent per year growth in

earnings(CCE), the elasticity of benefits with respect to job tenure is

slightly less than one while the elasticity of benefits with respect to salary

is slightly greater than one. These values hold for both the legal and

projected methods of calculating benefits. The relative values of these two

elasticities is reversed in the equations that are based on the Fed's earnings

growth assumptions; however, all eight of the estimates for these two variables

are relatively close to one. Only the parameter estimate for salary in the

legal CGE equation and the parameter estimate for tenure in the projected

earnings CGE equation are statistically significantly different from one at the

.05 level of significance.

     If the benefit formula were a simple multiplicative, earnings-based formula,

then both the tenure and salary elasticities should be one. The existence of

social security offsets tend to make benefits rise by more than a proportionate

in response to salary increases while maximum benefits would tend to make the
                                                                                  19

tenure and salary elasticities less than one. The negative age elasticities in

the equations for projected benefits follow from the construction of the

benefit. Holding salary and tenure constant, the projected benefit will be

lower for older workers as long as the growth rate of earnings is positive.

     Benefits from defined benefit pensions on the current job for persons with

missing values were imputed from these regression equations and the individual

and firm characteristics. Persons with missing data concerning the value of

benefits from past jobs are given the mean value of this type of pension

benefit for similar types of workers.



Summary of Pension Benefit Data

     There are 2,304 households in the sample who are covered by a pension on a

current or past job. This represents 56.2 percent of the unweighted households

and 54.8 of the weighted households. Of these households, 1,592 have at least

one family member that is a participant in a defined benefit plan on their

current job. We were able to derive pension benefits using the plan specific

data for 889 of these households. Therefore, we imputed pension benefits for

703 households. Pension-provider data were not available for these households

because the interviewers were unable' to locate the firm, there were no summary

plan descriptions available, or for some other reason the firm interview was

not completed.

     Pension wealth from defined contribution plans was determined for 236

households and pension wealth from past jobs was derived for 740 households. A

household could, of course, have wealth from one or more of these sources.

Persons with thrift plans or profit sharing plans are not included in these
                                                                                20

counts; however, the value in these accounts as given by the respondents is

included in pension wealth.



Calculation of Pension Wealth

     For defined benefit plans, we converted the value of the pension benefit

into a wealth value calculating the value of a life annuity beginning at the

age of expected retirement as indicated by the respondent. Benefits were

assumed to remain fixed in nominal terms and the interest (or discount) rate

was set at 6 percent. The 1981 mortality rates by race and sex were used to

determine survival probabilities. Pensions were assumed to have no death

benefits. As noted above, respondents with defined contribution plans were

assumed to have reported accurately their pension wealth. Pension wealth

is the sum of all defined contribution and defined benefit values from current

and past jobs as well as withdrawable amounts in thrift-type accounts.



Calculation of Pension Savings

     Pension savings is calculated only for persons who are currently working

on a job and are participating in a defined benefit pension plan. For these

workers, pension savings was calculated by estimating current pension wealth as

described above and subtracting this value from pension wealth one year later.

Pension wealth in the succeeding year was calculated by increasing job tenure

by one year and increasing the salary average based on the two estimates of

earnings growth. This method combines the gain in wealth attributable to an

additional year of work (pension compensation) and the gain in wealth due to

surviving an extra year and being closer to retirement age. We have not

calculated similar values for persons covered by defined contribution plans.
                                                                                 21

For these workers, savings equal new contributions and the return to the

pension fund. Neither have we calculated savings for persons with pensions on

past jobs. Savings from a pension on past job is solely attributable to

surviving an extra year and being closer to the retirement age.



                       VI. Wealth, Pension Wealth, and Age



     Since the early development of life cycle saving theory, economists have

predicted that household wealth will tend to be relatively low early in life,

rise during the middle years, and then decline during the final years of life.

Evidence on the life cycle accumulation of wealth has typically been from cross

section data and focused exclusively on nonpension wealth. In this section, we

present a comprehensive assessment of pension wealth along with nonpension

wealth using data from the 1983 SCF. It is important to remember that these

data represent wealth at a particular point in time for different cohorts of

households and are not a true measure of the effect of aging for a single

cohort.



Nonpens ion Wealth

     Our measure of nonpension wealth is a variable that was created by

researchers at the Fed. It represents the net value of all paper and other

financial assets, equity in the respondent's home and other property, the net

value of vehicles and boats, and net worth of any businesses or farms. This

measure is compiled by examining the response to numerous questions concerning

family assets and liabilities and is intended to represent the standard concept

of net household wealth.
                                                                                22

     Estimates of nonpension net wealth are shown in Table 4 for all households

in the SCF along with separate estimates for households with pension wealth and

those without pension wealth. For all three samples, mean nonpension wealth is

less than $10,300 for households with respondents under the age of 25. It

rises to $30,000 and above for households aged 25 to 34. Nonpension wealth

then more than doubles across each of the next two ten year age groups.

This form of wealth continues to increase slightly across the next two groups

before declining sharply for the oldest age group. For all age groups except

those aged 45 to 54, these estimates are between 50 and 78 percent higher than

estimates of net worth presented by Avery, et. al. (l984b). These earlier

values excluded the value of consumer durables such as automobiles and home

furnishings, the cash value of life insurance, and equity in small businesses

and farms.

     Studies by Munnell (1974, 1976) and Feldstein (1974, 1982) initiated a

debate on the impact of social security and private pensions on the magnitude

of private savings. A number of studies followed these early papers and to

date this literature has produced no clear picture concerning the elasticity of

private savings with respect to pension savings. The data that we have

constructed from the SCF will provide a useful new source for testing these

hypotheses. As of yet, we have not attempted to estimate savings response to

pension coverage and pension savings. The data in Table 4 indicate that the

mean nonpension wealth of persons with pension wealth is not lower than that of

persons with no such wealth. In fact, nonpension wealth is considerably higher

for households with pension wealth than for those without pension wealth for

all ages over 55; however, the Z statistic indicates nonpension wealth for
                                                                                23

households covered by a pension is not statistically different for any of the

age groups from the wealth of those not covered by a pension.



Pension Wealth and Total Net Wealth: Legal Method

     Estimates of legal pension wealth using the two earnings growth assumptions

are presented in Table 5. At all ages, the two estimates are very similar.

Holding constant the interest rate, it seems reasonable to conclude that legal

pension wealth is relatively insensitive to the earnings growth rate assumption

within a fairly wide range of growth rates. This is due to two effects.

First, some pension wealth is from past jobs or defined contribution plans and

therefore our earnings assumption does not enter into the calculation of

pension wealth. Second, most plans use relatively few years of earnings to

determine the salary average in the benefit calculation. Thus the earnings

histories based on the different growth assumptions are not very different.

     As expected, legal pension wealth is quite small early in life, rises

rapidly during the working years, and declines with advancing age. For workers

less than 25, mean pension wealth is approximately $2,000. Wealth triples

across each of the next two ten year age groups to stand at over $60,000 for

the cohort aged 45 to 54. Pension wealth then almost doubles for the next

cohort so that wealth is over $115,000 for the cohort aged 55 to 64. After 65,

pension wealth declines sharply.

    Net worth is the sum of nonpension and pension wealth for each household

and the mean values are shown in the last 5 columns of Table 5. The middle of

these columns represents net worth for households without pensions. For these

families, total net worth is identical to nonpension wealth. Net worth is also

presented for all households and for households with some pension wealth. Net
                                                                                24

worth for households with some pension wealth exceeds the net wealth of the no

pension households at all ages. Between the ages of 55 and 74, wealth of the

pension households is almost twice that of the nonpension households.



Pension Wealth and Net Worth: Projected Earnings Method

     Pension wealth under the projected earnings method is shown in Table 6. The

CGE pension wealth is over $14,000 for households with heads less than age 25

using the projected earnings method compared to only $1,900 with the legal

method. Instead of tripling across the first two age groups, the projected

pension wealth only doubles. Slower growth is also observed across the middle

working years. Wealth for the oldest age groups are virtually identical for

the two methods. This follows from the fact that most of these households are

currently receiving benefits and are not still working.

     There are greater differences between the CGE and the FGE estimates under

the implicit contracting model than were observed with legal pension wealth.

This follows from the longer forward projection of earnings in the implicit

contract model as compared to the relatively short backward projections done in

conjunction with the legal method. These differences vary between 22 percent

and 28 percent for households under the age of 45 but are less than 4 percent

for households aged 55 to 64. Since most people are retired after the age of

65, the wealth estimates for these two assumptions are approximately equal at

these older ages.

     Since pension wealth is higher using the projected earnings method, net

worth is also higher with this method compared to the legal method. The CGE

wealth for all households rises from $10,000 for households under the age of 25

to approximately $120,000 for those aged 35 to 44. Net worth peaks for
                                                                                25

households aged 55 to 64 at about $358,000 and then declines for the older

households. The implicit contract method of evaluating pension wealth results

in much higher net worth for persons with pension wealth at all ages compared

to households with no pension wealth.



Pension Wealth as a Percentage of Total Wealth

     The data presented in Tables 4 to 6 illustrate that pension wealth is

relatively small early in life and grows until the retirement years. This

pattern of wealth accumulation is similar to that for nonpension wealth. Table

7 shows the mean value for pension wealth as a percentage of mean total wealth

by the age of the household head. The first part of the table shows that for

all households less than 25, legal pension wealth is about 8 percent of total

wealth as compared to over 34 percent for the projected earnings method. Legal

pension wealth as a percent of total wealth rises with age until the 55 to 64

age group when pension wealth represents 27 percent of total wealth. For the

projected earnings method pension wealth varies between 22 and 35 percent of

total net worth for all ages prior to 55 and increases to over 44 percent of

total net worth for the 55 to 64 group.

     Looking only at households with pensions, pension wealth is, of course, a

larger proportion of total net worth. In these households, the fraction of

wealth that is due to pension wealth is about 16 percent for the youngest

households for the legal method. This ratio rises with household age until the

55 to 64 age group when the proportion of wealth due to pensions reaches

approximately 37 percent. The fraction of total net worth due to pension

wealth using the projected earnings method is more variable. The ratio drops
                                                                                 26

from 59 percent for the youngest households to 54 percent for households aged

45 to 54 before rising slightly for those aged 55 to 64.

     Pension Savings. These data also permitted us to calculate pension savings

or the change in pension wealth. This was done only for persons who were

currently working and covered by a defined benefit plan. Pension savings

was calculated by finding the change in pension wealth from last year to this

year. These values are reported in Table 8 for both the earnings growth

assumptions and both the legal and projected earnings methods of evaluating

pension wealth. Legal pension savings are very low at the youngest ages and

rise steeply until retirement. Savings under the implicit contract model are

larger at all ages but they increase at a slower rate across the age groups.

     In summary, both of these methods of calculating pension wealth clearly

indicate that pension wealth is an important component of total wealth.

Ignoring pension wealth substantially understates total wealth and also will

yield incorrect inferences concerning the distribution of wealth. This latter

point is examined in the next section.



                           VII. Distribution of Wealth



     The preceding sections have described the magnitude of pension wealth by age

of the head of household. This analysis indicated that pension wealth is a

major component of the net worth of households with slightly over half of the

households having some pension coverage. The effect of including pension

wealth in an analysis of the distribution of household wealth is an unresolved

question. Tables 9-17 present income distribution data for nonpension wealth,

pension wealth and net worth. These tables show the wealth value at various
                                                                                27

percentile rankings for each distribution by age of the head of household. For

example, the 0 percentile represents the minimum value in the wealth

distribution, the 50th percentile is median wealth, and the 100th percentile is

the maximum wealth value. We present distributions for both the legal and

projected earning methods of calculating pension wealth, using the CCE

assumptions.

     Table 9 shows the nonpension wealth for all households by age groups. These

data indicate that the median nonpension wealth in the U.S. in 1983 was

$38,300. The values at the various percentiles illustrate the same age-wealth

pattern as observed for the mean wealth values in Table 4.

     Tables 10 and 11 show the nonpension wealth distribution for households with

and without pension coverage. These data along with the mean values shown in

Table 4 indicate that median households with pension coverage have more

nonpension wealth than median households with no pension coverage. Median

nonpension wealth for all households with pension coverage is $51,600 but is

only $18,000 for households without pension coverage. The wealth distribution

of households with pensions is more compact as indicated by the range of the

distributions. Households with pensions have higher minimum values and lower

maximum values of wealth than households without pensions. On balance,

households with pension coverage have greater nonpension wealth and this wealth

seems to be more equally distributed than the wealth of households without

pension coverage.

     Tables 12 and 13 show the distribution of pension wealth for households

with pension coverage as estimated using the CCE assumptions. Using the legal

method, household pension wealth is zero for unvested workers on current jobs

and without pension wealth from other jobs. Over ten percent of all households
                                                                                 28

and 25 percent of the younger households are in this category. Using the

projected earnings method, pension wealth is zero only during the first year of

employment. Therefore, only a small proportion of households will have no

pension wealth under this criterion.

     Median legal pension wealth for all households with pension coverage is

$17,700 and the wealth at the 95th percentile is $383,200. This compares to a

median projected earnings pension wealth of $30,600 and a value of $486,200 at

the 95th percentile. These numbers indicate that approximately 42 percent of

the pension wealth of a household at the middle of the wealth distribution is

contingent on continued employment at the present job. The wealth loss

associated with job termination is $12,900 out of the $30,600 in pension wealth

shown by the projected earnings method.

     Tables 14 and 15 give the distribution of total net worth for households

using the legal and projected earnings methods of determining pension wealth.

Adding legal pension wealth to other wealth raises the median net worth for all

families from $38,300 (Table 9) to $49,800 (Table 14). Using the projected

earnings method, median net worth increases to $57,900. Including pension

wealth in the analysis primarily raises the wealth of households between the

25th and 95th percentiles of the nonpension wealth distribution. For the most

part, very poor and very rich households have relatively little pension

wealth.

     Tables 16 and 17 show the net worth distribution for households with pension

coverage. These data can be compared to the distribution in Table 10 to assess

the effect of pension wealth on the wealth distribution of only those

households with pension coverage. Median wealth for these households is raised

from $51,600 ignoring pension wealth to $84,500 using the legal method and
                                                                                29

$99,200 with the projected earnings method. The effect of including pension

wealth has similar effects on the distribution of wealth by age as described

above for all households.

     These preceding analyses clearly indicates the importance of pension wealth

as a component of net worth. Tables 9-17 show the increased wealth at various

percentiles of the wealth distribution. These numbers seem to indicate that

most pension wealth accrues to wealth holders between the 25th and the 95th

percentile. If true, the inclusion of pension wealth in an examination of the

distribution of net worth should decrease the degree of inequality in the

wealth distribution.

     Table 18 shows this effect by reporting the proportion of nonpension wealth

and net worth that is held by the top 5 percent and the top 1 percent of the

wealth distribution. The top 5 percent of all households own 57.9 percent of

nonpension wealth but only 52.5 percent of net worth when pensions are

evaluated using the legal method and 55.0 percent of net worth using the

projected earning method. Similar declines in the relative holdings of the

wealthiest 5 percent of households occur for each age group shown in the

table.

     Using the legal method, the relative wealth of the top 1 percent drops from

35.5 percent of wealth excluding pensions to 31.1 percent of net worth when

pension wealth is included in the analysis. By contrast, when pension wealth

is evaluated using the projected earnings method, the inclusion of pension

wealth actually increases the proportion of total wealth held by the wealthiest

1 percent of households.

     The overall impact of including pensions in the wealth distribution is shown

in Table 18 and Figures 1 and 2. The Lorenz curves are constructed by plotting
                                                                                30

the cumulative wealth holdings of the population. We restrict the values of

the curve to be equal to or greater than zero. Thus, the Lorenz curve

coincides with the axis until cumulative positive wealth is greater than the

total negative wealth of the poorest households. This procedure maintains the

traditional restriction on the Gini coefficient to range between zero and one.

    The Gini coefficient for nonpension wealth for all households is 0.806.

Including legal pension wealth lowers this value to 0.777 while the Cmi

coefficient for net worth including projected pension wealth is 0783. These

data confirm that including pension wealth tends to reduce measured inequality

in the wealth distribution. This result is shown in the graphs of the Lorenz

Curves in Figures 1 and 2.   In both figures, including pension wealth shifts

the curve in toward the line of equity. Allowing the Lorenz curve to fall

below the horizontal axis to reflect negative net worth raises the Gini

coefficients but does not alter the conclusion that pension wealth reduces

measured inequality.



               VIII. Conclusions and Comparison to Earlier Studies



     This paper has provided a detailed examination of the value of pension

benefits. Two methods of calculating pension wealth were described and

shown to bound the true value of pension wealth. Each method was applied to

data from the 1983 SCF to derived pension wealth for the U.S. population. For

all households with pension coverage, mean pension wealth under the projected

earnings method was $98,291 and represented 43 percent of total net worth. At

the median of the distribution, pensions represent 31 percent of net worth.

Using the legal method of calculating pension wealth lowers these values so
                                                                                31

that mean pension wealth represents 26 percent of mean net worth while median

pension wealth is 21 percent of median net worth.

     There are very few studies against which these findings can be compared.

The results of two such studies are reviewed below. Quinn (1985) estimated the

combined pension and social security wealth for households in the Retirement

History Survey (RHS) in 1973 and compared this to their total wealth. He

assumed no post-retirement adjustments and estimated pension and social

security wealth under interest rate assumptions of 2, 5 and 10 percent. The

results at the 5 percent assumption are most comparable to those reported in

this study. His sample is limited to households where the age of the head is

between 62 and 67. The RHS reports the expected pension benefit for each

person covered by a pension. Quinn's estimate of pension wealth is the present

value of this benefit starting at the earliest age of eligibility, adjusted for

survival probabilities. Quinn's estimates are increased by 124 percent (the

change in the CPI and the return on 3-month Treasury bills) to make them

comparable to our 1983 data.

     Quinn found that median wealth without social security and pensions was

$61,869 for married men in 1973, $21,056 for nonmarried men, and $12,790 for

nonmarried women. At the 5 percent interest rate assumption, median wealth

with social security and pensions was $238,762 for married men, $141,277 for

nonmarried men, and $76,653 for nonmarried women. The proportion of this

wealth in pension rights was roughly 12.9 percent for married men, 11.9 percent

for nonmarried men, and 13.4 percent for nonmarried women (calculated from

midpoints of the intervals in Table 3 of Quinn (1985)). Thus, pension wealth

averaged $30,800 for married men, 16,811 for nonmarried men, and $10,286 for

nonmarried women.
                                                                                   32

     Mean nonpension wealth is considerably larger for the most comparable group

in the SCF -- $196,492 for the 55 to 64 age group. Pension wealth is also much

larger using our derived values of wealth. Under the legal (CGE) method, mean

pension wealth across all households aged 55 to 64 is $73,922; under the

projected (CGE) earnings method, $161,468. These values are derived by

multiplying mean pension wealth shown in Tables 5 and 6 by the proportion of

persons covered by a pension. Both estimates are much larger than Quinn's

estimate for married men. This could be attributable to growth in pension

coverage or more generous benefit formulas. Another possibility is that survey

respondents systematically underestimate their benefits.

     We have not yet examined the data on expected benefits provided by the SCF

respondents. Avery j (1985) reports a mean value of pension wealth

(including thrift assets) of $43,511 for households with married heads 50 and

over; $27,985 for those with unmarried heads. In all but 8 percent of the

households the age of the head is 65 or lower, so the most comparable estimate

in our results is once again for the 55-64 age group. Even under the legal

method, our estimates are much higher than those obtained by Avery          from

the household responses, suggesting the possibility of significant

underreporting.

     Cartwright and Friedland (1985) used pension benefit data from a survey done

for the President's Commission on Pension Policy (PCPP) in September 1979.

Their estimates are largely based on individual responses to the

questionnaire. When this information was not available, they imputed benefits

from either the Department of Labor's EBS-l forms or the employer survey.

Private pensions were discounted at a rate of 7 percent (3 percent real, 4

percent inflation); public pensions, 3 percent (all real). IRAs, Keoghs, and
                                                                                  33

annuities are included in the estimates. For nonvested workers, the

probability of vesting was imputed from a cross-section logit equation. Their

estimates are increased by 37.2 percent below to reflect the change in the CPI

between 1979 and 1983.

     The average household in the PCPP had $4,503 of retirement assets,

representing 6 percent of net worth. In contrast, our estimates of pension

wealth for the average household under the CGE assumptions are $26,052 under

the legal method and $53,863 under the projected earnings method. Mean

retirement wealth varied by age group in a pattern which was very comparable to

that observed in Tables 5 and 6:

                                                Mean Retirement
                  Age Group                     Wealth. PCPP

                    Under   35                      $    1,547
                     35 -   44                           3,906
                     45 -   54                           9,922
                     55 -   64                          14,175
                     65 &   over                         1,858

To make those estimates directly comparable to those in Tables 5 and 6, we

divided them by the ratio of households with retirement wealth:

                                                         Mean Retirement
                    Ratio of Households                  Wealth, Households
     Age Groups     with Retirement Wealth               with Retirement Wealth

     Under 35                    .22                         $ 7,032
      35 - 44                    .40                           9,766
      45 - 54                    .47                          21,112
      55 - 64                    .49                          28,929
      65 & over                  .06                          30,975


Except for the under 35 group, these estimates are much smaller than our

estimates in Tables 5 and 6. The gap between these two sets is largest (in

relative terms for the 55 to 64 age group.
                                                                                34

     The ratio of retirement asset to net wealth can also be estimated for each

age group, using Table A8 in Cartwright and Friedland:



                                                Ratio of Retirement Assets
               Age Group                        to Net Wealth, All Households

               Under 35                                        .04
                35-44                                          .04
                45-54                                          .08
                55 - 64                                        .12
                65 & over                                      .02



Once again, these ratios much smaller in every age group than the corresponding

estimates in Table 7.

     In conclusion, several key findings of this study should be indicated.

     1. Pension wealth is a large and important component of household wealth.

Pension wealth follows the expected life cycle pattern of increasing with age

up until retirement and declines.

     2. Our results are larger than those reported by Quinn (1985) or Cartwright

and Friedland (1985) both in terms of the absolute magnitude of pension wealth

and the ratio of pension wealth to net worth.

     3. Nonpension wealth of older households with pension coverage is

considerably larger than the wealth of older households without pension

coverage.

     4. Pension wealth reduces measured inequality in the distribution of

wealth.

     5. A key omission of this study is social security wealth. Calculating

social security wealth for these households is a research priority. Including

social security wealth should further reduce wealth inequality. The

distribution of social security wealth is an interesting issue in itself.
                                                                                35

     6. The inclusion of pension wealth into a measure of net worth will bring

the life cycle pattern of net worth more into conformity with the predictions

of the life cycle savings hypothesis. First, during the working years, the

inclusion of pension wealth results in a more rapid rise in net worth between

ages 35 and 65. Second, during the retirement years, the inclusion of pension

wealth will accelerate the decline in net worth. Consider the example of a

household with $200,000 of nonpension wealth along with a pension of $1,000

per month for the head whose is age 65. The wealth value of the pension is

$101,370 at 65 but declines to $38,980 at 80 solely due to the decline in life

expectancy. Even if nonpension wealth remains constant, the decline in pension

wealth lowers net worth from $301,310 to $238,986 or a decline of 21 percent in

15 years.
                                                                                36

                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY


Allen, Steven, Robert Clark and Ann McDermed. "Job Mobility, Older Workers and
     the Role of Pensions." Final Report for Department of Labor Contract
     No. J-9-M5-0049, October 1986.

Allen, Steven, Robert Clark, and Daniel Sumner. "Post-retirement Adjustments
     of Pensions." Journal of Human Resources 21(1986): 118-137.

Avery, Robert, Gregory Elliehausen, and Glenn Canner. "Survey of Consumer
     Finances, 1983." Federal Reserve Bulletin September 1984: 679-692.

Avery, Robert, Gregory Elliehausen, and Glenn Canner. "Survey of Consumer
     Finances, 1983: A Second Report." Federal Reserve Bulletin, December
     1984: 857-868.

Avery, Robert, Gregory Elliehausen and Thomas Gustafson. "Pensions and Social
     Security in Household Portfolios: Evidence from the 1983 Survey of
     Consumer Finances." Research Papers in Banking and Financial Economics,
     Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 1985.

Bulow, Jeremy. "What Are Corporate Pension Liabilities?" Quarter Journal
     Economics 97(1982): 435-452.

Cartwright, William and Robert Friedland. "The President's Commission on
     Pension Policy Household Survey 1979." Review of Income and Wealth
     31(1985): 285-308.

Clark, Robert and Ann McDermed. "Earnings and Pension Compensation: The
     Effect of Eligibility." Quarterly Journal of Economics 101(1986):
     341-361.

Clark, Robert and Ann McDermed. "Labor Contracts, Pension Plans, and Lifetime
     Earnings." Unpublished paper, March 1987.

Feldstein, Martin. "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital
     Accumulation." Journal of Political Economy 82(1974): 905-926.

Feldstein, Martin. "Social Security and Private Savings: Reply." Journal of
     Political Economy 90(1982): 630-642.

Ippolito, Richard. "The Labor Contract and True Economic Pension
     Liabilities." American Economic Review 75(1985): 1031-1043.

Ippolito, Richard. Pensions, Economics, and Public Policy. Homewood, Ill.:
     Dow Jones-Irwin, 1986.

Ippolito, Richard. "Why Federal Workers Don't Quit." Journal of Human
     Resources 22(1987): 281-299.
                                                                               37

Kotlikoff, Laurence and David Wise. "Labor Compensation and the Structure of
     Private Pension Plans." In David Wise (Ed.). Pensions, Labor and
     Individual Choice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985: 55-85.

Mitchell, Olivia. "Fringe Benefits and Labor Mobility." Journal of Human
     Resources 17(1982): 286-298.

Munnell, Alicia. The Effect of Social Security on Personal Savings.
     Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1974.

Munnell, Alicia. "Private Pensions and Savings: New Evidence." Journal of
     Political Economy 84(1976): 1013-1032.

Quinn, Joseph. "The Importance of Social Security and Pension Rights in the
     Wealth Portfolios of Older Americans." In C. Garbacz (Ed.). Economic
     Resources for the Elderly: Prospects for the Future. Boulder, Co.
     Westview Press, 1983: 33-51.

Quinn, Joseph. "Retirement Income Rights as a Component of Wealth." Review of
     Income and Wealth 31(1985): 223-236.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States 1985,
     105th Edition, Bureau of the Census, Washington, D.C., 1984.
                                                                                                  38

Table 1. Employee Compensation and Pension Wealth: Legal Method


                                               Pension Comp.
                                    Pension   As Percent of         Pension        Pension   Pension
Age     Tenure     Earnings         Comp.     Total Comp.           Benefit        Wealth    Savings


25         0      $ 19,959    $        41        0.21          $         0    $         0    $          0

30         5        25,737           402         1.54                1,654          1,530              630

35        10        33,318            845        2.47                4,293          5,340         1,045

40        15        42,946          1,704        3.82                8,323         13,945         2,294

45        20        55,016          3,339        5.72               14,269         32,325         4,833

50        25        69,873          6,395        8.39               22,772         70,361         9,922

55        30        87,684         11,995      12.03                34,543        147,571        20,035

60       35        108,267        22,010       16.89                50,251        302,288    40,040

64       39        126,191        35,199       21.81                65,945        532,487    70,231

65       40        164,680         5,586         3.28               70,304        613,518    81,030

70       45        246,141        -23,610      -10.61              127,045        934,312    75,257


Source: Data are based on a simulation of compensation for a male worker who remains
         with a firm throughout his worklife. He is assumed to have been hired at age 25
         with total annual compensation (earnings plus pension compensation) equal to
         $20,000. Total compensation grows at 5.5 percent per year. The worker is
         covered by a pension with a normal retirement age of 65 and a benefit formula of
         .015 times average earnings in last five years times years of service. The market
         interest rate is 6 percent.
                                                                                                39

Table 2.     Employee Compensation and Pension Wealth: Projected Earnings Method


                                               Pension Comp.
                                     Pension   As Percent of        Pension        Pension     Capital
Age        Tenure    Earnings        Comp.     Total Comp.          Benefit        Wealth      Loss


25             0    $ 18,670    $     1,330        6.65        $        0     $     1,330 $     1,330
30             5      24,353          1,786        6.83             1,562          10,717       9,272

35           10       31,762          2,401        7.03             4,074          26,414      21,346

40            15      41,415          3,234        7.24             7,969          51,752      38,399

45           20       53,982         4,373         7.49            13,853          91,835      60,452

50           25       70,303          5,964        7.82            22,564         155,076      85,357

55           30       91,432          8,247        8.27            35,245         255,654     105,082

60           35      118,664        11,612        8.91             53,434         418,048      96,610

64           39      145,802        15,587        9.66             73,290         623,494      31,700

65           40      173,397         -3,130       -1.84            79,146         690,677            0

70           45      253,590        -31,059      -13.96        134,412            988,489            0




Source: Data are based on a simulation of compensation for a male worker who remains with
         a firm throughout his worklife. He is assumed to have been hired at age 25 with
         total annual compensation (earnings plus pension compensation) equal to $20,000.
         Total compensation grows at 5.5 percent per year. The worker is covered by a
         pension with a normal retirement age of 65 and a benefit formula of .015
         times average earnings in last five years times years of service. The market
         interest rate is 6 percent.
                                                                                40

 Table 3. Pension Benefit Equations for Persons Currently Working and Covered
           by a Defined Benefit Plana

                                  Legal                      Projected
Variable                  CGEb             FGEC           COEd       FGEe


Intercept                -9.44***         -6.89***        1.61       1.72
                         (1.51)           (2.11)         (1.11)     (1.37)

Construction              0.43             0.31          -1.ll***   -l.13***
                          (.91)           (1.11)          (.35)      (.41)

Manufacturing            -0.45            -0.63         -0.51**     -0.43*
                          (.33)            (.41)          (.21)      (.23)

Transportation;          -0.49            -0.58         -0.37       -0.18
Communications            (.36)            (.45)         (.23)       (.27)

Wholesale and            -1.04***         -0.90*        -0.07        0.14
Retail Trade              (.41)            (.50)         (.26)       (.30)

Finance; Ins.;           -1.57***         -1.48***      -0.50*      -0.52
Real Estate               (.42)            (.55)         (.28)       (.33)

Personal and Repair      -0.52            -0.79         -0.80       -0.63*
Services                  (.60)            (.76)         (.31)       (.36)

Professional Services    -0.09            -0.21          0.07        0.24
                          (.35)            (.44)         (.22)       (.24)

Public Administration     0.06             0.02          0.11        0.26
                          (.36)            (.45)         (.23)       (.25)

Managers;                -0.35*           -0.67***       0.19        0.07
Administrators           (0.18)            (.23)         (.15)       (.17)

Sales and Clerical       -0.19            -0.39*        -0.15       -0.20
                          (.17)            (.22)         (.13)       (.15)

Craftsmen;               -0.33*           -0.33         -0.22       -0.15
Protective Services      (.19)             (.23)         (.15)       (.17)

Operatives;             -0.32*            -0.54**       -0.64***    -0.52***
Laborers                 (.19)             (.24)         (.13)       (.15)

Log (Age)                 .76***          0.74**        -1.37***    -1.l7***
                         (.27)            (.35)          (.18)       (.21)
                                                                                     41

Table 3.   (cont'd)

                                  Legal                      Projected
Variable                  CGEb            FGEC            CGEd        FGEe


Log (tenure)              0.97***         l.03***          O.87***    0.90***
                          (.13)           (.17)            (.05)         (.06)

Log (salary)              1.26***         l.02***          l.05***    0.92***
                          (.11)           (.16)            (.09)      (.11)

R2                        0.63            0.53             0.52       0.46



Source: Benefit data are from the pension-provider portion of the Survey of Consumer
         Finance for all persons covered by a defined benefit plan on their current job.
         Other variables for each individual are from the household portion of the SCF.

     aDependent variable is the natural logarithm of pension benefit as calculated
by each of two methods using one of two earnings growth assumption. The omitted
industrial group is agriculture, forestry, fishing and mining. The omitted
occupational group is professional, technical and kindred workers. Standard
errors are in parenthesis.

     bpension benefit is calculated using the legal method assuming a constant
5.5 percent growth in annual earnings.

     cpension benefit is calculated using the legal method assuming the individual
specific growth rate in earnings derived by the Fed.

     dpension benefit is calculated using the projected earnings method assuming
a constant 5.5 percent growth in annual earnings.

     epension benefit is calculated using the projected earnings method assuming
the individual specific growth rate in earnings derived by the Fed.

     *Coefficient is statistically significant at the ten percent confidence
level.

     **Coefficient is statistically significant at the five percent confidence
level.

     ***Coefficient is statistically significant at the one percent confidence
level.
                                                                               42

Table 4. Mean Nonpension Wealth by Age and Pension Status



                         All           Households              Households
    Age            Households        with Pensions          without Pensions


 Less than 25      $     6,342        $    10,292             $     4,842

   25 - 34              31,735             29,731                  34,412

    35 - 44             82,181             75,993                  94,179

   45 - 54             188,503            188,170                 189,122

    55 - 64            196,492            208,896                 177,111

    65 - 74            222,514            293,829                 163,652

 Greater than 74       119,639            200,270                  87,220

 All households        118,419            132,047                 101,862

 No. of households
 in sample               4,103              2,304                   1,799



Source: Weighted household wealth data from the Survey of Consumer Finance.
                                                                                                                               43

Table 5.     Wealth   Estimates: Legal Nethod


                                                                                    NET WO RTH
                  Pension Wealth
               Households with Pensions           All Households       Households   Households with Pensions Percent of
                                                                       Without                               Households
AGE                   CGE          FXE            CGE          RE      Pensions      CGE           RE             with Pension



Less than 25 $ 1,951          $    2,007    $     6,879   $    6,894 $ 4,842        $ 12,243    $ 12,299                27.5



25 - 34               6,899        6,850         35,612       35,584     34,412      36,659       36,609                57.2



 35 - 44          20,383          24,481         98,924       98,329     94,179      101,371     100,469                66.0


45 - 54           70,764          63,451        230,128    225,362      189,122      258,934     251,621                65.0



 55 -   64       121,183          116,498       270,380    267,523      177,111      330,079     325,395                61.0


 65 -   74        55,060          55,066        247,411    247,413      163,652      348,888     348,894                45.2


Greater than    74 25,522         25,651        126,958    126,995       87,220      225,792     225,921                28.7


All Households 47,541             45,180        143,837    142,541      100,261      179,642     177,281                54.8



Source: Weighted pension wealth data derived for households in the Survey                  of Consumer Finance   and weighted
        nonpens ion wealth fran the household-portion of the SCF.
                                                                                                              44
Table 6. Wealth     Estimates: Projected Earnings Method

                                                                        NET WORTH
                      Pens ici Wealth
                  Households with Pensictis    All Households           Households   Households with Pens ious
                                                                        Withcit
AGE                   OCE        E              (XE            FGE      Pensions        CGE              RE

Less than 25       $ 14,862    $ 12,177       $ 10,432     $    9,693   $ 4,842      $ 25,154       $    22,469


  25 - 34            22,923      17,785        44,792          41,848     34,412       52,683            47,544

  35 -   44         57,083       44,530       119,837      111,555        94,179     133,072            120,519


  45 - 54          152,315       79,684       283,277      235,941       189,122     340,485            267,853


  55 - 64          264,702      255,286       357,887      352,146       177,111     473,598            464,183


  65 - 74           54,344       53,249       247,087      246,592       163,652     348,173            347,078


Greater than 74     24,122       23,631       126,556      126,415        87,220     224,392            223,901


All Households      98,291       78,792       171,696      160,992       100,261     230,392            210,893




Source: Weighted pension wealth data derived for households in the Survey of Consumer Finance and weighted
        nonpension wealth fran the household-portion of the SCF.
                                                                                        45

Table 7.    Pension Wealth as a Percent of Total Wealth


                                                 All Households

                                  Legal                              Projected

   Age                   CGE               FGE                CGE                FGE


Less than 25             7.8               8.0                39.2               34.6

  25 - 34               11.1              11.0               29.3                24.3

  35 - 44               16.9              16.4               31.4                26.3

  45 - 54               20.0              18.3               35.0                22.0

  55 - 64               27.3              26.6               45.1                44.2

  65 - 74               10.1              10.1                9.9                 9.8

Greater than 74          5.8               5.8                5.5                 5.4


All Households          18.1              17.4               31.4                26.9


                               Households With Pensions


Less than 25            15.9              16.3               59.1                54.2

  25 - 34               18.8              18.7               43.5                37.4

  35 - 44               25.0              24.4               42.9                36.9

  45 - 54               27.3              25.2               44.7                29.7

  55 - 64               36.7              35.8               55.9                55.0

  65 - 74               15.8              15.8               15.6                15.3

Greater than 74         11.3              11.4               10.8                10.6


All Households          26.5              25.5               42.7                37.4

Source: Weighted pension wealth data derived for households in the Survey of
         Consumer Finance and weighted nonpension wealth from the
         household-portion of the SCF.
                                                                                 46

Table 8.    Pension Savings Aniong Households Participating in a Defined Benefit
            Plan


                                    Legal                       Proj ected

   Age                       CCE                 FCE      CCE            FCE


Less than 25            $     244           $     284   $ 2,658        $ 1,881

  25 - 34                     303                 321     1,972          1,420

  35 - 44                   1,044               1,060     5,997          4,570

  45 - 54                   2,224               2,263     5,340          4,372

  55 - 64                   4,747               4,888     6,940          5,738

  65 - 74                   4,623               4,451     3,829          3,210

Greater than 74               0                   0         0                0


All Households              1,994               2,017    4,512           3,573


Source: Pension savings data as derived using pension wealth from the
         pension-provider portion of the Survey of Consumer Finance.
                                                                                     47

Table 9. Nonpension Wea1tha Distribution by Age:        All Households


Age                    0%        10%        25%        50%      75%       95%      100%


Less than 25           -23.2         -3.7   -    0.7    0.2       5.7       33.2     167.4
 25 - 34               -52.0     -    2.5        0.0    7.1      33.8      148.0   15,497.0
 35 -    44            -44.8     - 0.2           7.9   41.2     104.4      809.6   53,572.5
 45 - 54               - 9.9          0.1       21.1   63.0     205.3    2,689.7   71,993.0
 55 -    64            -73.4          1.0       27.8   88.7     409.5    5,149.5   86,820.5
 65 - 74               -40.0          2.9       25.6   78.4     370.2    4,729.8   51,079.0

Greater than 74        - 2.7          0.2        7.3   44.3     137.5    4,594.4   35,033.1


All Households         -73.4     - 0.4           3.1   38.3     123.0    2,231.7   86,820.5



Source: Weighted household wealth data from the Survey of Consumer Finance.


        aReported in units of $1000
                                                                                      48

Table 10. Nonpension Wealtha Distribution by Age:   Households with Pensions


Age                  0%       10%       25%         50%     75%       95%           100%


Less than 25         -23.2     - 4.3    - 1.4         1.8    16.2           33.2      167.4

 25 - 34             -52.0     - 2.6      0.0        11.7    35.9        110.7      2,632.9

 35 - 44             -44.8      0.3      12.9       45.3    101.8       704.6       6,471.8

45 - 54              - 9.9      3.4      30.6        74.1   212.0     3,484.6      58,690.6

 55 - 64             - 6.0     13.1      48.2       104.9   554.8     5,418.2      32,142.3

 65 - 74             - 3.3     15.7      47.0       114.0   687.9     5,165.8      51,079.0

Greater than 74      - 2.7      8.7      36.8        90.1   210.3     7,279.7      25,127.3


All households       -52.0      0.0      12.8        51.6   145.4     2,764.0      58,690.6



Source: Weighted household wealth data from the Survey of Consumer Finance.


      aReported in units of $1000
                                                                                    L9

Table 11. Nonpension Wealtha Distribution by Age: Households without Pensions


Age                  0%        10%     25%       50%       75%       95%


Less than 25         -11.0     -3.7     -0.6      0.1       3.3       35.2         132.9


 25 - 34             -39.9     -2.4    -0.1       2.0      30.3      192.0      15,497.0


 35 - 44             -11.8     -0.9     0.1      30.4     120.5    1,366.6      53,572.5

 45 - 54             - 7.9      0.0     2.6      42.1     203.8    1,997.6      71,993.0


 55 - 64             -73.4      0.0     5.4      51.2     260.1    4,397.1      86,820.5


 65 - 74             -40.0      0.5    12.0      56.2     225.7    2,654.6      41,530.2


Greater than 74      - 1.7      0.0     3.2      29.9      91.2    2,926.8      35,033.1


All households       -73.4     -0.7     0.1      18.0      92.0    1,563.4      86,820.5



Source: Weighted household wealth data from the Survey of Consumer Finance.


      aReported in units of $1000
                                                                                 50

Table 12. Pension Wealtha Distribution by Age: Households with pensions, Legal CGE


Age                  0%        10%     25%       50%       75%      95%        100%


Less than 25         0.0       0.0      0.0       0.2        2.0      9.0            29.1


 25 - 34             0.0       0.0      0.0       1.8        7.3     35.8        141.9

 35 - 44             0.0       0.0      2.0      11.6       29.2    152.0      1,158.8

 45 - 54             0.0       0.0     12.4      39.8      114.3    492.8      5,338.2

 55 - 64             0.0       7.3     33.0      80.7      195.3    879.1     17,289.3

 65 - 74             0.7       7.0     19.5      44.3      122.6    552.6      3,564.7

Greater than 74      0.8       2.6      6.3      20.9      42.1     245.7        900.0


All households       0.0       0.0      2.2      17.7       66.6    383.2     17,289.3



Source: Weighted pension wealth data derived from the pension-provider portion of the
         Survey of Consumer Finance.


      aReported in units of $1000
                                                                                    51

Table 13. Pension Wealtha Distribution by Age: Households with Pensions Projected
               Earnings CGE


Age                  0%        10%     25%       50%       75%       95%        100%


Less than 25         0.0       0.0      0.7       3.0        6.7     109.2          270.9


 25 - 34             0.0       0.9      3.5       9.1       24.2     104.1          330.3
 35 - 44             0.0       2.5      8.9      25.5       73.1     300.5      5,941.1
 45 - 54             0.0       4.0     19.8      59.4      162.1     905.0     94,079.9
 55 - 64             0.0      10.2     32.4      86.9      230.7   1,261.4     44,678.6
 65 - 74             0.7       7.0     19.6      44.8      116.1     560.2      5,381.7
Greater than 74      0.8       2.6      6.3      20.9       42.1     245.7          900.0


All households       0.0       2.1      8.7      30.6      100.3     486.2     94,079.9



Source: Weighted pension wealth data derived from the pension-provider portion of the
         Survey of Consumer Finance.


      aReported in units of $1000
                                                                                      52

Table 14. Net Wortha Distribution by Age: All Households, Legal CGE


Age                  0%        10%     25%        50%      75%        95%           100%


Less than 25         -21.7     -3.6    -   0.6     0.3       6.3            34.5      169.4


 25 - 34             -51.2     -1.9        0.0      9.6     39.6        165.8      15 ,497.0

 35 - 44             -44.6      0.0        13.2    51.3    130.7      1,013.2      53 ,572.5

 45 - 54             - 7.9      2.5        33.7   103.0    292.3      3,039.6      71 ,993.0

 55 - 64             -73.4      5.5        51.7   160.8    572.6      5,896.7      86 ,820.5

 65 - 74             -40.0      8.1        34.6    98.2    414.8      5,162.2      51 ,627.4

Greater than 74      - 1.9      0.2        8.5    52.0     143.6      4,594.4      35 ,033.1


All households       -73.4      0.0        6.6    49.8     169.2      2,463.2      86 ,820.5




Source: Weighted pension and nonpension wealth data derived from the Survey of Consumer
         Finance.

      aReported in units of $1000.
                                                                                     53

Table 15. Net Wortha Distribution by Age: All Households, Projected Earnings CGE


Age                      0%      10%    25%      50%       75%       95%           100%


Less than 25             -21.7   -2.8   - 0.5      0.4       8.5           49.7      269.0


 25 - 34                 -51.3   -1.1    0.7      15.3      52.6       206.0      15,497.0
 35 - 44                 -44.6    0.5   20.2      67.7     164.4     1,063.5      53,572.5
 45 - 54                 - 7.9    3.2   40.3     116.1     353.2     3,553.8      95,071.3
 55 - 64                 -73.4    7.0   51.9     161.0     595.9     6,184.7      86,820.5
 65 -    74              -40.0    8.1   34.6     100.0     408.3     4,923.3      51,627.4
Greater than 74          - 1.9    0.2    8.5      52.0     143.6     4,594.4      35,033.1


All households           -73.4    0.0    9.6      57.9     195.9     2,557.6      95,071.3



Source: Weighted pension and nonpension wealth data derived from the Survey of Consumer
              Finance.


        aReported in units of $1000
                                                                                     54

Table 16. Net Wortha Distribution by Age: Households with Pension, Legal CGE


Age                 0%         10%     25%       50%       75%       95%           100%


Less than 25         -21.7     - 3.6   - 2.2       3.8      19.2           34.3      169.4


 25 - 34             -51.3     - 1.4     3.0      18.3      45.6       152.1       2,703.4

 35 - 44             -44.6       6.1    25.5      63.5     133.2       796.4       7,630.6

 45 - 54             - 2.2      23.1    57.3     128.9     343.2     3,904.3      58,919.8

 55 - 64             - 0.8     48.8    102.3     234.0     882.6     6,418.9      34,586.7

 65 - 74                 9.4    38.7    79.1     158.3     827.4     5,570.5      51,627.4

Greater than 74      - 1.9      20.3    57.6     115.4     230.0     7,537.2      25,544.3


All households       -51.3      4.0     24.8      84.5     229.5     3,214.0      58,919.8



Source: Weighted pension and nonpension wealth data derived from the Survey of Consumer
         Finance.

      aReported in units of $1000
                                                                                   55

Table 17. Net Wortha Distribution by Age: Households with Pensions, Projected
          Earnings CGE


Age                  0%         10%         25%    50%     75%       95%         100%


Less than 25         -21.7      -    1.6     0.4     7.7    27.8       156.4       269.0
 25 - 34             -51.3           1.9     8.9    27.4    66.4       207.0     2,731.8
 35 - 44             -44.6          12.3    35.1    87.9   181.0       920.4    12,412.9
 45 - 54             - 3.6          30.5    76.4   144.1   436.2     4,008.2    95,071.3
 55 - 64                  0.3       50.3   107.8   270.0   926.7     6,667.0    44,699.2
 65 - 74                  9.4       38.7   79.1    159.0   827.4     5,968.5    51,627.4
Greater than 74      - 1.9      20.3       57.6    115.4   230.0     7,537.2    25,544.3


All households       -51.3          9.1    33.8     99.2   277.3     3,340.3    95,071.3



Source: Weighted pension and nonpension wealth data derived from the Survey of Consumer
         Finance.

      aReported in units of $1000
                                                                                                                  56

Table 18. Neasurennt of Wealth Ditri1xitiou

                       Non Pens ion Wealth                               Net Worth: Legal CCE
Household        Percent of Wealth Held By              Gin!          Percent of Net Worth Held By         Gin!
Age                    Top 5%        Top 1%        Coefficient          Top 5%        Top 1%            Coefficient



less than 25            55.5          25.4              .891             53.3             23.6             .875

  25 -     34           47.8          22.5              .799             43.5          20.2                .769

  35 - 44               41.9          20.3              .706             37.7             18.8             .688


  45 - 54               62.2          40.3              .800             54.6             34.3             .739


  55 - 64               50.7          27.2              .745             43.6          23.3                .686


  65 - 74               56.1          35.0              .782             52.5             32.6             .749


Greater than 74         50.9          35.7              .763             49.3             34.0             .750



All Households          57.9           35.5             .806             52.5             31.1             .777



                       Net Worth: Projected CGE
Household            Percent     of Net Worth Held By          Gin!
Age                     Top 5%           Top 1%          Coefficient
Less than 25              53.7            25.3                 .860

  25 -     34             39.1            17.1                 .730

  35 -     44             34.5            16.2                 .646

  45   -   54             57.4            40.2                 .761


  55   -   64             55.2            38.2                 .751


  65   -   74             52.7            32.9                 .749

Greater    than 74       49.1             34.1                 .749



All Households           55.0             36.2                 .783


Source:     Weighted   pension and nonpension wealth data derived fran the       Survey   of Consuser Finance.
                                                                                57



    100




    90




    80




P   70
E
R
U
E
N
    60
T
A
6
E
    50
0
F

w
     0
E
A
L
T
H   30




    20




    10




     0

          0   10   20     30        qo      50     60     70       80      90   100

                               PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS

                   ______ Nonpension wealth                    Net worth

                   Figure 1. Distribution of Wealth: Legal Method
                                                                                      58


    100




     90



     80




P
     70
E
R
C
E
N
     60
T
A
G
E
     50
U
F

w
     140
E
A
L
T
H
     30



     20




     10



       0

           0      10      20      30        140     50     60      70     80   90   100
                                       PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS


                       Nonpension wealth                    Net Worth


               Figure 2. Distribution of Wealth:     Projected Earnings
