                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 BLOCKCHAIN DISRUPTION AND SMART CONTRACTS

                                      Lin William Cong
                                         Zhiguo He

                                     Working Paper 24399
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24399


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2018, Revised April 2018




The authors thank Matthieu Bouvard, Alex Edmans, Andreas Park, Maureen O'Hara, Edward
“Ned” Prescott, Hongda Zhong, and an anonymous referee for insightful discussions of the paper,
and Jingtao Zheng for excellent research assistance that helped shape an initial version of the
paper. They are also grateful to Susan Athey, Tom Ding, Itay Goldstein, Brett Green, Campbell
Harvey, Gur Huberman, Wei Jiang, Andrew Karolyi, Jiasun Li, Minyu Peng, Chung-Hua Shen,
Dominic Williams, David Yermack, and seminar and conference participants at Chicago Booth,
HBS, Notre Dame Mendoza, CUHK Econ, AEA, NBER Conference on Competition and the
Industrial Organization of Securities Markets, RFS FinTech workshop, Federal Reserve Bank in
Philadelphia FinTech Conference, USC FOM Conference, 25th SFM Conference, CEIBS
Behavioral Finance and FinTech Forum, SFS Calvacade Asia-Pacific, AMAC FinTech and Smart
Investing Workshop, TAU Finance Conference, and NBER Conference on Financial Market
Regulation for very helpful feedback and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lin William Cong and Zhiguo He. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Blockchain Disruption and Smart Contracts
Lin William Cong and Zhiguo He
NBER Working Paper No. 24399
March 2018, Revised April 2018
JEL No. D4,D8,G2,L13,L4,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Blockchain technology provides decentralized consensus and potentially enlarges the contracting
space using smart contracts with tamper-proofness and algorithmic executions. Meanwhile,
generating decentralized consensus entails distributing information which necessarily alters the
informational environment. We analyze how decentralization affects consensus effectiveness, and
how the quintessential features of blockchain reshape industrial organization and the landscape of
competition. Smart contracts can mitigate informational asymmetry and improve welfare and
consumer surplus through enhanced entry and competition, yet the irreducible distribution of
information during consensus generation may encourage greater collusion. In general,
blockchains can sustain market equilibria with a wider range of economic outcomes. We further
discuss anti-trust policy implications targeted to blockchain applications, such as separating
consensus record-keepers from users.


Lin William Cong
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave,
Chicago, IL 60637
will.cong@chicagobooth.edu

Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
1       Introduction
    Blockchain, a distributed ledger technology managed in a decentralized manner (often au-
tonomously), was first popularized as the technology behind the cryptocurrency Bitcoin. It
has since emerged in various other forms, often with the ability to store and execute computer
programs. This has given rise to applications such as smart contracts featuring payments
triggered by tamper-proof consensus on contingent outcomes, and financing through initial
coin offerings. Many industry practitioners argue that blockchain technology has the po-
tential to disrupt business and financial services in the way the Internet disrupted off-line
commerce. Others remain skeptical of its genuine innovativeness and real-world applicability,
not to mention its association with money laundering or drug dealing.1 Figure 1 displays
Google searches showing the rising popularity of blockchain technology in recent years, as
well as the the growing number of open-source projects that are related to blockchain and
smart contract.
    In this paper, we argue that despite a plethora of definitions, descriptions, and appli-
cations of blockchain and decentralized ledger, the technology and its various incarnations
share a core functionality in providing a “decentralized consensus.” Decentralized consen-
sus is a description of the state of the world—e.g., whether the goods have been delivered
or whether a payment has been made—that is universally accepted and acted upon by all
agents in the system. Economists have long recognized that consensus enables agents with
divergent perspectives and incentives to interact as if it provided the “truth,” which has
profound implications on the functioning of society, including ethics, contracting, and legal
enforcement, among others. What is key for blockchain technology is that such a consensus
is generated and maintained in a decentralized manner, which blockchain advocates believe
can improve the resilience of the system and reduce the rent extracted by centralized third
parties.2 For example, on the Bitcoin blockchain, given the transaction history, agents can
check and verify transaction records digitally to prevent “double-spending” the digital cur-
rency and freeing everyone from the need of a centralized trustworthy arbitrator or third
    1
      The Oct 31, 2015 issue of the Economist ran a cover story, “the Trust Machine,” which argued that
“the technology behind bitcoin could change how the economy works.” Marc Andreessen, the cocreator of
Netscape, even exclaimed “This is the thing! This is the distributed trust network that the Internet always
needed and never had.” On the negative side, see Narayanan and Clark (2017), Blockchain is meaningless,
and Ten years in, nobody has come up with a use for blockchain.
    2
      As is evident when Satoshi Nakamoto, founder of Bitcoin, remarked, “A lot of people automatically
dismiss e-currency as a lost cause because of all the companies that failed since the 1990s. I hope its obvious
it was only the centrally controlled nature of those systems that doomed them. I think this is the first time
were trying a decentralized, non-trust-based system.”



                                                      1
party.3




Figure 1: Trends about Blockchain and Smart Contracts. The left panel displays relative
search interest and plots each search term relative to its peak (normalized to 100) for the given region and
time. The right panel shows the number of blockchain and smart contract projects hosted on Github from
Jan 2013-April 2018, a major open-source development platform for coding programs around the world.



    Blockchains interact with dispersed record keepers to reach decentralized consensus using
the latest technologies. Two economic forces then naturally arise: programmable decentral-
ized consensus, if achieved, tends to make contracting on contingencies easier thanks to its
temper-proof and automated nature; however, achieving such consensus requires sufficiently
distributing information for verification. Consequently, blockchain applications typically
feature a fundamental tension between decentralized consensus and information distribu-
tion. The former enhances contractibility and is welfare-improving, while the latter could be
detrimental to the society. This fundamental tension we highlight has since been recognized
by governments, media, and industry research. For example, the Jasper Project at the
Bank of Canada in 2017 reveals that,
    “More robust data verification requires wider sharing of information. The balance required
between transparency and privacy poses a fundamental question to the viability of the system
for such uses once its core and defining feature is limited.”4
    Our paper offers the first analysis on this core issue of blockchain. As we discuss in
more detail in the literature review, there are two economically relevant areas of research
   3
     Double-spending is a potential flaw in a digital cash system in which the same digital currency can be
spent more than once when there lacks a consensus record of transaction histories because the digital file it
consists of can be duplicated or falsified.
   4
     See, “‘Not There Yet’: Bank of Canada Experiments with Blockchain Wholesale Payment System,”
by Maureen Gillis and Alexandru Trusca, CyberLex, June 19th, 2017, and Chapman, Garratt, Hendry,
McCormack, and McMahon (2017). de Vilaca Burgos, de Oliveira Filho, Suares, and de Almeida (2017)
emphasize the same point.


                                                     2
on blockchain: (1) blockchain mechanisms for generating and maintaining decentralized
consensus; (2) real-world implications given the functionality blockchain provides. Our paper
contributes to both fronts by highlighting a universal tradeoff in this technology (as opposed
to analyzing the strategic mining games specific to the Bitcoin protocol), as well as studying
the impact of this technology on industrial organization.
    We first provide a simple framework to think about the process of reaching decentralized
consensus on a blockchain in trade-finance application. Most blockchains have overlapping
communities of record keepers and users. Similar to third-party arbitrators in the real world,
they receive signals on the true state of the world and may have incentives to misreport (tam-
per or manipulate). With the help of fast-developing real-time communication technologies
among decentralized record keepers, a carefully designed protocol on blockchains can reduce
individual’s incentive to manipulate and misreport, allowing more efficient information ag-
gregation. Compared to traditional contracting, blockchains have the potential to produce
a consensus that better reflects the “truth” of contingencies that are highly relevant for
business operations, thereby enhancing contracting on these contingencies. Nevertheless,
generating a more effective consensus (i.e., a consensus closer to truth) is predicated on de-
centralized record-keepers’ observing and receiving greater amount of information.5 The key
insight is that information distribution process changes the informational environment, and
hence the economic behaviors of blockchain participants.
    Armed with this insight, we then analyze the impact of blockchain technology on com-
petition and industrial organization. Specifically, our model features two incumbent sellers
known to be authentic, and an entrant who only has some probability of being authentic.
Authentic sellers always deliver the goods while the fraudulent ones cannot. In each period,
buyers as a group show up with a constant probability (reflecting the aggregate business
condition), shop the sellers based on price quotes, and then exit the economy. Each seller
observes her own customers but does not observe the other sellers’ prices or customers. We
call this economic environment the “traditional world,” in which it is infeasible to commu-
nicate information across agents, in the spirit of Green and Porter (1984).
    In this traditional world, due to contract incompleteness, sellers cannot offer prices con-
tingent on the success of delivering the goods. The lemons problem thus precludes entry. On
the other hand, two incumbents might engage in collusion in equilibrium. However, because
incumbent sellers cannot differentiate the event of no buyers showing up from the event of
   5
     Some of the information can be encrypted. In the case of public blockchains (e.g., Bitcoins), the consensus
is typically generated by all users.



                                                       3
the other seller stealing her market share, aggressive price wars occur too often, making it
relatively hard to sustain collusion among incumbent sellers.
    In contrast, blockchains, via decentralized consensus, enable agents to contract on de-
livery outcomes and automate contingent transfers. Hence, the authentic entrant is now
able to signal her authenticity fully. This eliminates information asymmetry as a barrier for
entry and greater competition, enhancing welfare and consumer surplus in this “blockchain
world”.
    However, as mentioned before, generating decentralized consensus also inevitably leads to
greater knowledge of aggregate business condition on the blockchain, which we we show can
foster tacit collusion among sellers. In contrast to the traditional world where sellers do not
observe one another’s business activities, in the blockchain world they at least can infer the
aggregate business condition on the blockchain—by serving as record keepers—and hence
are able to detect deviations in any collusive equilibrium. Consistent with this intuition,
we show that with blockchains in which only incumbents can participate, there are always
weakly more collusion equilibria than those sustainable in the traditional world.
    Our model thus features the trade-off between potentially enhanced competition and
aggravated collusion, both arising from the blockchain technology. More generally, with
blockchain (accessible to both incumbents and entrants) and smart contracts, the set of
possible dynamic equilibria expands, leading to social welfare and consumer surplus that
could be higher or lower than in a traditional world.
    Our findings relate to the widespread concern that blockchains may jeopardize mar-
ket competitiveness in a serious way. This becomes especially relevant for permissioned
blockchains with powerful financial institutions as exclusive members.6 Our paper highlights
one salient economic mechanism through which blockchain facilitates collusion, and we ex-
plore policy implications of our model. For instance, an oft-neglected regulatory solution
is to separate usage and consensus generation on blockchains, so that sellers cannot use
the consensus-generating information for the purpose of sustaining collusion. By providing
a conceptual description of blockchain and smart contracts from an economic perspective,
our analysis aims to demonstrate that blockchains are not merely database technologies that
reduce the cost of storing or sharing data. Rather, the design of the blockchain can have pro-
found economic implications on consensus generation, industrial organization, smart contract
design, and anti-trust policy. Overall, we provide a cautionary tale that blockchain tech-
   6
    See, for example, “Exposing the ‘If we call it a blockchain, perhaps it won’t be deemed a cartel?’ tactic,”
by Izabella Kaminska, Financial Times, May 11th, 2015.



                                                      4
nology, while holding great potential in mitigating information asymmetry and encouraging
entry, can also lead to greater collusive behavior.

Related Literature Our paper adds to the emerging literature on blockchains, which
thus far has mainly come from computer scientists. There are two economically relevant
areas of research on blockchain: (1) blockchain mechanisms for generating and maintaining
decentralized consensus, and (2) real-world implications given the functionality blockchain
provides. The first category can be further divided into the studies analyzing the general
process of consensus generation for most blockchains, emphasizing the tradeoffs in decentral-
ization, and the studies exploring the game theoretical topics including incentive provisions
and market microstructure, taking as given a particular blockchain protocol such as the min-
ing protocols in Bitcoin. While most of existing literatures focus on the latter subcategory,
our paper adds to the former, and links the analysis directly to the technology’s impact on
the real economy.
    Among studies on the application and economic impact of the technology, Harvey (2016)
briefly surveys the mechanics and applications of crypto-finance, especially Bitcoin.7 Yer-
mack (2017) evaluates the potential impacts of the blockchain technology on corporate gov-
ernance. Complementary to our discussion on smart contracts, Bartoletti and Pompianu
(2017) empirically document how smart contracts are interpreted and programmed on var-
ious blockchain platforms. We add by examining arguably the most defining features of
blockchain, and how they interact with information asymmetry and affect market competi-
tion, both of which are important, general issues in economics.
    Related to our analysis on the underlying mechanism for generating decentralized consen-
sus are studies on Bitcoin mining games. Kroll, Davey, and Felten (2013) note that miners’
following the “Longest Chain Rule” should be a Nash equilibrium. Biais, Bisiere, Bouvard,
and Casamatta (2018) formalize the mining game and discuss multiple equilibria.8 Instead
of taking as given specific blockchain protocols such as that of Bitcoin and analyzing strate-
gic behaviors of miners or market microstructure, we take a holistic approach to examine
universal features of blockchains, with a direct focus on how the information distribution
   7
     Other papers on various applications such as trading and digital currency include Catalini and Gans
(2016), Malinova and Park (2016), Khapko and Zoican (2017), Raskin and Yermack (2016), and Cong, Li,
and Wang (2018).
   8
     Eyal and Sirer (2014) and Nayak, Kumar, Miller, and Shi (2016) study “selfish mining” and the related
“stubborn mining” in which miners launch block-withholding attacks. Easley, O’Hara, and Basu (2017) and
Huberman, Leshno, and Moallemi (2017) analyze Bitcoin transaction fees, and discuss the inefficiencies and
congestion in mining and transactions. Cong, He, and Li (2018) study the organization of and compensation
in mining pools.


                                                    5
that comes with decentralization interacts with the quality of consensus generation. Impor-
tantly, the technology’s core concept of decentralization has both pros and cons. Concerns
for information distribution constitute a natural force to stay centralized under a supposedly
decentralized system. We focus on the information channel in this paper while Cong, He,
and Li (2018) explore a risk-sharing channel.
    Our analysis on collusion adds to the large literature on industrial organization and re-
peated games with monitoring (see, e.g., Tirole (1988)). Our model ingredients partially
derive from Porter (1983) and Green and Porter (1984), which study collusion in Cournot
setting with imperfect public monitoring. A recent empirical study by Bourveau, She, and
Zaldokas (2017) shows how collusion relates to firms’ financial disclosure strategies (infor-
mation distribution in our language). We instead examine Bertrand competition, and link
the additional observable or contractible information to the type of monitoring in repeated
games under the technological innovation.9
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides institutional details on
blockchains, smart contracts, and their applications, with a simple framework for under-
standing the key economic trade-offs surrounding decentralized consensus and information
distribution; Section 3 takes the core functionality of blockchain as given and analyzes dy-
namic industrial equilibria in both traditional and blockchain worlds, demonstrating that
blockchain technology facilitates entry and cartelism; Section 4 discusses policy implications
and model extensions; Section 5 concludes.


2       Blockchain as Decentralized Consensus
    It is commonly recognized that blockchains provide many functions, such as distributed
data storage, anonymity, data obfuscation, shared ledgers, and so on. Because solutions to
these problems are well known outside of the blockchain space, the impact of blockchain along
these dimensions, though material, is somewhat incidental. We therefore focus on their core
functionality of providing decentralized consensus. In other words, rather than analyzing
the technical details of various protocols or additional benefits the technology brings about,
this paper underscores the economic implications of decentralized consensus, and the natural
    9
    Our analysis of sustainable equilibria is related to Fudenberg and Maskin (1986); our discussion on
the application of blockchain and smart contract in financial services and transactions is broadly linked to
optimal contracting, especially concerning information asymmetry and contract incompleteness (e.g., Baron
and Myerson (1982), Hart and Moore (1988), and Tirole (1999)).




                                                     6
process that accompanies it — information distribution due to decentralization.
    In this section, we first provide an overview of the blockchain technology, highlighting
decentralized consensus as its core feature and the tradeoffs therein. We then model the
generation of decentralized consensus and information distribution, before discussing various
real-world business applications in the financial industry.


2.1     Blockchains and Smart Contracts
    The work on blockchain dates back to 1991 by Stuart Haber and W. Scott Stornetta, but
it was only until 2008 that the first blockchain was conceptualized by Satoshi Nakamoto.
Nakamoto implemented and popularized the blockchain through the cryptocurrency Bitcoin
(Nakamoto (2008)).10 Its simplest form entails a distributed database that autonomously
maintains a continuously growing list of public transaction records in units of “blocks,”
secured from tampering and revision. Each block contains a time-stamp and a link to a
previous block. Other forms of blockchains have emerged subsequently with different designs
on exclusivity, transparency, and maintenance of the records. Yermack (2017) summarizes
how blockchains work.
    All blockchains—to varying degrees—aim to create a database system that parties can
jointly maintain and edit in a decentralized manner, with no individual party exercising
central control. One defining feature of blockchain architectures is thus their ability to
maintain, in a relatively more effective way, a uniform view on the state of things and the
order of events – a consensus.
    As consensus is essential to many economic and social functions, the benefits and em-
powerment for everyone sharing and trusting the same ledger are clear. Settlements in
some cases no longer take days, lemons problems and frauds can be mitigated, and the list
continues. These outcomes will likely affect the agents’ ex-ante incentives in the economy.
Traditionally, courts, governments, notary agencies, etc., provide such consensus, but in a
way that was sometimes thought to be labor-intensive, time-consuming, and prone to tam-
pering and monopoly power. In this regard, many advocates of the technology believe that
blockchains hold the promise of disrupting many industries by providing consensus in a more
decentralized manner, albeit still potentially costly in ways of energy consumption as well
  10
    Böhme, Christin, Edelman, and Moore (2015) surveys Bitcoin’s design principles and properties, risks,
and regulation. Narayanan, Bonneau, Felten, Miller, and Goldfeder (2016) is an in-depth introduction for the
technical details of Bitcoin blockchain. True to the Stigler’s law of eponymy, the ingredients and principles
for Bitcoin were introduced much earlier, and Nakamoto’s innovation truly lies in putting it altogether. See
Narayanan and Clark (2017) for further details.


                                                     7
as informational concerns that we focus on in this paper.

Decentralized Consensus

    To produce and maintain a decentralized consensus without a centralized authority,
blockchain protocols are designed to incentivize responsible and accurate record-keeping
by a community of dispersed “record keepers”, typically in a competitive manner, while
reducing manipulation and tampering. In a sense, all decentralized consensus must come to
some form of “majority” vote, though the algorithms may vary significantly across projects
and applications.
    Two widely discussed designs for maintaining decentralized consensus are proof-of-work
(PoW) and proof-of-stake (PoS). PoW rewards record keepers who solve complicated cryp-
tographical puzzles in order to validate transactions and create new blocks (i.e., mining). It
prevents attacks such as denial-of-service (DoS attack) and ensures that once one observes
a valid state of the ledger, transactions that have certain age cannot be negated, as doing so
requires the malicious entity to have computing power that can compete with the entire net-
work. Consequently, the blockchain achieves tamper-proof consensus on the validity of these
transactions. Unlike PoW, in PoS the creator of the next block is chosen in a deterministic
manner, and the chance that an agent is chosen depends on his/her wealth (i.e., the stake).
Other prominent designs include practical byzantine fault tolerance algorithm (PBFT) and
the delegated proof-of-stake algorithm (DPoS).11 Instead of comparing specific designs, we
will model decentralized consensus algorithm in abstraction in order to shed lights on most
extant designs.
    It is worth noting that many algorithm designs in their current forms are imperfect; but
they have improved quickly and substantially. For instance, while there have been several
hacking incidents on blockchains and criticisms of Bitcoin mining for wasting electricity,
there have been multiple proposals to address these issues by improving the protocol design
and furthering decentralization.12 Another problem practitioners are actively researching on
is the lack of consensus on how to modify blockchain protocols, which generally leads to
  11
     DPoS works along the same lines as the PoS system, except that individuals vote an overarching entity
to represent their portion of stake in the system (hence the word delegation). PBFT deals with robust
synchronous agreement in the presence of some malicious fault nodes.
  12
     Lightning, which builds on the Bitcoin blockchain, reduces the amount of information that has to be
recorded on the blockchain to increase processing power; LITEX similarly facilitates using various cryp-
tocurrencies as means of payment among retailers; Phi from String Lab builds on Ethereum to ensure
higher security and execution speed; startup firms such as BOINC channel mining computation to solving
scientific problems.



                                                    8
forking and temporary confusion about which blockchain users should follow.

Smart Contracts

    The recent development of blockchain technology has revived the notion and facilitated
the creation of smart contracts, originally envisioned by Szabo in 1994 (e.g., Tapscott and
Tapscott (2016)). While a universally-accepted definition (no pun intended) for smart con-
tracts has yet to be reached, their core functionality is clear: contracting on contingencies
reached based on a decentralized consensus, with low-cost and more automated execution.
This leads to a natural functional definition of smart contracts:
    Smart contracts are digital contracts allowing terms contingent on decentralized con-
sensus that are tamper-proof and typically self-enforcing through automated execution.
    Our definition is consistent with and nests the definitions commonly seen among legal
scholars (Lauslahti, Mattila, Seppälä, et al. (2016)), and in Szabo (1997, 1998). It is im-
portant to note that smart contracts are not merely digital contracts (many of which rely
on trusted authority for reaching consensus and execution), nor are they entailing artificial
intelligence (on the contrary they are rather robotic).
    Without decentralized consensus, the party providing centralized consensus often enjoys
huge market power (for example, a third party with data monopoly). And traditional resolu-
tions by third parties such as courts or arbitrators involve high degrees of human intervention
that are less algorithmic, potentially leading to greater uncertainty and cost. Smart con-
tracts can increase contractibility and facilitate exchanging money, property, shares, service,
or anything of value in an algorithmically automated and conflict-free way.13
    Concerning contracting theory, the decentralized consensus reached by blockchain tech-
nology has the potential to greatly reduce the scope of noncontractible contingencies, the
underpinning of the incomplete contract literature (e.g., Hart (1995)). In particular, smart
contracts can augment contractibility and enforceability on certain contingencies, be it the
lock-in requirement for fund withdrawal or the automated payment upon an importer’s suc-
cessfully receiving the goods. That said, the enhanced contractibility comes at the expense of
greater information distribution, and the overall impact on the economy is far from obvious.
  13
    Even with a weaker definition of smart contracting requiring execution be conducted by centralized
parties, having a consensus record reduces contracting and execution frictions significantly, as seen in recent
applications in the land registry in Georgia (Weiss and Corsi (2017)).




                                                      9
Information Distribution

    Achieving decentralized consensus requires information distribution among participants
in the system. The economic tradeoffs involved in information distribution necessary for
generating a decentralized consensus are highly relevant from the practical or regulatory
perspective. With Bitcoin, the consensus is reached and maintained through distributing all
transaction information (with public-key-encrypted owner addresses) to the entire population
on the blockchain, so all transaction details (except for identities) recorded on the consensus
are public information. One obvious issue that arises when pushing for real-world blockchain
applications is business privacy. For instance, financial institutions are typically sensitive to
reveal the details of the transaction to unrelated parties. For example, traders may want
to hide their identities to prevent front-running (Malinova and Park (2016)), and greater
information distribution may also affect industrial organization and competition, as this
paper shows.
    Facing this fundamental trade-off, there are many proposals for better encryption which
effectively masks sensitive information in the process of consensus generation. Another
straightforward compromise is to reach a decentralized consensus only on a subset of im-
portant states of world, or requesting verification from fewer nodes (record keepers) in the
blockchain network.14 In what ways does information distribution matter beyond privacy
concerns? Will it affect the effectiveness of blockchain consensus? Extant theory tells us
very little.


2.2     A Model of Decentralized Consensus and Information
   We build a simple economic model of the mechanism of consensus generation, highlighting
the role of record keepers and the inevitable nature of information distribution. Our model
setup is motivated by the application of trade-finance, which has been proposed and widely
explored by industry practitioners.
  14
    For example, Aune, O’Hara, and Slama (2017) discuss the use of first-stage hashing to secure time-
priority without revealing detailed information and revealing information later, in order to prevent front-
running a transaction before it is recorded on a block on distributed ledgers. Directly related is the so-called
“Zero Knowledge Proof” in computer science; in layman’s language, participants can agree on certain facts
without revealing useful information.




                                                      10
Trade-finance Example

    Consider the following scenario many industry pioneers discuss: there are multiple po-
tentially international exporters (sellers) of certain goods which require shipping with proper
care (say, wine, so the temperature is critical for good condition). The success of selling these
goods to importers (customers) require various other parties such as logistics providers, in-
ternational ports and customs (for the flow of goods), notaries, and financing intermediaries
(for the flow of payments).
    Say a seller is shipping the goods to a customer. Let us examine the information flow in
generating the consensus on delivering the goods, a contingency represented by ω̃ in Figure
2.




Figure 2: A diagram of Trade-Finance example on blockchain. A seller delivers goods to a
buyer, with ω̃ denoting the contingency of successful delivery. record keepers, potentially with real-time IoT
sensors, monitor the delivery and submit their reports ỹk ’s. The protocol of blockchain aggregates these
reports to form a decentralized consensus z̃. This consensus, together the smart contract, is stored in the
block and then added to the blockchain.



    The participants, necessarily including the seller and buyer, can monitor the physical


                                                     11
conditions (e.g., location and temperature) of the goods via the end-to-end information
collection, enabled by sensors, smart input mechanisms, and real-time data processing, or
more broadly, Internet-of-Things (IoT). For better monitoring and more transparency, these
IoT sensors could be installed on other relevant parties that handle logistics. The seller-buyer
pair receives this information (including notification of final delivery) along the way.
    Other parties on the blockchain may receive relevant information that can help monitor
the process. For instance, the other sellers may also have installed IoT sensors able to detect
the goods’ delivery. Even without the help of IoT, other customers who happen to collect
other goods at the same port may observe relevant information on this particular delivery.
At this stage, these signals are not yet recorded on blockchain.
    The crucial step on blockchain is to generate a decentralized consensus on whether the
goods has been successfully delivered, so that information from many relevant parties can be
aggregated to something that is accepted by the community—and recorded to the blockchain.
This is done by contacting verifiers on the blockchain. In our trade-finance example, the
seller-buyer pair, logistic providers, and ports must be contacted. Likely, other sellers with
IoTs are contacted as well, because they have the expertise to verify the success of the delivery
in case of disputes. In blockchain applications, they are what we call “record keepers.”
Contacted agents might not truthfully report their signals—a possibility that is allowed by
our model. Finally, other customers are contacted as well, perhaps serving the purpose of
consistency check.
    Contacted parties then submit their reports yek to the blockchain. Then the blockchain
protocol generates the decentralized consensus ze regarding the contingency in question based
the reports {eyk }. A newly created block is added to the entire chain, as shown in the bottom
of Figure 2. This newly created block must pass certain consistency checks with respect to
the history of the existing blockchain (which can be thought of incorporating past reports
as an input for generating current consensus) before more blocks are added to it.15
    In this example, sellers beyond the seller-buyer pair may receive information via two
sources on blockchain: one via the terminals connected to the IoT sensors, and the second
via being contacted to verify the transaction. In our perspective, they are playing different
roles, but the second—as the essential step in generating the consensus—is more crucial for
the blockchain technology. Putting the concern of collusion aside, the more information these
industry experts have, the better the chance of forming a higher quality consensus in this
  15
    This thematic treatment covers the case where the added block still requires further verification as in
the case of Bitcoin, so “added” corresponds more to “finalized” or “confirmed.”



                                                    12
process. There is also a lower bound on information distribution: Even if the transaction to
be verified is encrypted, the mere fact of being contacted actually reveals information (this
point will be highlighted in our model).

Model Set-up

    To illustrate how decentralization makes the consensus more effective at the expense of
greater information distribution, we now formalize the above trade-finance example. Our
analysis applies to both public and permissioned blockchains.
    Suppose a smart contract references a contingent outcome ω       e which we refer to as the
“delivery” of service or goods, in the context of our main model in Section 3. The random
variable ω̃ takes the value of one if the delivery is successful and zero otherwise, and denote
the decentralized consensus on ω   e on a blockchain by ze which takes value in {0, 1} as well.
    As illustrated by the trade-finance example, participants on the blockchain receive vari-
ous signals with the aid of real-time IoT technologies.16 For simplicity we assume all agents
observe ω̃ perfectly. Although we could model the information environment as agents re-
ceiving signals that might be different from the true contingency ω̃, this complication is
unnecessary given the misreporting incentives introduced later. In fact, In Appendix A, we
consider this possibility under a more general formulation, and repeat the analysis for a large
class of linear models to demonstrate the robustness of the tradeoff that we highlight.
    In practice, to reach decentralized consensus, blockchains contact a set of record keepers,
who are typically dispersed blockchain participants and hence the name “decentralized”, for
verification. Cryptocurrency mining as a way to maintain consensus record is a prominent
feature for the likes of Bitcoin and Ethereum. Ripple and R3 CEV use their own
consensus process but also rely on a community of record keepers. The process typically
entails both competition and assignment for recordkeeping as well as post-block validations,
and is an interesting industry on its own. Table C in the Appendix contains a list of further
examples of record keepers, including finer descriptions of their roles.
    To model this, suppose that the blockchain protocol contacts a set of K potential record
keepers. Record keepers in the set K ≡ {1, 2, · · · , K} are homogeneous, and for simplicity we
model the effectiveness of the consensus for contracting (and potentially other purposes)
by −V ar (e ω − ze).17 An effective consensus is the cornerstone for the trust that many Fintech
  16
     Clearly, the technology is not applicable for verifying subjective experience.
  17
     In reality, the effectiveness depends on the purpose and use of consensus on each specific blockchain.
Our specification qualitatively captures the universal feature that a consensus is not effective even when it
is unbiased if it is uncertain to always reflect truth accurately. Our results are robust to introducing penalty


                                                      13
firms purport.
     Upon contact, each record keeper k ∈ K submits yek taking values in {0, 1}, yielding a
collection of reports y ≡ {e   yk }k∈K . As we will elaborate later, record keepers might misreport,
i.e., yek 6= ω
             e . For illustration, we examine the case where the consensus is given by
                                        
                                        1                             P
                                                 with probability          k   wk yek
                              ze(y) =
                                        0       otherwise.
where the weights of the validating notes, wk , are non-negative and sum to unity. We also
assume that wk → 0 as K → ∞, which captures the key concept of decentralization. The
consensus function implies that if record keepers report more successful delivery, then the
consensus is more likely to be successful delivery. We focus on how the metric of decen-
tralization K affects the quality of decentralized consensus and the system-wide information
distribution.18

Record Keepers’ Information and Misreporting

    Suppose each record keeper on the blockchain observes the realization of ω̃, the delivery
status. While payment verifications on Bitcoin mostly concerns double-spending issues and
require limited information distribution (e.g., the real identities of transaction parties are
masked), the validations of general economic activities are typically more complicated, po-
tentially requiring more nuanced information. For example, many trade-finance blockchains
use information from local ships, ports, banks, and border customs to track delivery status,
potential aided by sensors and IoT devices with details not fully publicly available (e.g.,
Corda or some Hyperlydger blockchains).19 In addition, record keepers may also receive
extra information about the transaction upon contact. For example, IBM currently works
on trade-finance blockchains that provide record keepers additional information about ship-
ment status, since to generate consensus on delivery requires off-chain collaborations and
cross-validations with shipping companies and import-export controls.
terms for bias as well as high moments of −V ar (e   ω − ze).
   18
                                                 P
      Our results hold for a general ze(y) = Z̃ ( k wk yek ), Where Z̃ is a function that takes values in {0, 1},
and satisfies that E[Z̃] is differentiable and increasing in the argument, and takes the value of 0 or 1 when
the argument is 0 or 1. This implies that if the reports are all accurate, the consensus reflects the true state
of the world. These requirements are broadly consistent with extant blockchain protocols.
   19
      For such more complicated business situations, the record keepers likely only observe a noisy signal of
the true state, and public information disclosure policy on any blockchain likely affects the record keeper’s
signal quality, thereby affecting the quality of decentralized consensus. We discuss these issues in Appendix
A when we introduce the general linear model.


                                                       14
    Record keepers may have incentives to misreport. For example, in trade-finance appli-
cations record keepers are also parties involved in the transaction; Bitcoin miners may hide
report through “selfish-mining”, or double-spend certain coins.20 Such incentives also exist
in traditional economies: business arbitrators may favor a client, and double-spending was
the issue in traditional online payments that originally inspired the creation of Bitcoin. In
fact, media reports and practitioners’ discussions have largely centered on how blockchain
helps reduce tampering, manipulation, and hacking.
    In our reduced-form model, we assume that each risk-neutral record keeper k submits a
report of yk to maximize his normalized utility U (yk ; y). In particular, he solves

                             max U (yk ; y) = bk · |e
                                                    z (y) − ω
                                                            e | − hk |yk − ω
                                                                           e |,                          (1)
                           yk ∈{0,1}


where bk and hk are positive, uniformly bounded above and below from zero for all k. The
first coefficient bk is record keeper k’s benefit when the wrong consensus is reached (forming
1 − ω̃ when the true state is ω̃). In the second term, hk captures the cost of misreporting.
Depending on the protocol design in specific trade-finance applications, hk could correspond
to reputation cost in a blockchain alliance, or it could be the cost of counterfeiting signals in
IoT sensors. In the case of Bitcoin, inaccurate records take longer to be confirmed and have
a higher probability to be reversed, not to mention the extremely large computation power
required in PoW systems.

Information Distribution and Quality of Consensus

       Each contacted record keeper chooses yk to optimize U in (1), which gives
                                         
                                     ∗
                                         ωe              if   bk wk ≤ hk
                                   yek =                                                                 (2)
                                         1 − ω
                                              e           otherwise.
The benefit of misreporting is bk wk because it shifts the consensus by wk given other people’s
equilibrium strategies, whereas the cost is hk . The equilibrium consensus then is
                                          
                                          ω                   P
                                            e         w.p.         k∈K∗   wk
                                   ze =                                                                  (3)
                                          1 − ω
                                               e      otherwise.
  20
    To the extent that in our model misreporting represents some noise, it can also come from the possibility
that record keepers are hacked.



                                                     15
where K∗ ≡ {k ∈ K : bk wk < hk } is the set of truth-telling record keepers. The resulting
quality of the decentralized consensus can be shown to be
                                                         !2
                                             X
  − V ar(e
         ω − ze) = −V ar(2ω̃ − 1) 1 −               ωk        ,   where K∗ ≡ {k ∈ K : bk wk < hk }. (4)
                                             k∈K∗


Notice that V ar(2ω̃ − 1) is independent of K. Therefore, the greater the set K∗ , the higher
the quality of the decentralized consensus. The benefit of decentralization manifests in how
the size of contact K improves the quality of consensus, by diminishing each record keeper’s
manipulation incentives and edging the set with truthful report K∗ closer to the full set
K. For illustration, consider the case with homogeneous symmetric record keepers with
bk = b > 0, hk = k > 0, and wk = 1/K, where the consensus quality is proportional to
−I{K≤ b } which is increasing in K.
       h
   For more general bk and hk satisfying conditions given below Equation (1), the consensus
                            e as K → ∞; we focus on this case in Section 3, and show how
becomes perfect, i.e., ze = ω
decentralized consensus improves the contractibility and enhances entry (hence competition).
We discuss imperfect consensus in Section 4.

Relating to the Literature on Information Economics

    It is important to highlight the difference between our analysis and the extant literature
applying information economics to finance and trading. The key difference hinges on the
unique functionality provided by blockchain, i.e., the generation of decentralized consensus
through information distribution among the set of record keepers. This is the first stage
involving “decentralization:” in our trade-finance example illustrated by Figure 2, the system
contacts record keepers like trading partners, ports, and other sellers/customers and they
contribute to form the consensus that is accepted by the community. Then, the consensus
can be, and often is, further distributed to all agents on the blockchain—this is the second
stage of information distribution.
    Earlier literature in financial economics often studies distribution of available information,
which can be thought of the second stage described above. The leading example is studies on
information disclosure that typically concern transparency, for example the TRACE report-
ing system on the corporate bond market.21 Although transparency affects traders’ incentives
  21
     See, e.g., Goldstein, Hotchkiss, and Sirri (2006) and Bessembinder and Maxwell (2008). In particular,
Bloomfield and O’Hara (1999) also find that market makers can use trade information to maintain collusive
behavior.


                                                    16
and the effectiveness of market function, it is arguably true that trading and aggregation can
still take place, even without pre- and post- transparency requirements on TRACE. In other
words, in traditional settings, when greater public information is detrimental, regulators or
agents can opt to distribute less information.
     In contrast, our paper emphasizes the first stage: the distribution of information during
consensus generation serves the core function of blockchain in providing decentralized consen-
sus and tamper-proofness. The greater the degree of information distribution, the higher the
quality of decentralized consensus. This point shares the same spirit as Chapman, Garratt,
Hendry, McCormack, and McMahon (2017), who find that attempts of restricting decentral-
ization in order to reduce information distribution often reduce the operational resilience
that is supposedly the technology’s advantage over centralized systems.
     In general, the quality of consensus, and the amount of information distribution on
blockchains depend on their specific protocols. There is a great diversity of algorithms
for building consensus based on requirements such as performance, scalability, consistency,
data capacity, governance, security, and failure tolerance. Detailing the various consensus
mechanisms or deriving the “optimal” blockchain design is beyond the scope of this pa-
per. Nevertheless, we provide a brief description of blockchain applications in the financial
industry and the concerns practitioners share about the informational issue we highlight.


2.3     Blockchain Applications in the Financial Industry
    With the core functioning of blockchain in mind, we now discuss various blockchain
projects in real-world. The applications of blockchain technology and smart contracts are
broad, sometimes even beyond the Fintech industry; and the applications discussed here are
not merely proofs of concept.22 Readers familiar with the institutional background may skip
this subsection and directly go to Section 2.4.

Trade and Trade Finance

   Recall our motivating example in Section 2.2 that involves international trade and its
associated financing activities. International trade accounts for more than USD 10 trillion
annually according to a WTO report in 2015. Despite technological advances in many areas
  22
    Bartoletti and Pompianu (2017) analyze 834 smart contracts from Bitcoin and Ethereum with 1,673271
transactions. They find five main categories of uses (financial, notary, games, wallet, and library), three
of which are related to monetary transfers and transactions, with the remaining two related to recording
consensus information. More than two-thirds of the uses are on managing, gathering, or distributing money.



                                                    17
of financial services, trade finance remains a largely paper-based, manual process, involving
multiple participants in various jurisdictions around the world, and prone to human error
and delays along the supply chain.23 An importer may fail to strike a deal because the bank
offering the letter of credit is not well-known in the exporter’s country. An exporter may fail
to get advanced financing because the bank worries whether the goods can be successfully
and timely delivered and whether payments from the importer can be secured.
    Blockchain technology can help alleviate the aforementioned frictions in trade. As men-
tioned, there are two classes of solutions that the blockchain technology can offer. One
concerns the flow of goods, as a decentralized ledger can better track goods during the
process in which goods are shipped, stored, and delivered (e.g., physical locations and move-
ments, whether goods are kept with the right temperature, etc.), with the help of modern
communication technology such as Internet of Things (IoT) and “oracles” that are feeders
of information from the offline world. The second solution concerns the flow of money asso-
ciated with trade (e.g., letter of credit and trade finance; this is related to Trusted Payments
discussed above). Though currently both solutions are being developed in isolation, the
industry envisions a fully integrated system in the future, with the potential benefit of a
network of shippers, freight forwarders, ocean carriers, ports and customs authorities, and
banks, all of them interacting on a blockchain in real-time.
    In 2016, Barclays and Fintech start-up Wave claim to have become the first organi-
zations to complete a global trade transaction using the new Wave blockchain platform,
handling the letter of credit (LC) transaction between Ornua (formerly the Irish Dairy
Board) and Seychelles Trading Company. IBM has also been spearheading the application
of blockchain and smart contracts to trade finance, launching solutions for Indian Mahindra
Group in December 2016, and in partnership with Danish shipping behemoth Maersk. In
March 2017, IBM and Maersk, cooperating with Hyperledger Fabric, announced the com-
pletion of an end-to-end digitalized supply chain pilot using blockchain technology, which
involves trading parties and various ports and custom authorities.24 In early 2017, IBM has
  23
     While a seller (or exporter) can require the purchaser (an importer) to prepay for goods shipped, the
purchaser (importer) may wish to reduce risk by requiring the seller to document the goods that have been
shipped. Typically, banks may assist by providing various forms of support. For example, the importer’s
bank may provide a letter of credit to the exporter (or the exporter’s bank) providing for payment upon
presentation of certain documents, such as a bill of lading. The exporter’s bank may make a loan (by
advancing funds) to the exporter on the basis of the export contract. Small suppliers have to wait as long
as 60 to 90 days to be paid for delivered goods, which hinders their access to working capital.
  24
     This pilot was a consignment of goods from Schneider Electric from Lyon to Newark, which involved
the Port of Rotterdam, the Port of Newark, the Customs Administration of the Netherlands, and the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate, and U.S. Customs and Border



                                                   18
ventured further by rolling out the Yijian Blockchain Technology Application System
for the Chinese pharmaceutical sector. It has also collaborated with a group companies to
develop a blockchain-based crude oil trade finance platform.25
    There has also been progress in applying blockchain technology to the freight and logistics
industry. In September 2017 Maersk partnered with EY, Microsoft, Willis Towers Watson,
and several insurance companies to securely share shipping data on KSI, a blockchain de-
veloped by Guardtime. In November 2017, it was reported that the association Blockchain
in Transport Alliance (https://bita.studio/) whose members include start-up blockchain
companies like ShipChain, had attracted global giants like SAP and UPS in the traditional
sector.26

Trusted Payments

    Payments across long distance or among unknown parties are difficult due to the lack
of trust. The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT)
mitigates the problem, but often entails ineffective coordination across multiple institutions
and hefty fees. This concern becomes further exacerbated with digital payments, which are
plagued by “double-spending” issues.
    Bitcoins was first offered as a solution and it enables anonymous peer-to-peer trans-
actions recorded on the Bitcoin blockchain that is secure and time-stamped to make it
tamper-proof;(Nakamoto (2008)).27 More importantly, by broadcasting all candidate trans-
actions publicly and having “miners” constantly competing for the recording right of new
blocks to earn Bitcoins, its distributed ledger provides a decentralized consensus on whether
a transaction has taken place.
    By design, maintaining the decentralized consensus record on Bitcoin blockchain requires
the miners to solve NP-complete computational problems (i.e., mining, a form of PoW) whose
difficulty level increases with computation power by design, making it unsuitable for large
volumes of financial transactions. Subsequent platforms such as Lightning (built on the
Protection. For details, see http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/maersk-ibm-aim-get-10-million-shipping-containers-
onto-global-supply-blockchain-by-year-end-1609778.
   25
      http://www.coindesk.com/ibm-blockchain-platform-oil-trade-finance/. Other blockchain-based plat-
forms that support lending, issuing letters of credit, export credit and insurance include HK Blockchain
for trade finance, TradeSafe, and Digital Trade Chain (DTC). Recently, Blockchain startup R3, trade
finance tech provider TradeIX, and a group of major banks have moved their Marco Polo trade finance
platform to the pilot stage; see https://www.coindesk.com/r3-pilots-blockchain-trade-finance-platform-with-
global-banks/.
   26
      https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/bita-looking-disrupt-freight-logistics-industry/.
   27
      Many retailers in Japan already accept Bitcoins (e.g., The Economist Nov 4 (2017)).


                                                    19
Bitcoin blockchain) and Stellar (a separate blockchain) help improve the processing capacity
through local channels and multisignature accounts so that unnecessary information does not
have to be part of the decentralized consensus.28
    That said, these blockchains’ scripting language is limited. Ethereum, the second largest
blockchain platform by market capitalization after the Bitcoin blockchain, allows the use of
Turing-complete language and permits more complex contingent operations (Turing (1937)),
providing the archetypal implementation of smart contracts (Buterin (2014)). All valid
updates to the contract states are recorded and automatically executed. A group of voluntary
participants (Ether miners) maintain a decentralized consensus recording of the states, and
other interacting parties utilize the consensus information to automate executions of contract
terms. Additional applications such as Monax and Phi (String Lab) build on Ethereum
to enrich and optimize its smart contract functionalities and processing power, similar to
how websites build on the Internet protocol.
    Traditional players in the financial industry have started the process of accommodating
the blockchain technology to address the payment problem. Originally known as Ripple
Labs, Ripple was founded in 2012 to provide global financial transactions and real-time
cross-border payments, and has since been increasingly adopted by major banks and payment
networks. A (typically large) set of validating nodes achieve decentralized consensus using
the Ripple transaction protocol RTXP—an iterative consensus process as an alternative
to PoW, in which transactions are broadcasted repeatedly across the network of validating
nodes until an agreement is reached. Digital transfers are then automated by connecting
electronically to bank accounts or using the native crypto-token Ripples (XRP).

Other Applications

   In addition to applications in payments and trade finance, blockchain and smart contracts
can also be used in exchanges and trading, voting, and even syndicated loans. To that end,
in 2015 Nasdaq Inc launched the Linq Platform for managing and exchanging pre-IPO
shares, and in early 2017 successfully completed a test using blockchain technology to run
proxy voting on Estonian Tallinn Stock Exchange.29 Smart contracts can enforce a standard
  28
      Counterparty also builds on the Bitcoin blockchain, but allows for more flexible smart contracts and
maintains consensus through “proof-of-burn,” i.e., fees paid in cryptocurrency paid by clients are destroyed,
and nodes are rewarded for validation from the appreciation of the currency.
   29
      Korea Exchange (KRX) also launched a blockchain-based marketplace, Korean Startup Market
(KSM), where equity in startup companies can be traded. Other efforts in applying blockchain and smart
contracts to exchanges and trading include Digital Asset Holdings (DAH) backed by the Australian Secu-
rities Exchange (ASX) to upgrade post-trade services. The costs consumers save from brokerage arbitration


                                                     20
transactional rule set for derivatives (a security with an asset-dependent price) to streamline
Over-The-Counter (OTC) financial agreements. Symbiont offers product with a simple
interface for specifying the terms and conditions when issuing smart securities, as well as
integration with market data feeds.30
    Furthermore, on the application of loan syndication in which multiple banks agree to
extend syndicated loans to a single borrower so that a decentralized consensus among par-
ticipating banks is perhaps crucial, a blockchain project led by Credit Suisse and twelve
other banks together with Symbiont will be ready to go into production in early 2018.31
Finally, Walmart recently partnered with IBM and JD.com for a blockchain tracking food
production, safety, and distribution.


2.4     Verification and Informational Concerns in Practice
     Our theory highlights the potential downside of information distribution during the pro-
cess of decentralized consensus. The concern about information distribution and privacy is
voiced by practitioners, among which R3 CEV, an active blockchain consortium, has been
outspoken. R3’s Corda system sets out to tackle the challenge that the only parties who
should have access to the details of a financial transaction are those parties themselves and
others with a legitimate need to know. Even with that, the request, itself a form of in-
formation, for proving transaction uniqueness is distributed to some independent observers,
changing the information environment of this economy at least partially.
     While these measures potentially ensure confidentiality, two important economic insights
are missing from current discussions. First, contacting fewer record keepers may reduce the
effectiveness of the consensus; second, encrypting data means some contingencies cannot be
validated and thus cannot be used in smart contracts. Moreover, even encrypted data are
still data, as the mere act of verification request is still informative to record keepers, an
insight to be highlighted in our model. As de Vilaca Burgos, de Oliveira Filho, Suares, and
de Almeida (2017) point out in a report for the central bank of Brazil, simply encrypting
sensitive data is not a viable solution because smart contracts then cannot decide whether
a transaction is valid.
     These observations imply that restricting information distribution often comes at the ex-
could also be substantial.
  30
     Symbiont is a member of the Hyperledger project, a cross-industry, open-source, collaborative project
led by the non-profit Linux Foundation to advance blockchain technology by coming up with common
standards.
  31
     http://www.businessinsider.com/credit-suisse-led-blockchain-solution-makes-progress-2017-8.


                                                   21
pense of compromising the consensus effectiveness. For instance, R3’s Corda’s validating
model restricts information distribution only to the notaries.32 As pointed out in the Bank of
Canada report mentioned earlier, Chapman, Garratt, Hendry, McCormack, and McMahon
(2017), Corda’s model requires data replication from the notaries to ensure business con-
tinuity rather than each node providing resilience to the system, as in the case with many
public blockchains. This makes the so-called Single Point of Failure (SPOF) more likely
because the system is once again centralized. In fact, in Phase 2 of Project Jasper, the
role of notary in Corda is performed by the Bank of Canada, so an outage at the Bank
would prevent the processing of any payments.
    Our model underscores this tension: contacting fewer record keepers reduces the infor-
mation distribution, but at the expense of compromising the quality of consensus. We now
go one step further to analyze the consequence of distributing information on industrial
organization and competition in Section 3.


3      Blockchain Disruption and Industrial Organization
    To understand blockchain’s impact on the real economy, we now cast our model of
decentralized-consensus generation in a standard dynamic industrial organization setting
similar to Green and Porter (1984). We show that smart contracts on decentralized consen-
sus help entry which promotes competition, but greater information distribution may foster
collusion which hurts competition.


3.1     Model Setup
    Consider a risk-neutral world in which time is infinite and discrete and is indexed by t,
t = 0, 1, 2, · · · . Every agent has a discount factor δ ∈ (0, 1). In every period t ≥ 0, with
probability λ a unit measure of buyers show up, each demanding a unit of goods. They shop
sellers and choose the most attractive offer. We use It to denote this aggregate business
condition whether buyers show up in period t. Throughout, we use “buyers”, “consumers”,
and “customers” interchangeably.
    The goods delivery between the seller and the buyer is modeled as in Section 2.2. It
  32
    In the white paper, this restriction is to prevent Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks, i.e., a node knowingly
builds an invalid transaction consuming some set of existing states and sends it to the notary, causing
the states to be marked as consumed. For more details, please see https://docs.corda.net/key-concepts-
notaries.html and https://docs.corda.net/key-concepts-consensus.html.



                                                     22
should be clear that although we are building our model in the context of trade-finance,
the goods can be interpreted as a service such as a fund transfer, a loan origination, or the
financing of a trade. Buyers (if present) only live for one period and then exit the economy.
    There are three long-lived sellers who are either authentic or fraudulent. A fraudulent
seller is unable to deliver the good, while an authentic seller always delivers the good to the
consumer. The consumer obtains an expected utility qi from seller i. In particular, with
probability qi , the consumer obtains a utility of one and with probability 1 − qi , they obtain
zero.
    At the start of the game t = 0, two of the sellers, A and B, are incumbents known to be
authentic (who have already established a good reputation). There is also a new entrant C
who privately knows her authenticity, but others only have the common prior belief that C
is authentic with probability π, later referred to as C’s reputation.
    In every period t ≥ 0, each seller gets an i.i.d. draw of qi , i ∈ {A, B, C}. The quality
profile q = (qA , qB , qC ) is publicly observable, capturing temporal differences among sellers.
We discuss the case when quality is the seller’s privately information in Section 4.3. Denote
the elements in q in decreasing order by q (1) , q (2) , and q (3) respectively; this implies that
even buyers’ choice of incumbent sellers has welfare consequences. We denote the cumulative
distribution function and probability density function of quality distribution by φ(q) and
Φ(q), and its support by [q, q̄]. It costs a seller µ to produce the goods, where µ < q to
reflect that the transaction with an authentic seller is welfare-improving.
    Seller C can potentially enter by paying an arbitrarily small cost of  > 0; hence C enters
only if she can ever make strictly positive profit in this market after entry.33 This allows us
to focus on information asymmetry of seller authenticity as the relevant entry barrier. We
further assume that before getting customers, the entrant has no loss-absorbing capacity.34


3.2     Traditional World
   We analyze the model in the traditional world, starting with the key assumption on
contracting space and information environment there.
  33
      Whether the entry decision is made before the quality qC realization or not is immaterial, given the
arbitrary small entry cost.
   34
      This can be microfounded by some borrowing capacity, so that potential entrants cannot implement
aggressive penetration pricing schemes. It is a sufficient condition to rule out aggressive penetration pricing
(in which entrants suffer huge losses in order to enter). This is realistic because without accumulation of
service profit over time, the entrant typically does not have large initial capital (deep pocket) to undercut
price aggressively. In fact, all we need is that C’s tolerance for loss, L, is no more than [q − πq]+ .



                                                      23
Contracting Space and Information

Assumption 1. In traditional world, no payment can be contingent on whether service de-
livery occurs or not. Each seller can only observe her own buyers and associated transaction
information.

The first part of Assumption 1 reflects certain real-life contract incompleteness that either
limits the effectiveness of consensus or makes contracting on it too costly; for a good reference
on the costs of writing and enforcing complete contracts, see Hart (1995) and Tirole (1999).
In our context, this implies that the sellers can only quote a non-contingent price pi (q)
privately to buyers.35 The second part of Assumption 1 implies that in the traditional
world sellers do not observe others’ price quotes, and can be interpreted as seller’s quoting
customized or “bespoke” prices based on their proprietary data and private interaction with
buyers. In other words, it is infeasible to communicate information across agents beyond
transactions. This assumption plays a role when we solve for the sellers’ collusion equilibrium,
and is similar to the assumption in Green and Porter (1984) and Porter (1983).

Bertrand Competition and Entry

    We first consider a competitive equilibrium, in which sellers keep lowering their of-
fered prices until their competitors quit. Suppose that an authentic C enters. If πqC <
max{qA , qB }, any incumbent will compete to lower the price to µ to get the customer this
period and prevent the enhanced future competition they face had C entered in this period.
Without a reputation of being authentic, an authentic C only stands a chance of getting a
customer if πqC ≥ max{qA , qB }.36 Basically, an entrant can get customers only when her
perceived quality is higher than the incumbents. The next proposition follows.

Proposition 3.1. In a competitive equilibrium, the first time an authentic C can serve
customers is in period τ ≡ min{t ≥ 0|πqC,t It ≥ max{qA,t , qB,t }} or later. Consequently, C
never enters if πq < q.

   In the remainder of the paper, we focus on the case q > πq; in other words, the entrant
C’s reputation is sufficiently low that no entry ever occurs in the traditional world. The
  35
      That sellers make offers is realistic in many applications where the customers or buyers are short-lived
and dispersed. For example, banks typically quote the fee for making an international transfer, and customers
can decide which bank to go to. Our main results are robust to this particular trading protocol.
   36
      Even so, C may not get a customer if the incumbents use predatory pricing. Note that when πq < q, no
matter what q is, C cannot enter even with penetration pricing because the maximum loss C can afford is
less than q − πq.

                                                     24
expected future consumer (buyer) surplus and social welfare at any time s are, respectively,
                            "   ∞
                                                                   #
                                X                                           δλ
              Πbuyer = Es               δ t−s It (min{qAt , qBt } − µ) =       E [min{qA , qB } − µ]         (5)
                                t=s+1
                                                                           1−δ

and                        "   ∞
                                                                  #
                               X                                           δλ
             Πtotal = Es               δ t−s It (max{qAt , qBt } − µ) =       E [max{qA , qB } − µ] .        (6)
                               t=s+1
                                                                          1−δ

   The presence of fraudulent sellers causes no-entrance of a high quality C, a standard
lemons problem. We show later that this problem can be better or even fully resolved by
smart contracts with blockchain technology offering decentralized consensus.

Collusive Equilibria

    Besides the competitive equilibrium derived, there may exist collusive equilibria in this
economy. Given no-entrance of seller C, we only need to examine potential tacit collusion
among the incumbents.
    We restrict each seller’s strategy to the standard supergame strategies discussed in, for
example, Green and Porter (1984). Specifically, consider the following strategy, indexed by
{T, f }, for A and B to collude. There are two phases:
    1) Collusion phase: Every period, after the realization of types, A charges price qA and
B charges price qB . A and B get It f (qA , qB ) and f (qB , qA ) = It (1 − f (qA , qB )) fractions of
buyers, respectively.37 Here f (x, y) ∈ (0, 1) is the proposed anonymous allocation function,
potentially as a function of realized types (e.g., via setting quotas). This allocation function
f includes the case where sellers always equally split buyers, and the case where buyers all
go to the better seller.
    2) Punishment phase: The punishment phase is triggered once one of the sellers does
not have any buyers. More specifically, the punishment phase can be triggered either by i)
buyers not showing up this period or ii) one of the sellers deviating by quoting a cheaper
price to get all the buyers. Once triggered, A and B are engaged in Bertrand competition
for a fixed T period.
    Recall that the sellers do not observe other sellers’ price quotes, and only observes their
own customers. However, this repeated game with private monitoring is essentially a game
with imperfect public monitoring, because sellers can use the private observation to infer
  37
       Our analysis is robust to a collusion where sellers charge a lower colluding price (less than qi ).



                                                          25
whether there is aggregate activity (customers arriving). It is imperfect in the sense that
punishment could be triggered even when no one deviates. The equilibrium notion corre-
sponding to the above strategies is thus akin to public perfect equilibrium.
    A standard result in the literature of dynamic repeated games is that sustainable equi-
libria crucially depend on the discount factor δ, with the Folk Theorem as the best-known
example. We therefore proceed to derive the lower bound of discount factor, denoted by
δ(T,f ) , above which an equilibrium with a specified T and f (x, y) exists.

Lemma 3.2. A collusion strategy with (T, f ) as described above is an equilibrium, if
                                               
                                    λδ 1 − δ T            M3
                                                 T +1
                                                      ≥                                           (7)
                               1 − λδ − (1 − λ)δ        M1 − M2

where M1 ≡ E[f (q)(q − µ)], M2 ≡ E[(qi − q−i )+ ], M3 ≡ maxq {(1 − f (q))(q − µ)}, f (qi ) ≡
Eq−i [f (qi , q−i )].

Here, M1 (M2 ) is a seller’s expected payoff in the “stage game” in each period during the
collusion (punishment) phase, and M3 is the maximum gain from deviating. When the
discount factor δ is sufficiently low (impatient), the payoff from deviation is relatively large
compared with the punishment going forward, so no collusion equilibria can be sustained.
                                                                                            1     M3
                                                                     T raditional
Proposition 3.3. When the discount factor δ < δoT raditional ≡ inff δ(T,f )       = inf f   λ M1 +M3 −M2
                                                                                                         ,
no collusion equilibrium exists for any (T, f ).

    The welfare under (T, f ) collusion is determined by f , and consumer surplus is determined
by both (T, f ) and the colluding price. The consumer surplus depends on the length of
punishment period T because buyers earn positive surplus only when the punishment phase
is triggered due to absence of buyers in the economy (which occurs with probability 1 − λ
in each period).


3.3    Blockchain World
    Blockchain technology enables the consensus recording of success or failure of goods
delivery rendered by verifying and validating certain transactions. As detailed earlier in
Section 2.2, this verification typically involves distributing information.
    To highlight the economic force, we examine the case of perfect consensus, i.e., when
K → ∞ so that ze = ω  e , and smart contracts on the blockchain can trigger payment based on
this consensus. This case captures many extant blockchains such as Bitcoin, Ripple, and

                                                26
Symbiont, where either the verification request or transaction information is distributed to
sufficiently large numbers of parties including major institutional participants. Note, this
does not imply record keepers are the entire population of the blockchain. Moreover, as we
discuss in Section 4.2, the basic tradeoff under imperfect consensus is qualitatively the same.

Assumption 2. The blockchain contacts infinite participants (including the sellers and a
continuum of consumers) to generate an effective decentralized consensus. More specifically,
the blockchain consensus ze = ω
                              e , and a seller knows the aggregate business condition either
by observing the presence of her own customers, or by inferring the presence of customers
upon being contacted.

Recall ω e is the delivery outcome (whether successful or not). This assumption implies that
i) self-executed smart contracts can be perfectly contingent on delivery outcome consensus,
and ii) the sellers observe the aggregate business condition. These are in sharp contrast to
Assumption 1. We also note that the blockchain system may have richer information and the
results can be extended to the cases whereby this information is used. But our arguments
require weaker conditions and it suffices that they observe the aggregate activity.
    In the rest of this section, we first demonstrate how blockchain and smart contracts can
enhance entry and competition, then show that the same technology can lead to greater
collusive behavior before discussing regulatory implications.

Smart Contracts and Enhanced Entry

   With blockchain, the entrant now can offer a price contingent on the success of delivery
so that P = (ps , pf ), with ps and pf being prices charged upon success and failure. An
authentic entrant C can separate from her fraudulent peer by offering (ps , 0). The fraudulent
type gains nothing from mimicking: she knows that she will fail to deliver and hence never
receive the payment. As a result, the authentic seller C enters for sure. We have the following
proposition for the competitive equilibrium without potential collusion.

Proposition 3.4. In the competitive equilibrium in the blockchain world, the authentic en-
trant C enters almost surely, and first gets customers in period τ = min{t ≥ 0|qC,t It ≥
max{qA,t , qB,t }} or earlier.

   In the world with blockchain, the expected future consumer surplus and total welfare at




                                              27
t = s under a competitive equilibrium are, respectively,
                                    "    ∞
                                                                               #
                                         X                                              δλ
                                                δ t−s It q (2) − µ                         E q (2) − µ
                                                                                                     
                     Πbuyer = Es                                                   =                       (8)
                                        t=s+1
                                                                                       1−δ

and                                 "   ∞
                                                                           #
                                        X
                                                    t−s           (1)               δλ
                                                                                       E q (1) − µ .
                                                                                                 
                      Πtotal = Es               δ         It (q         − µ) =                             (9)
                                        t=s+1
                                                                                   1−δ

Notice that the qi s are observed, q (2) not q (1) enters Equation (8). Compared to (5) and (6),
we see that with smart contracts that facilitate entry and hence competition, the economy
becomes more efficient, as both consumer surplus (linear in the second order statistic) and
welfare (linear in first order statistic) improve.

Enhanced Collusion under Permissioned Blockchain

   While blockchain and smart contracts can improve both consumer surplus and welfare
by encouraging entry and competition, a dark side of blockchain may result in dynamic
equilibria with lower welfare or consumer surplus than in the traditional world. To highlight
the collusion-enhancing effect of blockchain, we first focus on permissioned blockchain for
the incumbents which C cannot use (hence no entry), before discussing blockchains that C
can utilize.

Collusion using Smart Contract With blockchain and smart contracts, sellers can use
the enlarged contingencies and hence side payment to facilitate collusion, as illustrated by
the following example. All sellers collude to charge the highest amount they can charge upon
delivery, i.e., qi , effectively extracting full rents from buyers. The sellers reach an agreement
that only the best-quality seller in each period takes all consumers, and if a seller who
does not have the best-quality takes any consumer, a smart contract can take all its profit
automatically and transfer it to other sellers.38 By imposing such automatic punishment
upon deviation, the smart contract can potentially support any collusion, regardless of the
discount factor.
    Such explicit form of collusion using smart contracts is easy to detect and can be forbidden
  38
    For such smart contracts to work, decentralized consensus on delivery contingency of the seller identity is
needed in the sense that the blockchain system has to recognize whether the best quality seller is serving all
consumers. In general, depending on specific collusive equilibria, one may penalize deviating contingencies
using smart contracts, even without information on seller’s identity/characteristic.



                                                                   28
by anti-trust law (Section 4.1). The more relevant and interesting phenomenon is that even
without explicit side payment, the blockchain still can facilitate greater collusion, which we
discuss next.

Tacit Collusion with Permissioned Blockchain In the case of tacit collusion, con-
sider exactly the same collusion and punishment phases as well as the allocation rule f as
in the traditional world. The catch is that, instead of triggering punishment upon deviating
or receiving no buyers, punishment in the blockchain world can be further conditioned on
whether buyers show up. This is because participants upon being contacted for verification
at least know that service requests are made; this does not even require installment of IoT
sensors on participants. However, being contacted for verification reveals the aggregate state
of the presence of buyers, which allows the sellers to perfectly monitor deviation behavior
by a colluding fellow.39
    In other words, the repeated game with traditionally imperfect public monitoring now
achieves perfect public monitoring as deviations can be accurately detected on blockchain
during the consensus generation process. Collusive equilibria hence become easier to sustain
(without punishment along the equilibrium path).
Proposition 3.5. For given (T, f ), denote the threshold discount factor above which col-
                                                     Blockchain2               T raditional
lusion is sustained with permissioned blockchain by δ(T,f )      , and recall δ(T,f )       and
 T raditional
δo            are defined in Proposition 3.3.
                                  Blockchain2        T raditional
   1. For any (T, f ), we have δ(T,f  )         < δ(T,f  )        .
                 h                                   
                        Blockchain2     T raditional
   2. When δ ∈ inf f {δ(∞,f )       }, δo              , there cannot be collusion without blockchain,
      but there could be with blockchain.
In case 2), the consumer welfare under collusion with blockchain is lower than that under
competitive equilibrium but without blockchain.


3.4      Blockchain Disruption
   Suppose now that there is a (potentially public) blockchain that all three firms (incum-
bents A, B, and new entrant C) have access to. Would the benefit of entry to consumer
  39
    The deviating seller might potentially choose to conduct his/her transaction off-chain to avoid triggering
the price war, and this is relevant given our simplified assumption of incumbents being established authentic
ones. However, in general, the augmented contractibility of smart contracts benefits all participants, and off-
chain stealing can be quite ineffective even for incumbents. Besides, the flexibility of sellers’ switching between
on-chain and off-chain businesses is also questionable, given the context of our trade-finance applications.

                                                        29
outweigh the cost of potential greater collusion?

Consumer Surplus under Public Blockchain

    Recall that Section 3.3 has solved the competitive equilibrium. To characterize other
collusive equilibria in this economy, consider the following collusion strategy:
    1) Collusion phase: Every period, after the realization of types, each seller i charges qi
contingent on success. Let fˆ(qi , qj , qk ) be the fraction of the buyers that go to the seller with
quality qi when the other two sellers have qualities qj and qk .
    2) Punishment phase: The punishment phase is triggered if one of the sellers does not
have any buyers AND there are buyers showing up in this period. In other words, the
punishment phase is triggered only if there is some seller deviates. Once triggered, all sellers
get involved in Bertrand competition for T periods.

Lemma 3.6. With blockchain, the above strategy is an equilibrium if the parameters satisfy
                                                 
                                      δλ 1 − δ T        M̂3
                                                   ≥                                            (10)
                                        1−δ          M̂1 − M̂2

where M̂1 ≡ E[fˆ(q)(q − µ)], M̂2 ≡ E[(qi − maxj6=i qj )+ ], andM̂3 ≡ maxq {(1 − fˆ(q))(q − µ)}.

   The M̂ s have similar interpretations as in Lemma 3.2, but for three sellers instead of two.
The left-hand-side of equation (10) is also modified because with perfect public monitoring,
the punishment is more accurately targeted.

Dynamic Equilibria under Blockchain Disruption

   More generally, in terms of welfare and consumer surplus, the set of equilibrium outcomes
with blockchain disruption is a non-trivial superset of those in equilibria in the traditional
world. Denote by Blockchain3 the public blockchain with all three sellers.

Theorem 3.7. The         threshold of discount factor δaBlockchain3 ≡ supfˆ{δ(∞,
                                                                               Blockchain3
                                                                                  fˆ)
                                                                                           } is well-
                          Blockchain3                     Blockchain3
defined and satisfies    δa           < 1. For all δ > δa             , any consumer surplus and
welfare attainable in    the traditional world can be attained with blockchain, and some addi-
tional equilibria with   higher or lower consumer surplus or welfare can also be sustained.

In this theorem, the subscript a in δaBlockchain3 stands for “all”, indicating that all collusion
equilibria can be sustained if the discount factor is above δaBlockchain3 . We can similarly define


                                                  30
threshold δoBlockchain3 ≡ inf fˆ{δ(∞,
                                  Blockchain3
                                      fˆ)
                                              }. Then an even weaker condition for blockchain to
potentially hurt consumers is δ > δoBlockchain3 .
     It is also worth remarking that with blockchain the total welfare can be reduced, because
it is now possible to sustain an equilibrium in which firms collude so that in any given period
all sales go to the seller with the lowest qi , which is lower than that with only incumbents.
     Our findings are robust qualitatively to having more incumbents and entrants, and the
next corollary illustrates how consumer surplus could be lower with blockchain in this more
general case.

Corollary 3.8. For m ≥ n ≥ 2, if λ < n−1      n
                                                , then δoT raditional,n > δoBlockchain,m , where m and
n indicate the number of colluding sellers with and without blockchain respectively. Con-
sequently for all δ ∈ [δoBlockchain,m , 1), there is no collusion in the traditional world with
n incumbents, while blockchain can lower consumer surplus (with m sellers including new
entrants).


4      Discussions and Extensions
    This section provides discussions from a regulatory angle, and considesr several extensions
of our model.


4.1     Measures to Reduce Collusion on Blockchain
    Our concern that blockchains can jeopardize market competitiveness is also shared by
other market observers. The concern becomes especially acute for permissioned blockchains
like R3 whose members are powerful financial institutions. As described in a Financial Times
article, what “...the technology really facilitates is cartel management for groups that don’t
trust each other but which still need to work together if they are the value and stability of
the markets they serve.”40 Our paper highlights one particular economic mechanism through
which blockchains could hinder competition, and provides a rigorous analysis on why and
how collusion could occur. In fact, empirical evidence suggests that greater information
sharing indeed facilitates collusion (e.g., Bourveau, She, and Zaldokas (2017)). We now
explore regulatory and market solutions to curb collusive behaviors in our framework.
  40
   “Exposing the ‘If we call it a blockchain, perhaps it won’t be deemed a cartel?’ tactic,” by Izabella
Kaminska, Financial Times, May 11th, 2015.




                                                  31
Blockchain Competition versus Firm Competition

    Although we focus on the case of a single blockchain on which multiple sellers compete,
in practice there are likely to be multiple blockchains which both sellers and buyers can
choose. The competition among blockchains naturally goes against the collusive behaviors
of sellers on one blockchain, as buyers can always pick the blockchain which offers the best
price-adjusted service. Recent research by Budish, Lee, and Shim (2017) formally analyses
this force. Although blockchain competition may mitigate collusive behaviors on specific
blockchains, in the long run if a single blockchain becomes dominant due to a network effect,
regulators still have to step in to prevent collusion by breaking up blockchain platforms.
While this approach of “breaking up big players” works for traditional industrial firms as
well, this point is especially relevant for blockchain. This is because coordination is integral
to the ecosystem of blockchain, and likely interferes with its operation. For a new blockchain
platform to be used and competition-enhancing, different institutional and retail users have
to coordinate on adoption. Coordination issues have already manifested themselves in the
dominance of early movers, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum in the cryptocurrency markets.41
    Of course, the above discussion raises other questions: Why is it more difficult for
blockchains to collude, at least relative to sellers on the same blockchain? What can govern-
ments do to facilitate coordinated adoption of better designed blockchain platforms? These
are all interesting questions for future research.

Regulatory Node and Design

    In the traditional world, in general it helps for regulatory agency to observe and collect
more information about the market in order to better detect collusive behaviors. Similarly,
adding a regulatory node in the blockchain, especially for private permissioned chains that
do not automatically include regulators as part of the business ecosystem, can help regulator
monitor the economic behaviors of market participants and reduce tacit collusion. However,
in this regard, blockchain is no different from traditional world: The government who has the
authority to investigate and penalize firms can reach the same outcome in both scenarios. For
instance, within our model, the regulator can detect and hence deter collusion by monitoring
whether buyers (if present) are purchasing goods with the highest quality.
    In this regard, blockchain may offer a significant advantage relative to the traditional
world thanks to real-time and tamper-proof records. As a result, regulators do not have
 41
      We thank the editor, Itay Goldstein, for pointing this out to us.



                                                      32
to worry about misreporting and time-delays, enabling the detection and containment of
collusion and market malfunctions at relatively high frequency. Moreover, retrospective
auditing is no longer prone to manipulation. These effects can be seen in the Hyperledger
Fabric example in Section 2.3.
    Regulators can also potentially participate in the protocol design. For example, the gov-
ernment can reserve access to certain encrypted information that is broadcasted to blockchain
participants or record keepers. Not only does this direct access enables elimination of col-
lusions using smart contracts (see Section 3.3), but also allows detection of tacit collusion
based on statistical analysis of transaction and pricing behaviors.42

Separation of Usage and Consensus Generation

    In the model, sellers can use the information on the blockchain to punish deviations from
collusion in a more accurate way. They observe the information because the information
is distributed and recorded on the blockchain during the process of consensus generation.
From this perspective, one obvious potential solution is to separate the players who help
generate the decentralized consensus, from the users of that consensus. For example, in our
model if sellers can only use the blockchain for signing smart contracts with buyers but are
excluded from recordkeeping activities, they no longer have access to the aggregate-activity
information that fosters collusion.
    As discussed in the trade-finance example in Section 2.2, it might be challenging to
exclude sellers from recordkeeping activities. This is because naturally, the parties that we
should exclude from being contacted for recordkeeping are also likely the ones who are the
most qualified to validate a record (e.g., the experienced sellers with great expertise within
the same industry). Most extant public blockchains do not separate the two groups. On
some blockchains such as Symbiont, record keepers tend to be a rather separate group from
the end users, though this resolution has not been sufficiently explored.
    The separation of usage and consensus generation is new in the discussion among blockchain
practitioners. It reflects yet another economic trade-off between decentralization (a resilient
  42
    Regulation also touches another important concern when the blockchain storages and processes data on
a large scale. In trade-finance applications, it is most likely that at a significant portion of the data are
personal data and hence is subject to regulations such as the general data protection regulation (GDPR),
which comes into force on May 25th, 2018, will be directly applicable to blockchain-based platforms in all
E.U. member states. As such, a public and permissionless blockchain would not work. It needs to be a
private and permissioned blockchain that is operated by one or more entities who set up the terms of use,
and these entities serve as controllers that are responsible and liable for the lawful processing of personal
data in compiling with the regulation.


                                                     33
system needs a wider range of participants) and centralization (but only a small set of agents
with expertise are able to provide high-quality inputs), and constitutes a direction for future
policy discussions concerning blockchain applications.43


4.2     Imperfect Consensus
    In Section 3 we have assumed that an infinite number of blockchain participants are
contacted as record keepers (K → ∞), rendering perfect consensus. Suppose now there is
a finite number of blockchain participants serve as record keepers, so that |K| = K < ∞.
Then the resulting imperfect consensus has probability ψ to correctly record the delivery
status, where ψ = k∈K∗ wk ≤ 1 and K∗ = {k ∈ K : bk wk < hk } as derived in Equation (3).
                    P

    The precision ψ essentially captures in reduced-form the quality of consensus when con-
sensus generation is imperfect, and is consistent with many alternative protocols.44 In words,
a successful (failed) delivery might be recorded as a successful delivery with probability ψ
(1 − ψ). Given the imperfect consensus, can the authentic type still enter the market with
the help of blockchain with smart contract (ps , pf ) and separate from (instead of pool with)
the fraudulent type?
    We introduce the entrant’s capacity to bear its initial loss L ≥ 0; this loss capacity helps
authentic entrants separate from fraudulent ones, and is a relaxation of the condition to
exclude aggressive pricing strategy in Footnote 33 in Section 3. The authentic seller in the
separating equilibrium of stage game solves the following:

                    max        ψps + (1 − ψ)pf
                   (ps ,pf )

            s.t. ψps + (1 − ψ)pf ≥ µ,           −pf ≤ L,     and (1 − ψ)ps + ψpf < 0,

where the inequalities are the authentic type’s participation constraint, limited loss capacity,
and the fraudulent type’s no-mimicking constraint, respectively. For instance, in the last
inequality, the fraudulent entrant who never delivers the good has probability 1 − ψ of being
recorded as having a successful delivery and paid by ps , and with probability ψ of being
  43
      According to Chapman, Garratt, Hendry, McCormack, and McMahon (2017), sufficient decentralization
among the record keepers who are not users may still preserve the blockchain advantage of resilient and
effective consensus.
   44
      Consider the situation with noisy observation of the true state ω̃, but no misreporting (say the misre-
porting benefit b is small). Suppose that all symmetric record keepers correctly observe the delivery outcome
with probability θ > 12 . If the consensus on successful delivery is based on unanimity rule, then ψ = θK .
                                       PK
Similarly, the majority rule says ψ = k=d K e K
                                                   k        K−k
                                            2    k θ (1 − θ)     .



                                                     34
                                                                                   µ+L
recorded as failed, receiving pf . The above program admits a solution when ψ > µ+2L   ,
which allows the authentic type enter for some positive profit without imitation by the
fraudulent type, yielding the following proposition.

Proposition 4.1. The use of smart contract on blockchain facilitates entry of the authentic
                                                              µ+L
type if the consensus quality is sufficiently high, i.e., ψ > µ+2L .

In the limit that µ = 0, we get that smart contracting facilitates entry as long as the
consensus is slight informative of the true state (ψ > 12 ).
     In our model, there is a continuum of consumers upon arrival, which implies that there is
a continuum of transactions to be verified. If each verification process draws record keepers
in some independent way, then the law of large numbers across transactions reveals the
aggregate state of customer arrival, even under imperfect consensus. Therefore, imperfect
consensus does not affect the collusive equilibria supported. Overall, it weakly reduces entry
and competition, and it is in this sense weakly welfare improving to have perfect consensus.
     As we mentioned, the key to reducing collusion is to separate sellers from record keepers
and reduce directly contacting the former. To model this exclusion of sellers, suppose for
each delivery, a seller is contacted with probability ζ̂; then the probability that a seller is
completely unaware of the aggregate service activity conditional on consumers’ arriving is
1 − ζ ≡ (1 − ζ̂)n where n is the number of transactions. In the collusion-phase, a deviation is
detected with probability of ζ instead of with probability one, triggering less punishment and
making the collusion equilibrium harder to sustain. That said, if the number of transactions
is large, the equilibrium approaches the one with perfect public monitoring unless the sellers
are strictly prohibited from acting as record keepers (ζ̂ = 0).


4.3    Information Asymmetry and Private Qualities
   In our analysis so far, q is publicly known. In this section we allow privately observed
qualities. Collusion with private information in general is complex (Athey and Bagwell (2001)
and Miller (2011)), therefore our focus is on the competitive equilibrium (and competitive
stage games in the punishment phase of a collusion.) We characterize how smart contracts
can help mitigate allocative inefficiency beyond entry, and derive the equilibrium form of
smart contracts under market equilibrium.




                                              35
Allocative Inefficiency in the Traditional World

    Suppose that in addition to uncertainty on authenticity, quality qi is also privately known
to seller i. Without smart contracts, the entrant would always claim it is authentic and
has high quality (cheap talk). Similarly, incumbents cannot separate themselves either.
Following the same logic as above, the lemons problem prevents entry and separation cannot
occur even among incumbents with different qualities. We have

Lemma 4.2. In the traditional world, sellers post the same price pi = µ, and each buyer
selects (randomly) one of them. Each period the buyer’s surplus and social welfare is E[q]−µ.

World with Blockchain and Equilibrium Smart Contracts

    Smart contracts enlarge the space of price quotes that sellers can use. Recall that 1 − q
can be interpreted as the probability that the goods delivered are defective. Consider an
offer P = (ps , pf ); we further impose that pf ≤ ps so that payment to the seller is higher
upon success, a standard monotonicity assumption in the security design literature.45 Then,
the type q seller, upon getting customers, earns Sq (P) = qps + (1 − q)pf − µ; and the buyer
gets a utility Bq (P) = q(1 − ps ) + (1 − q)(−pf ), where 1 − ps is the utility from successful
delivery less the payment.
    Sellers may offer a large variety of smart contracts; but only one particular class of
contracts emerges in equilibrium, as shown by the following proposition (recall that Φ is the
cdf of q).

Proposition 4.3. There is a unique competitive equilibrium for each stage game, and sellers
offer contracts of the form P∗ = (p, p − 1). A seller of quality q offers (pq , pq − 1) with
                                                     Z q              2
                                                             Φ(q 0 )
                                 pq = 1 − q + µ +                           dq 0 ,                    (11)
                                                         q   Φ(q)

which is decreasing in q. Buyers go to the highest-quality seller.

   Under the equilibrium contract (pq , pq − 1), buyers are getting utility 1 − p regardless of
the delivery outcome. The competitive equilibrium essentially has a cash auction in which a
bidder with quality q has a private valuation of his/her service opportunity q − µ, and bids
  45
    See, e.g., Innes (1990), Hart and Moore (1995), and DeMarzo and Duffie (1999). Under a market mech-
anism where buyers shop sellers and choose the most favorable one, our setup has a natural reinterpretation
under informal first-price auctions with security bids; e,g, DeMarzo, Kremer, and Skrzypacz (2005) and
Cong (2017).

                                                    36
p.46 In equilibrium, buyers choose the highest quality seller, who gets the second highest
valuation E[q (2) − µ] in each period with customer arrival (the revenue equivalence theorem).
Notice that the economic outcomes are exactly the same as in the case where q is publicly
known ((8) and (9)). Therefore we have,

Corollary 4.4. Smart contracts fully resolve informational asymmetry in a competitive equi-
librium, and welfare and consumer surplus are independent of whether seller qualities are
private or not.

    That said, one can show that restricting the form of smart contracts can potentially
increase the consumer surplus in a way similar to how security design affects issuer’s payoffs.
For regulators concerned with consumer surplus, collusion and smart contract forms should
be jointly considered — a topic for future studies.


5      Conclusion
    In this paper we argue that decentralized ledger technologies such as blockchains feature
decentralized consensus as well as tamper-proof algorithmic executions, and consequently
enlarge the contracting space and facilitate the creation of smart contracts. However, the
process of reaching decentralized consensus changes the information environment on the
blockchain, potentially engendering welfare-destroying consequences by promoting collusion.
    We analyze how this fundamental tension can reshape industry organization and the
landscape of competition; it can deliver higher social welfare and consumer surplus through
enhanced entry and competition, yet it may also lead to greater collusion. In general,
blockchain and smart contracts can sustain market equilibria with a larger range of economic
outcomes. We discuss regulatory and market solutions to further improve consumer surplus,
such as separating agents generating consensus from end-users.
    We have modeled in reduced-form the universal feature of blockchains and the key trade-
offs of consensus generation and information distribution. Although beyond the scope of this
paper, designing a robust consensus protocol and providing the right incentives for main-
taining consensus on specific blockchains is interesting and likely requires the joint effort of
computer scientists and economists.
  46
    This mirrors the well-known result in the literature of security design that the sellers would offer the
least information-sensitive security (“flattest” security in the language of security-bid auctions, e.g. DeMarzo,
Kremer, and Skrzypacz (2005)).



                                                       37
References
Athey, Susan, and Kyle Bagwell, 2001, Optimal collusion with private information, RAND
  Journal of Economics 32, 428–465.

Aune, Rune Tevasvold, Maureen O’Hara, and Ouziel Slama, 2017, Footprints on the
 blockchain: Trading and information leakage in distributed ledgers, The Journal of Trad-
 ing.

Baron, David P, and Roger B Myerson, 1982, Regulating a monopolist with unknown costs,
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 911–930.

Bartoletti, Massimo, and Livio Pompianu, 2017, An empirical analysis of smart contracts:
  Platforms, applications, and design patterns, in Michael Brenner, Kurt Rohloff, Joseph
  Bonneau, Andrew Miller, Peter Y.A. Ryan, Vanessa Teague, Andrea Bracciali, Massimil-
  iano Sala, Federico Pintore, and Markus Jakobsson, ed.: Financial Cryptography and Data
  Security pp. 494–509 Cham. Springer International Publishing.

Bessembinder, Hendrik, and William Maxwell, 2008, Markets transparency and the corporate
  bond market, The Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, 217–234.

Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, Matthieu Bouvard, and Catherine Casamatta, 2018, The
  blockchain folk theorem, Working Paper.

Bloomfield, Robert, and Maureen O’Hara, 1999, Market transparency: who wins and who
  loses?, Review of Financial Studies 12, 5–35.

Böhme, Rainer, Nicolas Christin, Benjamin Edelman, and Tyler Moore, 2015, Bitcoin: Eco-
  nomics, technology, and governance, The Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, 213–238.

Bourveau, Thomas, Guoman She, and Alminas Zaldokas, 2017, Naughty firms, noisy disclo-
  sure, .

Budish, Eric, Robin Lee, and John Shim, 2017, Will the market fix the market? a theory of
  stock exchange competition and innovation, .

Buterin, Vitalik, 2014, Ethereum: A next-generation smart contract and decentralized appli-
  cation platform, URL https://github. com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/% 5BEnglish% 5D-White-
  Paper.

Catalini, Christian, and Joshua S Gans, 2016, Some simple economics of the blockchain,
  Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chapman, James, Rodney Garratt, Scott Hendry, Andrew McCormack, and Wade McMa-
 hon, 2017, Project jasper: Are distributed wholesale payment systems feasible yet?, Fi-
 nancial System p. 59.

                                            38
Cong, Lin William, 2017, Auctions of real options, Chicago Booth Working Paper.

      , Zhiguo He, and Jiasun Li, 2018, Decentralized mining in centralized pools, Working
  Paper.

Cong, Lin William, Ye Li, and Neng Wang, 2018, Tokenomics: Dynamic adoption and
  valuation, Working Paper.

de Vilaca Burgos, Aldenio, Jose Deodoro de Oliveira Filho, Marcus Vinicius Cursino Suares,
  and Rafael Sarres de Almeida, 2017, Distributed ledger technical research in central bank
  of brazil, .

DeMarzo, Peter, and Darrell Duffie, 1999, A liquidity-based model of security design, Econo-
  metrica 67, 65–99.

DeMarzo, Peter, Ilan Kremer, and Andrzej Skrzypacz, 2005, Bidding with securities: Auc-
  tions and security design, American Economic Review 95(4), 936–959.

Easley, David, Maureen O’Hara, and Soumya Basu, 2017, From mining to markets: The
  evolution of bitcoin transaction fees, .

Eyal, Ittay, and Emin Gün Sirer, 2014, Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining is vulnerable,
  in International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security pp. 436–454.
  Springer.

Fudenberg, Drew, and Eric Maskin, 1986, The folk theorem in repeated games with discount-
  ing or with incomplete information, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp.
  533–554.

Goldstein, Michael A, Edith S Hotchkiss, and Erik R Sirri, 2006, Transparency and liquidity:
 A controlled experiment on corporate bonds, The review of financial studies 20, 235–273.

Green, Edward J, and Robert H Porter, 1984, Noncooperative collusion under imperfect
  price information, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 87–100.

Hart, Oliver, 1995, Firms, contracts, and financial structure (Clarendon Press).

       , and John Moore, 1988, Incomplete contracts and renegotiation, Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 755–785.

      , 1995, Debt and seniority: An analysis of the role of hard claims in constraining
  management, American Economic Review 85.

Harvey, Campbell R, 2016, Cryptofinance, Available at SSRN 2438299.



                                             39
Huberman, Gur, Jacob D Leshno, and Ciamac C Moallemi, 2017, Monopoly without a
 monopolist: An economic analysis of the bitcoin payment system, .

Innes, Robert D, 1990, Limited liability and incentive contracting with ex-ante action choices,
  Journal of economic theory 52, 45–67.

Khapko, Mariana, and Marius Zoican, 2017, ‘smart’ settlement, Working Paper.

Krishna, Vijay, 2009, Auction theory (Academic press).

Kroll, Joshua A, Ian C Davey, and Edward W Felten, 2013, The economics of bitcoin mining,
  or bitcoin in the presence of adversaries, in Proceedings of WEIS vol. 2013. Citeseer.

Lauslahti, Kristian, Juri Mattila, Timo Seppälä, et al., 2016, Smart contracts–how will
  blockchain technology affect contractual practices?, Discussion paper, The Research Insti-
  tute of the Finnish Economy.

Malinova, Katya, and Andreas Park, 2016, Market design for trading with blockchain tech-
 nology, Available at SSRN.

Miller, David A, 2011, Robust collusion with private information, The Review of Economic
 Studies 79, 778–811.

Nakamoto, Satoshi, 2008, Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, .

Narayanan, Arvind, Joseph Bonneau, Edward Felten, Andrew Miller, and Steven Goldfeder,
  2016, Bitcoin and cryptocurrency technologies (Princeton University Pres).

Narayanan, Arvind, and Jeremy Clark, 2017, Bitcoin’s academic pedigree, Communications
  of the ACM 60, 36–45.

Nayak, Kartik, Srijan Kumar, Andrew Miller, and Elaine Shi, 2016, Stubborn mining: Gen-
  eralizing selfish mining and combining with an eclipse attack, in Security and Privacy
  (EuroS&P), 2016 IEEE European Symposium on pp. 305–320. IEEE.

Porter, Robert H, 1983, Optimal cartel trigger price strategies, Journal of Economic Theory
  29, 313–338.

Raskin, Max, and David Yermack, 2016, Digital currencies, decentralized ledgers, and the
  future of central banking, Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Szabo, Nick, 1997, Formalizing and securing relationships on public networks, First Monday
  2.

       , 1998, Secure property titles with owner authority, Online at http://szabo. best. vwh.
  net/securetitle. html.

                                              40
Tapscott, Don, and Alex Tapscott, 2016, Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology Behind
  Bitcoin Is Changing Money, Business, and the World (Penguin).
  The Economist Nov 4

The Economist Nov 4, 2017, A yen for plastic, The Economist November 4, 72.

Tirole, Jean, 1988, The theory of industrial organization (MIT press).

       , 1999, Incomplete contracts: Where do we stand?, Econometrica 67, 741–781.

Turing, Alan Mathison, 1937, On computable numbers, with an application to the entschei-
  dungsproblem, Proceedings of the London mathematical society 2, 230–265.

Weiss, Mitchell, and Elena Corsi, 2017, Bitfury: Blockchain for government, HBS Case Study
 January 12, 818–031.

Yermack, David, 2017, Corporate governance and blockchains, Discussion paper, .




                                            41
Appendix
A      Consensus Generation: Alternative Specifications
     We still denote the decentralized consensus on ω
                                                    e on a blockchain by ze, except that they can take on a
continuum rather than binary values. The set of record keepers and effectiveness measure are as specified
earlier. Upon contact, each record keeper k ∈ K submits yek taking a continuum of values, yielding a collection
of reports y ≡ {eyk }k∈K .
     Depending on the specific blockchain protocol, the consensus ze(y) is then a transformation of inputs
collected from these contacted record keepers. Again we can write it as
                                                           X
                                                ze(y) = Z̃(  w
                                                             ek yek ),                                             (12)
                                                             k

which includes many well-known blockchains such as Bitcoin, in which the miner who solves a hard NP
complete problem first (which is completely random if miners have homogeneous computation power) gets
to make the record block. In the language of our model, the blockchain protocol randomly chooses one report
from all contacted record keepers (all miners).
    For simplicity, we examine a large class of linear model typically used in continuum-signal space.

                                                            1 X
                                                  ze(y) =       yek ,                                              (13)
                                                            K
                                                                 k

The decentralized consensus here is a simple average of all selected reports. It is easy to show that our
results are robust to heterogeneous and stochastic weights on signals.


Information Set of Record Keepers
     To incorporate potentially noisy observation, we assume that each recordkeeper on the blockchain has a
private signal x     e + ηei , where for simplicity ηei are i.i.d. with zero mean and variance ση2 . ηei captures noisy
                ei = ω
observations of the true state based on public information and off-chain information available on blockchain,
as well as additional information recordkeepers have when generating consensus.
     Denote by 1k the event of recordkeeper k being contacted, upon which his/her signal turns to x        ek = ωe +e
                                                                                                                    ηk ,
                                                      2
where ηek ’s are with zero mean and variance σK . We have σK ≤ ση , thanks to the additional (potentially
encrypted) information. To summarize, the set of all information on the blockchain can be written as a tuple
   
of K, {e xi }i∈K
              / , {e
                   xk , 1k }k∈K , ze .


Misreporting and Manipulation
    We modify the normalized utility of each risk-neutral recordkeeper who submits a report of yk to

                                                                        1           2
                                    U (yk ; y) = ebk · (e
                                                        z (y) − x
                                                                ek ) −    (yk − x
                                                                                ek )                               (14)
                                                                       2h

The first coefficient ebk ≡ eb+ εek is recordkeeper k’s bias in misreporting, which is known to the recordkeeper k
before submitting his/her report. Here, the common bias eb (among contacted recordkeepers) has zero mean



                                                          A-1
and variance σb2 , capturing the common bias on the blockchain, which can be interpreted as one institutional
transaction party choosing validators within its proprietary network (peer selection on Ripple or notary
choice on Corda), an attempt by holders of the crypto-currency to slow down the creation of inflation of
the native currency, and/or a system-wide hacking motive. Such common bias is not alien in the traditional
economy: Arbitrators in business arbitration are only rewarded if they are chosen by their clients and may
systematically cater to major clients. The idiosyncratic part εek is i.i.d., with zero mean and has variance σε2 .
     The second term captures the private cost of manipulation, where h parametrizes how quickly the cost
rises with the magnitude of misreporting, which depends on the consensus protocol design.


Information Distribution and Quality of Consensus
       Each contacted record keeper chooses yr to maximize U in (14), which gives

                                                                  he
                                               yek∗ = ω
                                                      e + ηek +     bk .                                     (15)
                                                                  K

The equilibrium consensus then is (recall ebk = eb + εek )
                                                                                          !
                                  1 X          1 X       h                 eb + 1
                                                                                  X
                             ze =     yek = ω
                                            e+     ηek +                            εek       ,              (16)
                                  K            K         K                      K
                                      k                 k                           k

with the resulting quality of the decentralized consensus:
                                                                                 
                                                          2
                                                                       h2      σ2 
                                                                                
                                                        σK
                              − V ar(e
                                     ω − ze) = −                    + 2 σb2 + ε  .                         (17)
                                                                                 
                                                        K
                                                        |{z}          K        K 
                                                                      |     {z   }
                                                    signal quality         manipulation


      The first term relates directly to signal quality. For instance, contacting for verificationby sharing some
details of the transaction information may reduce σK and hence is quality-improving. Additionally, the first
term in (17) shows that the average over a greater sample size K smooths out the observation noises ηek ’s,
and hence leads to a better consensus.
      The second channel is more novel and is rooted in the process of decentralized consensus generation.
When the blockchain contacts more and more recordkeepers, i.e., a greater K, each understands that each
individual has less influence on the final consensus outcome. The resulting reduced manipulation in report
yek∗ in (15) translates to a higher consensus effectiveness. This effect is reflected in the scaling of 1/K 2 in
the “manipulation”terms in (17). This is the key economic reason why blockchain is deemed more secure,
in addition to its technical improvements on cyber-security. Of course, aggregation certainly helps reach a
better consensus by reducing the idiosyncratic components of misreporting, as reflected in the denominator
of the second term in “manipulation” in (17).
      However, contacting more recordkeepers affects the information environment in which the agents reside
on the blockchain. First, depending on detailed blockchain protocols, soliciting reports involves transferring
certain transaction information to contacted record keepers, changing σK .47 Second, even with encrypted
content information, the act of contacting conveys information (denoted by 1k ). In the context of an
  47
       Recall the example of Corda’s validating model in Section 2.4.


                                                       A-2
industrial organization framework analyzed in Section 3, this renders the aggregate economic activities
public information if all agents are contacted, which makes collusion easier and jeopardizes competition.
    In conclusion, we have demonstrated the robustness in a large set linear models of the tradeoff between
greater decentralization to improve consensus quality and lesser decentralization to reduce information dis-
tribution.


B     Derivations and Proofs
Proof of Proposition 3.1
Proof. In a competitive equilibrium, each seller lowers its price until its competitors quit. If πqC <
max{qA , qB }, at least one of the incumbents always competes to lower the price to µ to get the customer this
period and prevent the enhanced future competition had C entered in this period. Without a reputation of
being authentic, an authentic C can only get a customer if buyers show up and πqC ≥ max{qA , qB }.
    Because C does not have a capacity to bear loss at the point of entry, C cannot charge a penetration
price below production cost µ and get customers when πqC,t It < max{qA,t , qB,t }. Even when πqC,t It ≥
max{qA,t , qB,t }, C may not be able to enter if the incumbents have deep pockets and can engage in predatory
pricing.



Proof of Lemma 3.2
Proof. Let V + (qi , q−i ) be the present value of payoff to a seller with realized quality qi in the collusion phase.
In the collusion phase, buyers are indifferent between different sellers.
    Let V − be the present value of payoff to a seller before the realization of type in the first period of
punishment phase. According to the collusion strategy, the continuation values satisfy:



                             V + (qi , q−i ) = λ(f (qi , q−i )(qi − µ) + δV + ) + (1 − λ)δV −                    (18)
                                                                      1 − δT
                             V − (qi , q−i ) = λE[(qi − max qj )+ ]          + δT V +                            (19)
                                                         j6=i          1−δ

For the strategy to be an equilibrium, we need to verify, by the one-shot deviation principal, that a seller does
not have incentive to unilaterally deviate. This is obvious in the punishment phase, since it is a Bertrand
equilibrium. In the collusion phase, to prevent deviation, we need

                                    ∀q, V + (q) ≥ λ((q − µ) + δV − ) + (1 − λ)δV −                               (20)

    Denote V + (qi ) = Eq−i [V + (qi , q−i )], f (qi ) = Eq−i [f (qi , q−i )]. Integrating (18), we have

                                   V + (q) = λ(f (q)(q − µ) + δV + ) + (1 − λ)δV −                               (21)
                                   V + = λ(E[f (q)(q − µ)] + δV + ) + (1 − λ)δV −                                (22)




                                                           A-3
    With (20) -(22), we have

                                 δ(V + − V − ) ≥ (1 − f (q))(q − µ), ∀q ∈ [q, q̄]                          (23)

From (22) (19), we solve for (V + − V − ), Plugging into the above equation, we get the range of discount
factors that support the collusion strategy as an equilibrium:
                                                    
                                             1 − δ T (M1 − M2 )
                                        δλ                        ≥ M3                                     (24)
                                           1 − λδ − (1 − λ)δ T +1

where M1 = E[f (q)(q − µ)], M2 = E[(qi − maxj6=i qj )+ ], M3 = maxq {(1 − f (q))(q − µ)}.


Proof of Proposition 3.3
Proof. Since M1 is the expected stage-game collusion rent to a seller, and M2 is her payoff in a compet-
                                                                                               M3
itive stage-game equilibrium, we have M1 > M2 . Moreover, M1 + M3 > E[q] − µ, thus λ1 M1 +M      3 −M2
                                                                                                       >
1 E[q]−µ−M1
λ E[q]−µ−M2  > 0. Because the least-upper-bound property (and its implied greatest-lower-bound property)
holds, the infimum exists.



Proof of Proposition 3.4
Proof. Since the payment can be contingent on completion of service, the authentic type can be separated
out from fraudulent type by the following smart contract: The buyer pays the seller ps conditional on
the success of service, otherwise pays zero (or an infinitesimally small negative amount). The fraudulent
type can ill-afford imitating the good type, since she can never complete the service and get the payment.
Consequently she does not enter and never gets any customer. For the authentic entrant to get buyers (if
present), if qC ≥ max{qA , qB }, she can charge payment ps = µ+(qC −max{q qC
                                                                              A ,qB })
                                                                                       contingent on completion
of service, and zero upon failure, to break the fraudulent type’s indifference, because there is a tiny cost for
entry and the fraudulent type would never enter since she will never be paid.
     Given the smart contract allows authentic C to costlessly separate. A, B, and C essentially compete
based on q. Any predatory behaviors would only incur losses for the current period without improving future
continuation value as future q is i.i.d.. Therefore there would not be any predatory (or penetration) pricing.
     Finally for collusive equilibria, if A and B collude, they must be charging a weakly higher price, which
enables C to get the first customer earlier.




                                                      A-4
Proof of Proposition 3.5
Proof. It is easy to derive,

                             V + (qi , q−i ) = λ(f (qi , q−i )(qi − µ) + δV + ) + (1 − λ)δV +             (25)
                             V + = λ(E[f (q)(q − µ)] + δV + ) + (1 − λ)δV +                               (26)
                                                             T
                                                     1−δ
                             V − = λE[(qi − q−i )+ ]        + δT V +                                      (27)
                                                     1−δ
                             ∀q, V + (q) ≥ λ((q − µ) + δV − ) + (1 − λ)δV +                               (28)

    Collusion can be supported if                                     
                                              δλ (M1 − M2 ) 1 − δ T
                                                                          ≥ M3                            (29)
                                                      1−δ
where M1 = E[f (q)(q − µ)], M2 = E[(qi − q−i )+ ], M3 = maxq {(1 − f (q))(q − µ)}
    Compared to tacit collusion without blockchain, the only difference in the above recursive equations is
that the punishment phase is not trigged if the buyers do not show up, i.e., the corresponding part of the
continuation value is (1 − λ)δV + instead of (1 − λ)δV − .
    We show that whenever (7) is satisfied, so is (29). This is equivalent to showing

                                              1 − λδ − (1 − λ)δ T +1 > 1 − δ                              (30)

which is equivalent to
                                                   δ(1 − δ T )(1 − λ) > 0                                 (31)

      Now for the second part of the proposition: Note that collusion being impossible when δ < δoT raditional
is already proven in Proposition 3.3.
                                                Blockchain2
      To show there could be when δ ≥ inf f {δ(∞,f  )       }, we note again by the least upper bound property,
        Blockchain2
inf f {δ(∞,f )      } is well-defined and positive. To show one collusion equilibrium exists, we only need to
search within the class of f such that f (q) is continuous function, i.e. f ∈ C([0, 1]). Because C([0, 1]) is
a locally convex Hausdorff space that is complete, there exists a sequence of allocation functions that gets
infinitely close to the infimum. This means for any δ ≥ δoBlockchain2 , we can find a (T, f ) that can be
sustained. This holds true for our later discussions on infimum and supremum as well.


Proof of Lemma 3.6
Proof.

                             V + (qi , q−i ) = λ(fˆ(qi , q−i )(qi − µ) + δV + ) + (1 − λ)δV +             (32)
                             V + = λ(E[fˆ(q)(q − µ)] + δV + ) + (1 − λ)δV +                               (33)
                                                                 T
                                                           1−δ
                             V − = λE[(qi − max qj )+ ]        + δT V +                                   (34)
                                                  j6=i     1−δ
                             ∀q, V + (q) ≥ λ((q − µ) + δV − ) + (1 − λ)δV +                               (35)

                         λ(M̂1 −M̂2 )(1−δ T )
    Note V + − V − =            1−δ           .



                                                           A-5
Proof of Theorem 3.7 and Discussion
Proof. Again,         M̂3
                               ∈ (0, 1) for all fˆ. Therefore by the least upper bound property, supf {δ(∞,
                M̂3 +λ(M̂1 −M̂2 )
                                                                                                          Blockchain3
                                                                                                             fˆ)
                                                                                                                      }
exists and is less than 1. When δ > supf {δ(∞,fˆ) Blockchain3            ˆ
                                                              }, any (∞, f ) can be sustained, including the one al-
locating buyers to the highest quality seller and the one allocating to the lowest-quality seller. Note that
for any realization of seller qualities, the best-quality seller with blockchain is better than the best-quality
incumbent, we could attain higher or lower welfare; similarly, the worst-quality seller with blockchain and
entry is worse than the worst-quality incumbent, so welfare could be lower. Moreover, since competitive
stage game is always on the equilibrium path without blockchain, the consumer surplus is positive. With
blockchain sellers can extract full rent, so lower consumer surplus is attainable. Moreover, by introducing
some punishing on the equilibrium path or lowering the collusion price under blockchain, consumer surplus
can be increased to be higher than that in the traditional world (for example, under perfect competition).
Thus consumer surplus can also be higher with blockchain.
    Note for the corollary, the most collusive equilibria maximizes welfare but sellers fully extract all welfare
surplus. This equilibrium can be sustained and the results follow.

   We note M̂2 is simply the payoff to a seller in a competitive stage game, and is almost surely less than M1
                                                                            Blockchain3
which is the expected stage game payoff under collusion. Therefore, inf fˆ{δ(∞,fˆ)
                                                                                        } = inf fˆ M̂ +λ(M̂3
                                                                                                          M̂ −M̂ )
                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                       3      1    2

But M̂ +λ(M̂ 3
            M̂1 −M̂2 )
                       ∈ (0, 1) for all fˆ. Again, by the greatest-lower bound property of real-numbered set, the
       3
threshold is well-defined and smaller than 1.
     When δ > δoBlockchain3 , the blockchain can support at least one collusion equilibrium that fully extracts
consumer surplus (with no punishment phase on equilibrium path). This is because, again, there is a sequence
of allocation function fˆ within in the complete function space C[0, 1] that arbitrarily approaches the infimum.
Without blockchain, consumer surplus is never zero as competitive stage game is always on the equilibrium
path. Note that even with collusion, there has to be punishment on the equilibrium path. Thus consumer
surplus is always positive. The conclusion follows.


Proof of Corollary 3.8
Proof. For m > 2 in general, the previous proposition’s proof still applies and δoBlockchain,m < 1. For n ≥ 2,
                                                                    1
                                M3                        1 E[q]−µ− n (E[q]−µ)
when λ < n−1              1               1 E[q]−µ−M1
             n , we have λ M1 +M3 −M2 > λ E[q]−µ−M2 > λ          E[q]−µ        > 1. Therefore there cannot be
collusion with n ≥ 2 in the traditional world. The corollary follows.


Proof of Lemma 4.2
Proof. The information asymmetry here is that the buyer does not know a seller’s type. Therefore the buyer
makes his decision based on his perception of the type q̂i and the price charged pi . To be specific, the buyer
maximizes his payoff by choosing the seller who can deliver the highest expected utility:

                                                    max q̂i − pi                                                  (36)
                                                      i

If the payoff by choosing any seller is negative, the buyer will step out of the market.
     Suppose there is a separating equilibrium where the pricing schedule is p(q) and the probability for a
seller with type q to be chosen is f (q). For a seller with type q, she can pretend to be type q̃ by posting the



                                                          A-6
price p(q̃). The seller’s expected payoff by doing so is

                                                f (q̃)(p(q̃) − µ)                                             (37)

Every seller will choose the same q̃ to maximize (37), which does not depend on q. Therefore, the separating
equilibrium does not exist.
    Since there is no separating equilibrium, we consider the pooling equilibrium. Without a reputation
system, the buyer’s perception of each seller’s type is the mean E[q].
    This is similar to Bertrand competition. Suppose the lower price of the two firms is higher than µ, say,
p1 > µ. Consider a deviation for the second firm to the price p2 = p1 −  > µ, which increases the profit of
the second firm. Therefore, in equilibrium, we must have p1 = p2 = µ. Since we always assume the buyer’s
decision rule is non-discriminating, the tie is broken randomly. Therefore, the ex-ante consumer surplus and
social welfare is E[qi u − µ], where the expectation is taken over the realization of qi . This yields E[q] − µ.
As a remark outside our parameter assumption, if the cost is so high that µ > E[q], ex-ante utility for the
buyer is negative, and the buyer will stay out of the market, i.e., the market breaks down.


Proof of Proposition 4.3
Proof. We first show that using P∗ is an equilibrium. We then prove that no other equilibrium exists. The
proof resembles the argument in DeMarzo, Kremer, and Skrzypacz (2005) on how the flattest securities are
always used in an equilibrium of informal auctions with security bids. However, because the sellers can always
offer quality-insensitive smart contracts, we do not need to worry about equilibrium refinement. Readers
who are familiar with DeMarzo, Kremer, and Skrzypacz (2005) should skip the detailed proof below.
     With P∗ , buyers get utility 1 − p regardless of the service outcome; in other words, the smart contract
is quality-insensitive. Conversely, any quality-insensitive smart contract has to be of the form P∗ . Given
that the buyer taking an offer (p, p − 1) gets 1 − p utility, the setup is equivalent to a first-price auction
where the buyers are the auctioneers who allocate the business opportunity, and sellers are bidders who bid
cash 1 − p. The buyers go to the seller with the lowest p. From the auction literature, a unique symmetric
equilibrium with cash bids exists. Therefore, there is a unique equilibrium when restricting smart contracts
to P∗ , implying that there is no profitable deviation using quality-insensitive contracts. The equilibrium
offer of type q follows the solution of symmetric equilibrium of first price auctions (Krishna (2009)), and is
given by the pq that solves

                                                                             q                 N −1
                                                                                     Φ(q 0 )
                              h                             i          Z         
                    1 − pq = E q (1),N −1 − µ|q (1),N −1 < q = q − µ −                                 dq 0   (38)
                                                                         q           Φ(q)

where q (1),N −1 is the highest realized quality among other N − 1 sellers. We note the expression is increasing
in q, thus buyers all choose the highest-quality seller. Substituting N = 3 gives the expression in the
proposition.
    Now suppose this equilibrium breaks down when we allow for smart contracts beyond P∗ , then there must
be a profitable deviation by a type q to a quality-sensitive smart contract Pq such that P r(B(Pq ))Sq (Pq ) >
P r(Bq (P∗q ))Sq (P∗q ), where P r(B) is the probability of getting customers when buyers believe that they can
get utility B, and B(Pq ) is the buyers’ perceived value of the deviation contract. Denote the set of types that
find it profitable to deviate to Pq by Q. Then B(Pq ) ∈ B(Pq (Q)). Therefore, ∃q 0 ∈ Q (possibly q) such that


                                                      A-7
q 0 −Sq0 (Pq ) = B(Pq (q 0 )) > B(Pq ). Consider the deviation by type q 0 to (p0 , p0 −1), where p0 = 1−q 0 +Sq0 (Pq ).
Then the probability of winning is higher than q 0 deviating to use Pq , and the payoff conditional on getting
customers are both Sq0 (Pq ), implying that if it is profitable for q 0 to deviate to Pq (which is true since q 0 ∈ Q).
It is also profitable for q 0 to deviate to a quality-insensitive contract (p0 , p0 − 1). However, this contradicts
the fact that there is no profitable deviation using quality-insensitive contracts. Therefore, we conclude that
the equilibrium described in the previous paragraph is an equilibrium even when we allow general smart
contract forms.
     Next, we show that the above equilibrium is essentially unique for the game, i.e., all other symmetric
equilibria have the same payoffs.
     We first argue that if a smart contract P is offered in an equilibrium and is quality-sensitive, then at most
one type uses it. Suppose otherwise and more than one type use it. Let the lowest and highest types offering
the smart contract be qL and qH , then B(P) = Bq∗ (Pq∗ ) for some q ∗ ∈ (qL , qH ). However, P is increasing
in quality because ps > pf . Consequently, qL would find it profitable to deviate to offering (p, p − 1) where
p = 1 − B(P), contradicting that in equilibrium both qL offers P. Therefore, at most one type uses P.
     Let the type be q, then B(Pq ) = Bq (Pq ). This implies the allocation and payoffs are unaltered if type q
replaces the offer by (pq , pq − 1) where pq = 1 − B(Pq ). This is because, Sq (Pq ) = q − Bq (Pq ) = q − (1 − pq ).
     Because each type q is solving the same optimization problem as in the case where we restrict to P∗ , we
have shown that any unrestricted equilibrium is payoff equivalent to the unique and monotone equilibrium
with restriction of smart contracts to P∗ .
     Finally, the smart contract (psq , pfq ) used by type q in such an essentially unique equilibrium gives type q
the same value as (pq , pq − 1). That is, qpsq + (1 − q)pfq = qpq + (1 − q)pq . Because in the equilibrium with P∗ ,
a seller’s expected payoff is differentiable q for all q, by a standard envelope argument, taking derivatives in
the unrestricted equilibrium yields psq − pfq = 0. From this we conclude that all possible equilibria are payoff
equivalent to the unique equilibrium when restricting smart contracts to P∗ and the smart contracts used
are also in P∗ . This means that no equilibrium exists other than the one described in the second paragraph
of the proof.



C      Examples of Record Keepers




                                                         A-8
                      Table C. A List of Record Keepers’ Functions
Source: KeepersWorkers that Maintain Blockchain Networks, Ryan Zurrer, Medium, Aug 5, 2017.
https://medium.com/@rzurrer/keepers-workers-that-maintain-blockchain-networks-a40182615b66




                                           A-9
