                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SOCIOECONOMIC INTEGRATION OF U.S. IMMIGRANT GROUPS OVER THE LONG TERM:
                 THE SECOND GENERATION AND BEYOND

                                          Brian Duncan
                                         Stephen J. Trejo

                                       Working Paper 24394
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24394


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2018




 The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2018 by Brian Duncan and Stephen J. Trejo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
 including © notice, is given to the source.
Socioeconomic Integration of U.S. Immigrant Groups over the Long Term: The Second Generation
and Beyond
Brian Duncan and Stephen J. Trejo
NBER Working Paper No. 24394
March 2018
JEL No. J61,J62

                                         ABSTRACT

In this chapter, we document generational patterns of educational attainment and earnings for
contemporary immigrant groups. We also discuss some potentially serious measurement issues
that arise when attempting to track the socioeconomic progress of the later-generation
descendants of U.S. immigrants, and we summarize what recent research has to say about these
measurement issues and how they might bias our assessment of the long-term integration of
particular groups. Most national origin groups arrive with relatively high educational attainment
and/or experience enough improvement between the first and second generations such that they
quickly meet or exceed, on average, the schooling level of the typical American. Several large
and important Hispanic groups (including Mexicans and Puerto Ricans) are exceptions to this
pattern, however, and their prospects for future upward mobility are subject to much debate.
Because of measurement issues and data limitations, Mexican Americans in particular and
Hispanic Americans in general probably have experienced significantly more socioeconomic
progress beyond the second generation than available data indicate. Even so, it may take longer
for their descendants to integrate fully into the American mainstream than it did for the
descendants of the European immigrants who arrived near the turn of the twentieth century.


Brian Duncan
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Campus Box 181
Denver, CO 80217-3364
brian.duncan@ucdenver.edu

Stephen J. Trejo
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway Stop C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
trejo@austin.utexas.edu
       As a self-styled nation of immigrants, the United States takes great pride in its historical

success as a “melting pot” able to absorb and unify people coming from diverse lands and

cultures. At the same time, however, pride in our immigrant heritage always seems tempered by

the nagging fear that the most recent arrivals are somehow different, that the latest wave of

foreigners won’t integrate into the mainstream of American society. Certainly, this fear was

voiced when Irish, Italian, and other relatively unskilled immigrants arrived in large numbers at

the end of the 1800s and the beginning of the 1900s (Jones 1960). Time has assuaged this

particular fear. In terms of outcomes such as educational attainment, occupation, and earnings,

the sizable differences by national origin that initially persisted among earlier European

immigrants have largely disappeared among the modern-day descendants of these immigrants

(Alba and Nee 2003; Borjas 1994; Chiswick 1977; Farley 1990; Lieberson and Waters 1988;

Neidert and Farley 1985; Perlmann 2005; Perlmann and Waldinger 1997).

       There is considerable skepticism, however, that the processes of assimilation and

incorporation will operate similarly for the predominantly nonwhite immigrants who have

entered the United States in increasing numbers over the past several decades (Gans 1992; Portes

and Zhou 1993; Rumbaut 1994). Indeed, Huntington (2004) voices a particularly strong version

of such skepticism with regard to Hispanic immigration. Are the descendants of present-day

Hispanic and Asian immigrants following the same trajectory of intergenerational integration

experienced by the descendants of earlier arrivals from Europe?

        In this chapter, we shed light on this question by documenting generational patterns of

educational attainment and earnings for contemporary immigrant groups. We also discuss some

potentially serious measurement issues that arise when attempting to track the socioeconomic

progress of the later-generation descendants of U.S. immigrants, and we summarize what recent
                                                  2

research has to say about these measurement issues and how they might bias our assessment of

the long-term integration of particular groups.



Educational Patterns in the First and Second Generations

        We begin by describing patterns of educational attainment among foreign-born

immigrants and their U.S.-born children. Education is a fundamental determinant of economic

success, social status, health, family stability, and life opportunities (Hout 2012). In addition,

information on education is available for all adults, whereas earnings data are available only for

those currently working. Our primary education measure is average completed years of

schooling, but similar patterns emerge for other education measures, such as the percent of

individuals in the lower (less than 12 years of schooling) and upper (at least a bachelor’s degree)

tails of the educational distribution.

        Throughout this chapter, we employ microdata from the Current Population Survey

(CPS) for all months from January 2003 through December 2016. The CPS is a monthly survey

of about 60,000 households that the U.S. government administers to estimate unemployment

rates and other indicators of labor market activity. The sampling universe for this survey is the

civilian noninstitutionalized population of the United States, which potentially generates biased

estimates for groups with relatively high rates of institutionalization, such as young, African-

American males (Pettit 2012). Beginning in 1980, the decennial U.S. Census stopped asking

respondents about the countries of birth of their parents, and the American Community Survey

follows the census in this regard. In 1994, however, the CPS began collecting this information on

a regular basis from all respondents. As a result, the CPS is currently the best large-scale,

nationally representative U.S. data set for investigating how outcomes vary by immigrant
                                                                 3

generation.

          In addition to the detailed demographic and labor force data reported for all respondents,

the CPS collects earnings information each month from one-quarter of the sample, the so-called

outgoing rotation groups. The data we analyze come from these outgoing rotation group samples.

The CPS sampling scheme is such that surveys for the same month in adjacent years have about

half of their respondents in common (e.g., about half of the respondents in any January survey

are reinterviewed the following January). To obtain independent samples, we use only data from

the first time a household appears in the outgoing rotation group samples (i.e., we use only data

from the fourth month that a household appears in the CPS sample). By pooling together these

14 years of monthly CPS data, we substantially increase sample sizes and improve the precision

of our estimates.

          Using the CPS information on the countries of birth of each respondent and his or her

parents, we define the following generation groups. The first generation consists of foreign-born

individuals, excluding those born abroad of an American parent. 1 The second generation consists

of U.S.-born individuals who have at least one foreign-born parent. Remaining persons are

members of the third+ generation (i.e., the third and all higher generations), which consists of

U.S.-born individuals who have two U.S.-born parents. Our analysis samples include men and

women aged 25–59.


           1 In the discussion that follows, we will use the terms first generation and immigrant as synonymous with foreign-born

individuals, in contrast to the official terminology used by the U.S. government in which immigrants are legal permanent
residents, and nonimmigrant aliens are other foreigners such as tourists, business travelers, and recent refugee arrivals. The data
analyzed here cannot make such distinctions among foreign-born individuals. In addition, individuals born in Puerto Rico and
other outlying areas of the United States are included within our first-generation group. Persons born in Puerto Rico are U.S.
citizens and enjoy unfettered mobility between the island and the U.S. mainland, and therefore Puerto Ricans are not, strictly
speaking, a U.S. immigrant group. Nonetheless, island-born Puerto Ricans who move to the United States and their U.S.-born
descendants encounter many of the same adjustment issues as conventional immigrant groups. Accordingly, the socioeconomic
mobility of Puerto Ricans is often analyzed using models and methods developed to study U.S. immigrant groups (e.g., Feliciano
2001; Hirschman 2001).
                                                               4

         For first- and second-generation individuals overall and separately for those from the

largest national origin groups, Table 1 reports average completed years of schooling and the

corresponding sample sizes on which these averages are based. 2 The bottom row of the table

shows average schooling levels for first- and second-generation individuals from all countries of

origin (including countries not listed individually in the table). Separate calculations are

presented for men and women.

         For the first generation, these tables illustrate the well-known diversity of educational

attainment among U.S. immigrants (Betts and Lofstrom 2000; Card 2005). Average schooling

levels range from about 10 years for those born Mexico and Central America to 15 years and

above for those born in India, Japan, Korea, and Canada. For comparison purposes, note that

average years of schooling among third+-generation non-Hispanic whites is 13.8 years for men

and 14.0 years for women.

         Additional calculations (not reported in Table 1) reveal that the foreign-born are greatly

overrepresented among those with the lowest levels of education. Overall, 27 percent of

immigrant men and 24 percent of immigrant women have completed less than 12 years of

schooling, and these rates exceed 40 percent for Central American immigrants and exceed 50

percent for Mexican immigrants. In contrast, the corresponding rates of low educational

attainment are below 7 percent for U.S.-born individuals overall. At the same time, however, the

foreign-born are well represented among those with the highest education levels. Completion of

a bachelor’s degree is only slightly less common for immigrants than for the U.S.-born, whereas


         2 The specific countries (e.g., Mexico) and regions (e.g., Europe) of origin identified in these tables collectively
represent 88 percent of the first-generation individuals and 92 percent of the second-generation individuals in our samples.
Second-generation individuals with parents born in different foreign countries have been assigned the national origins of their
fathers. We follow Jaeger’s (1997) recommendations for how to construct a completed years of schooling variable from the CPS
information collected about postsecondary degrees obtained.
                                                               5

a substantially higher fraction of immigrants than U.S. natives have postgraduate degrees, and

highly educated immigrants are heavily concentrated in science, technology, engineering, and

health fields (Bound and Turner 2014). College degrees and higher levels of education are

especially prevalent for immigrants from Canada, Europe, and parts of Asia (including China,

India, Japan, Korea, and the Philippines). To sum up, the foreign-born are overrepresented at the

bottom and, to a lesser extent, the top of the U.S. educational distribution, and they are

underrepresented in the middle.

         For assessing educational integration, it is particularly useful to look at the second

generation, because these U.S.-born children of immigrants grew up in American schools. Table

1 reveals that, overall, second-generation men and women average about 14 years of schooling.

Additional calculations (not reported) indicate that second-generation Americans have high

school dropout rates of 6–7 percent and college completion rates of 36–39 percent (with women

holding a slight educational advantage over men). These measures of educational attainment for

the second generation are very similar to the corresponding measures for non-Hispanic whites in

the third+ generation. 3 In this respect, the second generation as a whole has converged to the

average educational attainment of the typical American.

         Moreover, for the vast majority of specific national origin groups, average education

levels of the second generation significantly exceed those of the typical third+-generation

American. The exceptions are second-generation members of several important Hispanic groups:

Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, and Central Americans. Note that this is not the case for

all Hispanic groups—in particular, second-generation Cubans and South Americans exhibit


           3 For third+-generation, non-Hispanic whites, the comparable measures for men are an average education level of 13.8

years, a high school dropout rate of 5.8 percent, and a college completion rate of 33.9 percent. The corresponding measures for
women are 14.0 years, 4.5 percent, and 36.3 percent, respectively.
                                                               6

relatively high levels of educational attainment. But the low schooling levels of second-

generation Mexicans and Puerto Ricans and, to a lesser extent, Dominicans and Central

Americans stand in sharp contrast to the much higher educational attainment of the second

generations from non-Hispanic source countries. 4 As a result, Hispanics assume a central role in

current discussions of immigrant integration, not just because Hispanics make up a large share of

the U.S. immigrant population, but also because most indications of relative socioeconomic

disadvantage among the children of U.S. immigrants vanish when Hispanics are excluded from

the sample (Perlmann and Waldinger 1996, 1997; Farley and Alba 2002).

         In large part, the educational deficits displayed by some second-generation Hispanic

groups reflect the very low schooling levels of their immigrant parents (Perlmann 2005; Smith

2006). For example, Mexican immigrants average less than 10 years of education and under half

have completed at least 12 years of schooling, so it is perhaps not surprising that their U.S.-born

sons and daughters do not fully erase this enormous gap in human capital. Figures 1 (for men)

and 2 (for women) provide further evidence on the relationship between the education levels of

first- and second-generation individuals from the same source country. For the 17

countries/regions of origin displayed in Table 1, the figures plot average years of schooling for

second-generation individuals aged 25–34 against those for first-generation individuals aged 50–

59. These specific age groups are chosen so that the first generation more closely represents the

parental cohort for the corresponding second generation. The solid regression lines in the figures

highlight the central tendencies of the relationships between the average education levels of

second-generation individuals from a particular source country and those of their immigrant



         4 Similar patterns have been found by researchers employing a variety of different data sets and measures of

educational attainment. See, for example, Rumbaut (2005) and Perreira, Harris, and Lee (2006).
                                                               7

ancestors. For reference purposes, the horizontal and vertical dashed lines indicate average years

of schooling—13.8 years for men in Figure 1 and 14.2 years for women in Figure 2—for non-

Hispanic whites in the third+ generation who are aged 25–34 (the same age range as the second-

generation samples in the figures).

         These figures reveal a strong relationship between the educational attainments of second-

generation individuals and their immigrant predecessors. Most data points are close to the

corresponding regression line, and the R-squared statistics of 0.63 for men in Figure 1 and 0.44

for women in Figure 2 indicate that much of the variation across national origin groups in the

average education of the second generation is associated with differences in the human capital

possessed by their immigrant ancestors. 5 Moreover, three of the Hispanic national origin groups

with relatively low levels of second-generation schooling (Mexicans, Dominicans, and Central

Americans) are not prominent regression outliers in these figures, which indicates that their

educational deficits in the second generation are roughly what we would expect given the low

schooling levels of their immigrant parents. Puerto Ricans, however, do lie well below the

regression lines. Despite having education levels in the immigrant generation that exceed those

of the other disadvantaged Hispanic groups, by the second generation Puerto Ricans join

Mexicans at the bottom of the U.S. educational hierarchy.

         Regarding the educational integration of the second generation, the evidence presented

thus far can be briefly summarized as follows: on average, the second generation as a whole and

second-generation members from most contemporary immigrant groups meet or exceed the

schooling level of the typical American; the primary exceptions to this pattern are several


          5 Borjas (1994) and Card, DiNardo, and Estes (2000) provide detailed analyses of the transmission of human capital

across immigrant generations for a large number of national origin groups over several decades. These studies confirm the strong
relationships suggested by Figures 1 and 2.
                                                 8

important Hispanic groups: Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, and Central Americans; and

the sizable educational deficits that persist into the second generation for these Hispanic groups

largely reflect the very low levels of schooling, English proficiency, and other forms of human

capital brought to the United States by their immigrant ancestors.

       Because they start out farther behind, perhaps the lagging Hispanic groups will simply

require an extra generation or so to integrate into the socioeconomic mainstream of American

society. After carefully comparing the intergenerational mobility experienced by low-skill

European immigrants arriving in the United States around 1900 with that experienced by

modern-day Mexicans, Perlmann (2005) concludes that “Mexican economic assimilation may

take more time—four or five generations rather than three or four” (p. 124), but that such

assimilation is nonetheless occurring. If Perlmann is correct, then the long-term integration of

Mexican Americans and other Hispanic groups may not turn out all that differently from the

success stories often recounted for pervious waves of U.S. immigration.



Beyond the Second Generation

       Given the patterns described in the preceding section, a key question becomes how much

educational progress takes place after the second generation for Mexicans and other

disadvantaged Hispanic groups. To tackle this question, we must first confront the issue of how,

with available data, to identify immigrant groups in the third generation and beyond. In the CPS,

the only information about the national origins of third+-generation individuals comes from their

subjective responses to the Hispanic origin and race questions. Using this information, Table 2

reports average years of schooling by immigrant generation for the various Hispanic and non-
                                                                9

Hispanic racial/ethnic groups identified in CPS data. 6 The samples include men and women ages

25-59, and standard errors are reported in parentheses.

          For Hispanics overall, Table 2 reveals a substantial schooling advantage of more than 2.5

years for the second generation relative to the first, but no further improvement is evident for the

third+ generation. This pattern largely repeats itself for each of the Hispanic national origin

groups: sizeable schooling gains between the first and second generations with no signs of

additional progress beyond the second generation. Puerto Ricans are a notable exception,

however, with average education levels increasing by about one-half of a year between the

second and third+ generations. Another interesting pattern is that the gains between the first and

second generations are particularly strong for the national origin groups with the least-educated

immigrants (i.e., Mexicans and Central/South Americans).

          Turning now to the non-Hispanic groups in Table 2, Asians of all three generations

possess high levels of educational attainment, as do first- and second-generation whites. By the

second generation, the average schooling levels of black and other race individuals exceed those

of third+-generation whites. Educational attainment is dramatically lower (by a year or more, on

average) for third+-generation members of the black and other race groups, a pattern that reflects

the fundamental demographic heterogeneity across generations for these particular groups. First-

and second-generation blacks, for example, primarily consist of immigrants from the Caribbean

          6 Using answers to the questions regarding Hispanic origin and race, we assign each individual to one of five mutually

exclusive and exhaustive racial/ethnic groups: Hispanic (of any race), and non-Hispanic white, black, Asian (including Native
Hawaiian and Pacific Islander), and a residual “other race” category. Hispanics are disaggregated further by national origin group
(Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central/South American, or Other Hispanic). Starting in 2003, the CPS permits respondents to
designate more than one race, similar to the 2000 and 2010 censuses and the American Community Survey (del Pinal 2004;
Grieco and Cassidy 2001). The Hispanic origin question, however, still requires a single response. Our “other race” category
includes any non-Hispanics who designated two or more major race groups, as well as those who identified with an “American
Indian or Alaskan Native” group. Therefore, the non-Hispanic categories “white,” “black,” and “Asian” represent individuals
who designated a single major race group. In the 2010 Census, only 2.3 percent of non-Hispanics designated more than one
major race group (Humes, Jones, and Ramirez 2011). Consequently, our decision to include only those who report a single race
in the white, black, and Asian race groups does not have much effect on the estimates.
                                                 10

and Africa and their U.S.-born children. Third+-generation blacks, however, are largely the

descendants of African-American slaves whose families have been in the United States for many

generations. The residual nature of the “other race” group also creates comparability issues

across generations, especially for the third+ generation that disproportionately consists of

individuals with American Indian and/or mixed-race ancestry. As a result, comparisons between

the first two generations and the third+ generation for the black and other race groups are

unlikely to shed much light on the intergenerational integration of immigrants. In contrast, such

comparisons are more meaningful for the Hispanic and Asian groups, because these groups are

more demographically homogenous across generations and because most of the third+-

generation members are indeed third generation rather than from a higher generation.

       The apparent lack of socioeconomic progress between second and later generations of

U.S. Hispanics is surprising. Previous studies have consistently found parental education to be

one of the most important determinants of an individual’s educational attainment and ultimate

labor market success (Haveman and Wolfe 1994; Mulligan 1997). Through this mechanism, the

huge educational gain between first- and second-generation Hispanics (documented in Figures 1

and 2 and Tables 1 and 2) should produce a sizable jump in schooling between the second and

third generations, because on average the third generation has parents who are much better

educated than those of the second generation. Yet the improvement in schooling we expect to

find between the second and third generations is largely absent (except for Puerto Ricans).



Generational Patterns for Weekly Earnings

       Until now we have used educational attainment rather than earnings to measure skills, in

order to avoid potential biases from selective labor force participation (i.e., earnings data are
                                                            11

available only for those currently employed). Earnings, however, are perhaps the ultimate

indicator of labor market success, because earnings reflect the market’s valuation of a worker’s

entire package of abilities and attributes, including those for which data are often lacking (e.g.,

family background, or the quality of schooling). We now show that, in general, earnings patterns

are similar to the education patterns discussed previously, particularly with respect to the

apparent cessation of Hispanic progress after the second generation.

       Figures 3 (for men) and 4 (for women) display weekly earnings differences associated

with immigrant generation and race/ethnicity. The reported differentials are estimated from least

squares regressions in which the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of weekly earnings

from wage and salary work. 7 Separate regressions were run for men and women, and the samples

include those aged 25–59 employed in civilian wage and salary jobs. These regressions allow

intercepts to differ across racial/ethnic and immigrant generation groups, but the coefficients of

the control variables are restricted to be the same for all groups. All regressions include controls

for age, geographic location, and survey month/year. The controls for geographic location are

dummy variables identifying the nine census divisions and whether the respondent lives outside

of a metropolitan area. The controls for age are dummy variables identifying five-year age

intervals. The bottom panel of each figure reports differentials estimated from regressions that

also control for education level (i.e., dummy variables identifying the following years of

schooling intervals: less than 12 years, exactly 12 years, 13–15 years, and 16 or more years). The

reported differentials are all relative to the reference group consisting of non-Hispanic whites in




       7   CPS outgoing rotation group data do not report self-employment income.
                                                                 12

the third+ generation. 8 Because the outcome is weekly earnings, these differentials measure the

cumulative effect of differences in both hourly wages and hours worked per week.

          For Hispanics overall and for Mexicans in particular, the earnings deficits in Figures 3

and 4 display a similar pattern across generations as the education data presented earlier (see

Table 2): large gains for the second generation over the first, with little or no evidence of further

gains for the third+ generation. Among men, for example, the Hispanic earnings deficit (relative

to third+-generation non-Hispanic whites) drops from over 50 percent for the first generation to

21 percent for the second generation, but there is no additional decline for the third+ generation. 9

The corresponding pattern for Mexican men is quite similar. Comparing the top and bottom

panels of Figure 3, the earnings deficits for Hispanic and Mexican men of every generation

shrink by about half after controlling for education. For Hispanic and Mexican women, Figure 4

shows that earnings gains between the first- and second-generations are even larger than for men,

and conditioning on education produces a greater reduction in the female earnings deficits

relative to third+-generation non-Hispanic whites. Indeed, after controlling for education,

earnings deficits all but disappear for U.S.-born Hispanic and Mexican women.

          Broadly similar patterns emerge for Puerto Ricans, except that Puerto Rican men exhibit

earnings gains between the second and third+ generations in Figure 3, just as they were the one

group of Hispanic men to show educational gains between the second and third+ generations in

Table 2. These educational gains for Puerto Rican men seem to drive much of their observed

            8 To save space, the figures do not show the corresponding earnings differentials for Hispanic national origin groups

besides Mexicans and Puerto Ricans (the two Hispanic groups with sizeable third+ generations), for the “other race” group, and
for first- and second-generation non-Hispanic whites.
          9 For ease of exposition, we will refer to the estimated log earnings differentials as if they represented percentage
earnings differences (after multiplying the log differentials by 100). Strictly speaking, however, log differentials closely
approximate percentage differences only when the log differentials are on the order of 0.25 or less in absolute value. For larger
differentials, the implied percentage difference can be calculated as (ec – 1) × 100, where c is the log differential and e is Euler’s
number (i.e., the base of natural logarithms).
                                                 13

earnings progress, as the decline in the earnings deficit between the second and third+

generations is substantially larger without controlling for education (the relevant earnings deficit

declines from 25 percent to 18 percent) than when such controls are included (the earnings

deficit declines from 12 percent to 11 percent). On the whole, these results suggest that the

educational disadvantage of Hispanics accounts for much of their earnings deficit, and also that

Hispanic schooling gains between the first and second generations play an important role in the

earnings progress between these generations.

       Among the U.S.-born groups, third+-generation black men stand out with earnings

deficits that remain large even after conditioning on education. Compared to non-Hispanic white

men in the third+ generation with similar education, the bottom panel of Figure 3 indicates that

third+-generation black men earn about 28 percent less. In contrast, the corresponding deficit is

only 11 percent for Hispanic men. These findings corroborate other research that suggests that,

among men, U.S. labor market opportunities are more similar to those of whites for Hispanics

than for blacks (Duncan, Hotz, and Trejo 2006; Grogger and Trejo 2002; Trejo 1997). The

bottom panel of Figure 4 shows that, after controlling for education, earnings of U.S.-born

women do not vary much with race/ethnicity.

       Contrary to the sizable gaps observed for blacks and Hispanics, earnings deficits (relative

to third+-generation non-Hispanic whites) are either small or nonexistent for first- and second-

generation whites (not shown in the figures) and for Asians of all generations. However, earnings

comparisons for Asians become less favorable after controlling for education. As others have

noted (Sakamoto, Goyette, and Kim 2009), the schooling advantage of Asian Americans can

obscure the fact that, at least among men, they tend to earn somewhat less than whites with the

same level of education.
                                                                14




Stalled Progress for Hispanics?

          The education and earnings patterns presented thus far suggest that progress stalls after

the second generation for Hispanics overall and for Mexicans in particular. Huntington (2004)

points to several factors that could slow the pace of intergenerational integration by Hispanics

today as compared to Europeans in the past. These factors include the vast scale of current

immigration flows from Mexico and other Spanish-speaking countries, the substantial (though

lessening) geographic concentration of these flows within the United States, and the fact that

such flows have remained sizable over a much longer period of time than did the influx from any

particular European country. In addition, the close proximity of Mexico to the United States

facilitates return and repeat migration. These unique features of Hispanic immigration might

foster the growth of ethnic enclaves in the United States where immigrants and their descendants

could, if they so choose, live and work without being forced to learn English or to Americanize

in other important ways. 10 Another salient factor is that many Hispanics enter the United States

as illegal immigrants. Some evidence suggests that undocumented status may hinder

socioeconomic advancement not just for the illegal immigrants themselves but also for their

U.S.-born children (Bean et al. 2011; Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier 2015). 11

          Moreover, today’s economy provides fewer opportunities for unskilled workers to



           10 Contrary to Huntington’s thesis, however, available evidence suggests rapid linguistic assimilation for the U.S.-born

descendants of contemporary immigrant groups (Alba et al. 2002). This holds even for Hispanics who live in areas with high
concentrations of Spanish-speaking immigrants. In Southern California, for example, 96 percent of third-generation Mexicans
prefer to speak English at home rather than Spanish, and only 17 percent of third-generation Mexicans retain the ability to speak
fluent Spanish (Rumbaut, Massey, and Bean 2006).
          11 In this context, Puerto Ricans constitute an interesting case study, because they are U.S. citizens and automatically
enjoy all of the associated legal rights, including the ability to migrate to and work in the United States. Therefore, issues
pertaining to undocumented immigration cannot explain the incomplete socioeconomic integration of the U.S.-born descendants
of migrants from Puerto Rico.
                                                 15

advance than did the economy that greeted earlier European immigrants (Perlmann 2005; Portes

and Rumbaut 2001). Around 1900, high school completion was uncommon for native-born

Americans, so while many European immigrants arrived with relatively meager educations, their

skill disadvantage was smaller than that faced today by Hispanic immigrants who typically lack

the additional years of high school and college that have become the norm for U.S. natives.

Furthermore, recent decades have witnessed a large rise in earnings inequality among American

workers, driven by substantial increases in the labor market payoffs to education and other

indicators of skill (Autor and Katz 1999; Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2008; Levy and Murnane

1992). As a result, the human capital deficit possessed by most Hispanic immigrants has become

even more of a liability in our modern economy that places a higher premium on knowledge and

cognitive ability.

       Before accepting Huntington’s theoretical arguments for slower assimilation by

Hispanics, however, it is important to consider several potentially serious limitations of the

empirical evidence that has been presented in support of this phenomenon. First, as noted by

Borjas (1993, 2006) and Smith (2003, 2006), generational comparisons in a single cross-section

of data—like those reported so far—can be misleading because they do a poor job of matching

immigrant parents and grandparents in the first generation with their actual descendants in later

generations. If we assume that schooling is complete by the age of 25 and does not change

thereafter, we can use our CPS samples to conduct an analysis of intergenerational changes in

Hispanic educational attainment similar in spirit to Smith (2003).

       Table 3 presents average schooling levels for Mexicans and Puerto Ricans similar to

those displayed previously in Table 2, except that now separate calculations are reported for two
                                                              16

particular age groups: 25–34 and 50–59. 12 By choosing age groups 25 years apart, we create a

situation in which the older age group from a particular generation potentially represents the

parental cohort for the younger age group in the next generation. For example, the cohort of

immigrant men aged 50–59 includes fathers of the second-generation cohort of sons aged 25–34.

         If we make comparisons within age groups by reading across the rows of Table 3, we see

the same patterns that emerged in Table 2: For Mexicans, huge educational improvement

between the first and second generations but no progress after the second generation, whereas for

Puerto Ricans there are more modest gains between the first and second generations but also

advances between the second and later generations. If, however, we instead compare

age/generation groups that potentially match parents with their children (i.e., by moving

northeast between the connected cells with similar shading in Table 3), we begin to see some

educational gains for Mexicans after the second generation, especially for women. Among

Mexican men, for example, average schooling rises from 12.5 years for the older second

generation to 12.6 years for the younger third+ generation. The analogous educational increase

between the second and third+ generations is larger for Mexican women, from 12.4 to 13.0

years. Moreover, calculating schooling progress between the first and second generations in this

same way produces bigger gains than those we saw in Table 2: 4.2–4.4 years for Mexicans and

1.0–1.2 years for Puerto Ricans, with the larger gains for women. Despite these intergenerational

advances, young third+-generation Mexicans continue to trail the average schooling of their non-

Hispanic white peers by more than a year, and the corresponding deficits for Puerto Ricans are

smaller but still sizable (about two-thirds of a year).



          12 Table 3 focuses on Mexicans and Puerto Ricans because these are the Hispanic national origin groups with the

largest U.S. populations of individuals beyond the second generation.
                                                 17

       A second issue concerns measurement bias arising from “ethnic attrition.” The large,

nationally representative data sources typically employed to study U.S. immigrants and their

descendants provide only very limited information pertaining to immigrant generations.

Microdata sources such as the decennial U.S. Census, the American Community Survey, and the

CPS report each respondent’s country of birth, thereby distinguishing foreign-born individuals

(i.e., the first generation) from the U.S.-born population. Only the CPS, however, currently

collects information about the countries of birth of each respondent’s parents, which allows the

second generation (i.e., U.S.-born individuals who have at least one foreign-born parent) to be

differentiated from higher generations of U.S.-born individuals. Furthermore, none of these

surveys provide information about the countries of birth of an adult respondent’s grandparents,

so the third generation cannot be precisely identified.

       Because of these data limitations, research on the U.S.-born descendants of immigrants

often must identify the populations of interest using subjective measures of racial/ethnic

identification (Duncan, Hotz, and Trejo 2006; Saenz 2005; Sakamoto, Wu, and Tzeng 2000;

Snipp and Hirschman 2004; Zeng and Xie 2004). In particular, this approach is typically the only

feasible option for studies that examine long-term integration by distinguishing immigrant

descendants in the third and higher generations (Blau and Kahn 2007; Borjas 1994; Farley and

Alba 2002; Goyette and Xie 1999; Grogger and Trejo 2002; Rong and Grant 1992; Smith 2006;

Trejo 1997, 2003; Yang 2004). For example, the standard definition of third+-generation

Mexicans Americans is U.S.-born individuals who have U.S.-born parents and who self-identify

as Mexican in response to the Hispanic origin question.

       A potential problem with this approach is that assimilation and intermarriage can cause

ethnic attachments to fade across generations (Alba 1990; Alba and Islam 2009; Lee and Bean
                                                   18

2010; Perlmann and Waters 2007; Waters 1990), and therefore subjective measures of

racial/ethnic identification might miss a significant portion of the later-generation descendants of

immigrants. Moreover, if such ethnic attrition is selective on socioeconomic attainment, it can

distort assessments of integration and generational progress.

        Our own previous work demonstrates the salience of these issues for the specific case of

Mexican Americans (Duncan and Trejo 2007, 2009, 2011). Analyzing microdata from the CPS

for children living with both parents, in Duncan and Trejo (2011) we compare an objective

indicator of Mexican descent (based on the countries of birth of the child, his parents, and his

grandparents) with the standard subjective measure of Mexican identification (based on the

response to the Hispanic origin question). We find that about 30 percent of third-generation

Mexican children are not identified as Mexican by the Hispanic origin question in the CPS, and

this ethnic attrition is highly selective. In particular, the high school dropout rate of third-

generation Mexican youth (ages 16 and 17) is 25 percent higher when the sample is limited to

those youth subjectively identified as Mexican. Therefore, our previous research suggests that

ethnic attrition is substantial among third-generation Mexicans and could produce significant

downward bias in standard measures of attainment that rely on subjective ethnic identification

rather than objective indicators of Mexican descent.

        Extending our earlier work in Duncan and Trejo (2017), which focused on Mexicans, we

show that ethnic attrition is sizable and selective for the second- and third-generation populations

of key Hispanic and Asian national origin groups. Importantly, these results indicate that ethnic

attrition generates measurement biases that vary across groups in direction as well as magnitude,

and that correcting for these biases is likely to raise the socioeconomic standing of the U.S.-born

descendants of most Hispanic immigrants relative to their Asian counterparts. The results to date,
                                                 19

however, shed more light on the direction rather than the ultimate magnitude of these

measurement biases, and so at this point it is unknown whether correcting for selective ethnic

attrition would produce a small or large improvement in the relative attainment of later-

generation Hispanics.

       A third but related issue is that the data limitations just described imply that, for adults,

researchers typically cannot distinguish the “true” third generation from higher generations (e.g.,

this is why Tables 2 and 3 and Figures 3 and 4 refer to the “third+” generation). This is

potentially a problem because Mexicans in generations beyond the third are disproportionately

descended from ancestors who came of age in places (e.g., Texas rather than California) and

times (e.g., before the Civil Rights era) where Mexicans faced discrimination that was more

severe and often institutionalized (Alba 2006; Foley 1997; Montejano 1987). The more limited

opportunities for advancement experienced by these families may result in lower attainment for

Mexicans in the fourth and higher generations compared with their third-generation counterparts

whose families experienced less hostile environments. Alba et al. (2011) and Bean, Brown, and

Bachmeier (2015) provide evidence of this pattern for schooling levels, highlighting the

importance of distinguishing third-generation Mexicans from higher generations.

       In recent work with coauthors (Duncan et al. 2017), we exploit previously untapped

information from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) that provides,

among other things, the countries of birth of respondents’ grandparents. For a sample of adults

aged 28–34, these data allow us to minimize ethnic attrition by identifying third-generation

Mexicans using ancestors’ countries of birth rather than subjective ethnic identification, and they

also allow us to distinguish third-generation Mexicans from higher generations. We find

substantial educational progress between second- and third-generation Mexicans that is largely
                                                                20

hidden when we instead mimic standard data sets and aggregate the third and higher generations

into a “third+” generation. This analysis provides promising evidence of generational progress

for a recent cohort of Mexican-American adults. Indeed, in this birth cohort, the high school

graduation rate of third-generation Mexicans is only slightly below that of non-Hispanic whites

from the fourth and higher generations. 13 These NLSY79 findings are consistent with recent

evidence of improving high school completion rates for U.S.-educated Hispanics from 1990 to

2010, with particularly large gains during the second half of this period (Murnane 2013).



Conclusion

          Research on the educational attainment of the descendants of U.S. immigrants reveals

clear success stories as well as reasons for concern. On the one hand, most national origin groups

arrive with relatively high educational attainment and/or experience enough improvement

between the first and second generations such that they quickly meet or exceed, on average, the

schooling level of the typical American. On the other hand, several large and important Hispanic

groups (including Mexicans and Puerto Ricans) are exceptions to this pattern, and their prospects

for future upward mobility are subject to much debate (Alba et al. 2011; Alba, Jimenez, and

Marrow 2014; Alba, Kasinitz, and Waters 2011; Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier 2015; Haller,

Portes, and Lynch 2011a,b; Park, Myers, and Jimenez 2014; Perlmann 2005, 2011; Portes 2006;

Telles and Ortiz 2008).

          Because of the measurement issues and data limitations that we have discussed, Mexican

Americans in particular and Hispanic Americans in general probably have experienced



          13 Even in this birth cohort, however, rates of attending and completing college for third-generation Mexicans are still

substantially below those of non-Hispanic whites.
                                                 21

significantly more socioeconomic progress beyond the second generation than available data

indicate. Even so, because many Hispanic immigrants arrive in the United States with relatively

low levels of human capital, it may take longer for their descendants to integrate fully into the

American mainstream than it did for the descendants of the European immigrants who arrived

near the turn of the twentieth century. Closing the remaining educational gap between Hispanics

and other Americans should be a key component of any effort to hasten such integration.
                                              22


References


Alba, Richard D. 1990. Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of White America. New Haven, CT:
       Yale University Press.

———. 2006. “Mexican Americans and the American Dream.” Perspectives on Politics 4(2):
   289–296.

Alba, Richard D., Dalia Abdel-Hady, Tariqul Islam, and Karen Marotz. 2011. “Downward
       Assimilation and Mexican Americans: An Examination of Intergenerational Advance and
       Stagnation in Educational Attainment.” In The Next Generation: Immigrant Youth in a
       Comparative Perspective, Richard Alba and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: New York
       University Press.

Alba, Richard D., Tomas R. Jimenez, and Helen B. Marrow. 2014. “Mexican Americans as a
       Paradigm for Contemporary Intra-Group Heterogeneity.” Ethnic and Racial Studies
       37(3): 446–466.

Alba, Richard D., Philip Kasinitz, and Mary C. Waters. 2011. “The Kids Are (Mostly) Alright:
       Second Generation Assimilation; Comments on Haller, Portes and Lynch.” Social Forces
       89(3): 733–762.

Alba, Richard D., John Logan, Amy Lutz, and John Stults. 2002. “Only English by the Third
       Generation? Loss and Preservation of the Mother Tongue among the Grandchildren of
       Contemporary Immigrants.” Demography 39(3): 467–484.

Alba, Richard D., and Victor Nee. 2003. Rethinking the American Mainstream: Assimilation and
       Contemporary Immigration. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Alba, Richard D., and Islam, Tariqul. 2009. “The Case of the Disappearing Mexican Americans:
       An Ethnic-Identity Mystery.” Population Research and Policy Review 28(2): 109–121.

Autor, David, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1999. “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
       Inequality.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A. Orley Ashenfelter and David
       Card, eds. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 1463–1555.

Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage
       Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2): 300–
       323.

Bean, Frank D., Susan K. Brown, and James D. Bachmeier. 2015. Parents without Papers: The
       Progress and Pitfalls of Mexican-American Integration. New York: Russell Sage
       Foundation.

Bean, Frank D., Mark Leach, Susan K. Brown, James Bachmeier, and John Hipp. 2011. “The
                                               23

       Educational Legacy of Unauthorized Migration: Comparisons across U.S.-Immigrant
       Groups in How Parents’ Status Affects Their Offspring.” International Migration Review
       45(2): 348–385.

Betts, Julian R., and Magnus Lofstrom. 2000. “The Educational Attainment of Immigrants:
        Trends and Implications.” In Issues in the Economics of Immigration, George J. Borjas,
        ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 51–115.

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2007. “Gender and Assimilation among Mexican
       Americans.” In Mexican Immigration to the United States, George J. Borjas, ed. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, pp. 57–106.

Borjas, George J. 1993. “The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants.” Journal of Labor
        Economics 11(1): 113–135.

———. 1994. “Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill Differentials: The Children and
   Grandchildren of the Great Migration.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47(4):
   553–573.

———. 2006. “Making It in America: Social Mobility in the Immigrant Population.” Future of
   Children 16(2): 55–71.

Bound, John, and Sarah Turner. 2014. “U.S. High-Skill Immigration.” In Diversity and
      Disparities: American Enters a New Century, John Logan, ed. New York: Russell Sage
      Foundation.

Card, David. 2005. “Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?” Economic Journal 115(507): 300–
       323.

Card, David, John DiNardo, and Eugena Estes. 2000. “The More Things Change: Immigrants
       and the Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s.” In Issues in the
       Economics of Immigration, George J. Borjas, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       pp. 227–269.

Chiswick, Barry R. 1977. “Sons of Immigrants: Are They at an Earnings Disadvantage?”
      American Economic Review 67(1): 376–380.

del Pinal, Jorge H. 2004. Race and Ethnicity in Census 2000. Census 2000 Testing,
       Experimentation, and Evaluation Program: Topic Report No. 9. Washington, DC: U.S.
       Census Bureau.

Duncan, Brian, Leon Jeffrey Grogger, Ann Sofia Leon, and Stephen J. Trejo. 2017. “New
      Evidence of Generational Progress for Mexican Americans.” Working Paper 24067.
      Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Duncan, Brian, V. Joseph Hotz, and Stephen J. Trejo. 2006. “Hispanics in the U.S. Labor
                                              24

       Market.” In Hispanics and the Future of America, Marta Tienda and Faith Mitchell, eds.
       Washington, DC: Washington, DC: National Academies Press, pp. 228–290.

Duncan, Brian, and Stephen J. Trejo. 2007. “Ethnic Identification, Intermarriage, and
      Unmeasured Progress by Mexican Americans.” In Mexican Immigration to the United
      States, George J. Borjas, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 227–269.

———. 2009. “Ancestry versus Ethnicity: The Complexity and Selectivity of Mexican
   Identification in the United States.” Research in Labor Economics, vol. 29 (Ethnicity and
   Labor Market Outcomes, edited by Amelie F. Constant, Konstantinos Tatsiramos, and
   Klaus F. Zimmerman), pp. 31-66.

———. 2011. “Intermarriage and the Intergenerational Transmission of Ethnic Identity and
   Human Capital for Mexican Americans.” Journal of Labor Economics, April 2011,
   29(2), pp. 195-227.

———. 2017. “The Complexity of Immigrant Generations: Implications for Assessing the
   Socioeconomic Integration of Hispanics and Asians.” Industrial and Labor Relations
   Review, October 2017, 70(5), pp. 1146-1175.

Farley, Reynolds. 1990. “Blacks, Hispanics, and White Ethnic Groups: Are Blacks Uniquely
        Disadvantaged?” American Economic Review 80(2): 237–241.

Farley, Reynolds, and Richard Alba. 2002. “The New Second Generation in the United States.”
        International Migration Review 36(3): 669–701.

Feliciano, Cynthia. 2001. “The Benefits of Biculturalism: Exposure to Immigrant Culture and
        Dropping Out of School among Asian and Latino Youths.” Social Science Quarterly
        82(4): 865–879.

Foley, Neil. 1997. The White Scourge: Mexicans, Blacks and Poor Whites in Texas Cotton
       Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Gans, Herbert J. 1992. “Second-Generation Decline: Scenarios for the Economic and Ethnic
       Futures of the Post-1965 American Immigrants.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 15(2): 173–
       192.

Goyette, Kimberly, and Yu Xie. 1999, “Educational Expectations of Asian American Youth:
       Determinants and Ethnic Differences.” Sociology of Education 72(1): 22–36.

Grieco, Elizabeth M., and Rachel C. Cassidy. 2001. “Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin.”
       Census 2000 Brief C2KBR/01-1. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.

Grogger, Jeffrey, and Stephen J. Trejo. 2002. Falling Behind or Moving Up? The
      Intergenerational Progress of Mexican Americans. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute
      of California.
                                             25



Haller, William, Alejandro Portes, and Scott M. Lynch. 2011a. “Dreams Fulfilled, Dreams
        Shattered: Determinants of Segmented Assimilation in the Second Generation.” Social
        Forces 89(3): 733–762.

———. 2011b. “On the Dangers of Rosy Lenses; Reply to Alba, Kasinitz, and Waters.” Social
   Forces 89(3): 775–782.

Haveman, Robert, and Barbara Wolfe. 1994. Succeeding Generations: On the Effects of
     Investments in Children. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Hirschman, Charles. 2001 “The Educational Enrollment of Immigrant Youth: A Test of the
      Segmented-Assimilation Hypothesis.” Demography, August 2001, 38(3), pp. 317-36.

Hout, Michael. 2012. “Social and Economic Returns to College Education in the United States.”
       Annual Review of Sociology 38: 379–400.

Humes, Karen R., Nicholas A. Jones, and Roberto R. Ramirez. 2011. “Overview of Race and
      Hispanic Origin: 2010.” 2010 Census Brief C2010BR-02. Washington, DC: U.S. Census
      Bureau.

Huntington, Samuel P. 2004. Who Are We? The Challenges to America's National Identity. New
      York: Simon and Schuster.

Jaeger, David A. 1997. “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
        Recommendations for Researchers.” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics 15(3):
        300–309.

Jones, Maldwyn A. 1960. American Immigration. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lee, Jennifer, and Bean, Frank D. 2010. The Diversity Paradox: Immigration and the Color Line
       in 21st Century America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Levy, Frank, and Richard J. Murnane. 1992. “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A
       Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations.” Journal of Economic Literature
       30(3): 1333–1381.

Lieberson, Stanley, and Mary C. Waters. 1988. From Many Strands: Ethnic and Racial Groups
       in Contemporary America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Montejano, David. 1987. Anglos and Mexicans in the Making of Texas: 1836–1986. Austin, TX:
      University of Texas Press.

Mulligan, Casey B. 1997. Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press.
                                               26

Murnane, Richard J. 2013. “U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations.”
      Journal of Economic Literature 51(2): 370–422.

Neidert, Lisa J., and Reynolds Farley. 1985. “Assimilation in the United States: An Analysis of
       Ethnic and Generation Differences in Status and Achievement.” American Sociological
       Review 50(6): 840–850.

Park, Julie, Dowell Myers, and Tomas R. Jimenez. 2014. “Intergenerational Mobility of the
        Mexican-Origin Population in California and Texas Relative to a Changing Regional
        Mainstream.” International Migration Review 48(2): 442–481.

Perlmann, Joel. 2005. Italians Then, Mexicans Now: Immigrant Origins and Second-Generation
      Progress, 1890–2000. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

———. 2011. “The Mexican American Second Generation in Census 2000: Education and
   Earnings.” In The Next Generation: Immigrant Youth in a Comparative Perspective,
   Richard Alba and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: New York University Press, pp. 69–
   94.

Perlmann, Joel, and Roger Waldinger. 1996. “The Second Generation and the Children of the
      Native Born: Comparisons and Refinements.” Working Paper No. 174. Annandale-on-
      Hudson, NY: Jerome Levy Economics Institute.

———. 1997. “Second Generation Decline? Children of Immigrants, Past and Present—A
   Reconsideration.” International Migration Review 31(4): 893–922.

Perlmann, Joel, and Mary C. Waters. 2007. “Intermarriage and Multiple Identities.” In The New
      Americans: A Guide to Immigration Since 1965, Mary C. Waters and Reed Udea, eds.
      Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 110–123.

Perreira, Krista A., Kathleen Mullan Harris, and Dohoon Lee. 2006. “Making It in America:
        High School Completion by Immigrant and Native Youth.” Demography 43(3): 511–536.

Pettit, Becky. 2012. Invisible Men: Mass Incarceration and the Myth of Black Progress. New
         York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Portes, Alejandro. 2006. “Review Essay: Paths of Assimilation in the Second Generation.”
        Sociological Forum 21(3): 499–504.

Portes, Alejandro, and Ruben G. Rumbaut. 2001. Legacies: The Story of the Immigrant Second
        Generation. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Portes, Alejandro, and Min Zhou. 1993. “The New Second Generation: Segmented Assimilation
        and Its Variants among Post-1965 Immigrant Youth.” Annals of the American Academy
        of Political and Social Science 530: 74–96.
                                             27

Rong, Xue Lan, and Linda Grant. 1992. “Ethnicity, Generation, and School Attainment of
      Asians, Hispanics, and Non-Hispanic Whites.” Sociological Quarterly 33(4): 625–636.

Rumbaut, Ruben G. 1994. “The Crucible Within: Ethnic Identity, Self-Esteem, and Segmented
     Assimilation among Children of Immigrants.” International Migration Review 28(4):
     748–794.

———. 2005. “Turning Points in the Transition to Adulthood: Determinants of Educational
   Attainment, Incarceration, and Early Childbearing Among Children of Immigrants.”
   Ethnic and Racial Studies 28(6): 1041–1286.

Rumbaut, Rugen G., Douglas S. Massey, and Frank D. Bean. 2006. “Linguistic Life
     Expectancies: Immigrant Language Retention in the Southern California.” Population
     and Development Review 32(3): 447–460.

Saenz, Rogelio. 2005. “Latinos and the Changing Face of America.” In The American People:
       Census 2000. Reynolds Farley and John Haaga, eds. New York: Russell Sage
       Foundation, pp. 352–379.

Sakamoto, Arthur, Kimberly A. Goyette, and Chang Hwan Kim. 2009. “Socioeconomic
      Attainments of Asian Americans.” Annual Review of Sociology 35: 255–276.

Sakamoto, Arthur, Huei-Hsia Wu, and Jessie M. Tzeng. 2000. “The Declining Significance of
      Race among American Men during the Latter Half of the Twentieth Century.”
      Demography 37(1): 41–51.

Smith, James P. 2003. “Assimilation across the Latino Generations.” American Economic
       Review 93(2): 315–319.

Smith, James P. 2006. “Immigrants and the Labor Market.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(2):
       203–233.

Snipp, C. Matthew, and Charles Hirschman. 2004. “Assimilation in American Society:
       Occupational Achievement and Earnings for Ethnic Minorities in the United States, 1970
       to 1990.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 22: 93–117.

Telles, Edward E., and Vilma Ortiz. 2008. Generations of Exclusion: Mexican Americans,
        Assimilation, and Race. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Trejo, Stephen J. 1997. “Why Do Mexican Americans Earn Low Wages?” Journal of Political
        Economy 105(6): 1235–1268.

———. 2003. “Intergenerational Progress of Mexican-Origin Workers in the U.S. Labor
   Market.” Journal of Human Resources 38(3): 467–489.

Waters, Mary C. 1990. Ethnic Options: Choosing Identities in America. Berkeley: University of
                                            28

       California Press.

Yang, Philip Q. 2004. “Generational Differences in Educational Attainment among Asian
       Americans.” Journal of Asian American Studies 7(1): 51–71.

Zeng, Zhen, and Xie, Yu. 2004. “Asian-Americans’ Earnings Disadvantage Reexamined: The
       Role of Place of Education.” American Journal of Sociology 109(5): 1075–1108.
                                                      Figure 1: Average Education (in Years) of First- and Second Generation Men
                         17
Education of Second-Generation Men (ages 25-34)
                                      16




                                                                                                                                                               India


                                                                                                                           China
                            15




                                                                                                                                            Korea
                                                                                                                                   Africa
                                                                                                               Vietnam
                                                                                                                                         Philippines

                                                                                                       Haiti                   Europe
                                                                                                                         South America                 Japan
                 14




                                                                                                                  Cuba
                                                                                                               Jamaica                   Canada



                                                               Central America                Dominican Republic
     13




                                                          Mexico                                Puerto Rico
                         12




                                                  8            9            10         11          12         13          14                    15               16
                                                                             Education of First-Generation Men (ages 50-59)


  SOURCE: 2003–2016 Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group data.
  NOTE: The education measure is completed years of schooling. The first-generation samples include foreign-born
  men aged 50–59, excluding those born abroad of an American parent. The second-generation samples include U.S.-
  born men aged 25–34 who have at least one foreign-born parent. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.
                                                       Figure 2: Average Education (in Years) of First- and Second Generation Women
                                                  17
Education of Second-Generation Women (ages 25-34)




                                                                                                                                                         India
                                       16




                                                                                                                    China

                                                                                                                            Korea

                                                                                                  Vietnam
                                                                                                                        Africa
                             15




                                                                                                     Haiti                                   Japan
                                                                                                                                                     Philippines
                                                                                                                        Jamaica     Europe
                                                                                                                          Cuba               Canada

                                                                                                                  South America
                  14




                                                                    Central America
                                                                                             Dominican Republic
       13




                                                                                                      Puerto Rico
                                                             Mexico
                           12




                                                       8        9              10          11          12        13         14                           15        16
                                                                               Education of First-Generation Women (ages 50-59)


          SOURCE: 2003–2016 Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group data.
          NOTE: The education measure is completed years of schooling. The first-generation samples include foreign-born
          women aged 50–59, excluding those born abroad of an American parent. The second-generation samples include
          U.S.-born women aged 25–34 who have at least one foreign-born parent. Sampling weights were used in the
          calculations.
                                     Figure 3: Weekly Earnings Differentials of Men, Ages 25-59,
                                            By Race/Ethnicity and Immigrant Generation
                                        (Relative to Third+-Generation, Non-Hispanic Whites)

A. Not Controlling for Education

                                                First Generation           Second Generation             Third+ Generation

                           30
                           20
                                                                                                                                           7.0
                           10
  Log Point Differenital




                            0
                           -10                                                                                                     -4.2           -3.5

                           -20
                                                                                                 -17.7
                                         -21.4 -21.7                                                               -22.6
                           -30                                   -24.8 -23.9             -25.0
                           -40                                                   -35.3                                     -36.5
                                                                                                           -39.9
                           -50
                           -60   -53.5
                                                         -59.0
                           -70
                                 Hispanic (All)            Mexican               Puerto Rican                  Black                      Asian


B. Controlling for Education

                           30
                           20
                           10
  Log Point Differential




                            0
                           -10                                                                                                             -3.6
                                                                                                                                                  -7.3
                           -20
                                         -10.7 -10.7             -11.3 -11.1             -12.4 -10.6                               -13.3
                                                                                 -19.8
                           -30   -25.8                   -26.2                                                     -24.4
                                                                                                                           -27.8
                           -40                                                                             -35.0
                           -50
                           -60
                           -70
                                 Hispanic (All)            Mexican               Puerto Rican                  Black                      Asian


SOURCE: 2003–2016 Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group data.
NOTE: The reported figures represent log weekly earnings differentials (× 100) between each race/ethnicity and
immigrant generation group and the reference group of third+-generation, non-Hispanic whites. These differentials
are estimated from least squares regressions in which the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of weekly
earnings. The samples include men aged 25–59 employed in civilian wage and salary jobs. All regressions include
controls for age, geographic location, and survey month/year. The differentials shown in the bottom panel are from
regressions that also control for education level. Sampling weights were used in the regressions.
                                   Figure 4: Weekly Earnings Differentials of Women, Ages 25-59,
                                            By Race/Ethnicity and Immigrant Generation
                                       (Relative to Third+-Generation, Non-Hispanic Whites)

A. Not Controlling for Education

                                                  First Generation           Second Generation           Third+ Generation

                           30                                                                                                           20.7
                           20
                           10                                                                                      4.0                          3.5
  Log Point Differenital




                            0
                           -10                                                                                                   -1.6
                                         -11.1                                             -11.2 -13.6
                           -20                   -15.7             -16.4 -18.6                                           -14.0
                                                                                                           -19.5
                           -30                                                     -22.2

                           -40
                           -50   -46.9
                           -60
                                                           -57.5
                           -70
                                 Hispanic (All)              Mexican               Puerto Rican                Black                    Asian


B. Controlling for Education

                           30
                           20
                                                                                                                                        10.3
                           10                                                               1.6                    1.2
                                          0.2
  Log Point Differential




                            0
                                                 -2.7              -1.5 -3.5                                                                    -1.0
                           -10                                                                    -4.6                   -4.9    -5.6
                                                                                    -7.7                   -10.0
                           -20
                                 -18.4                     -20.6
                           -30
                           -40
                           -50
                           -60
                           -70
                                 Hispanic (All)              Mexican               Puerto Rican                Black                    Asian


SOURCE: 2003–2016 Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group data.
NOTE: The reported figures represent log weekly earnings differentials (× 100) between each race/ethnicity and
immigrant generation group and the reference group of third+-generation, non-Hispanic whites. These differentials
are estimated from least squares regressions in which the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of weekly
earnings. The samples include women aged 25–59 employed in civilian wage and salary jobs. All regressions
include controls for age, geographic location, and survey month/year. The differentials shown in the bottom panel
are from regressions that also control for education level. Sampling weights were used in the regressions.
           Table 1: Average Education of First- and Second-Generation Adults, Ages 25-59, by Source Country and Sex

                                               Men, by Immigrant Generation                               Women, by Immigrant Generation
                                               First                 Second                                First                 Second
                                         Avg.        Sample     Avg.        Sample                  Avg.         Sample    Avg.        Sample
          Source Country                 Educ.        Size     Educ.         Size                   Educ.         Size     Educ.         Size

          Mexico                           9.5         31,039          12.7          7,671           9.7          28,167          12.9           8,468
          Puerto Rico                     12.2          2,909          12.7          2,459          12.4           3,643          13.0           2,996
          Cuba                            13.0          2,062          14.3           821           13.2           2,051          14.6            806
          Dominican Republic              11.9          1,658          13.5           363           12.0           2,599          14.1            422
          Central America                  9.7          8,323          13.4           938           10.3           7,940          13.9           1,054
          South America                   13.3          5,962          14.4          1,116          13.5           7,068          14.5           1,162

          China                           14.9          3,149          15.4           886           14.4           3,802          15.5            902
          India                           16.3          5,200          15.9           576           16.0           4700           16.0            552
          Japan                           15.7           560           14.4           659           14.9           1,099          14.7            645
          Korea                           15.4          1,898          15.0           544           14.6           2,827          15.4            530
          Philippines                     14.4          3,779          14.4          1,590          14.7           5,970          14.7           1,674
          Vietnam                         13.1          2,637          14.6           395           12.6           3,031          14.9            397

          Haiti                           12.8          1,056          14.1           175           12.7           1,246          14.8            235
          Jamaica                         13.1          1,215          14.1           286           13.5           1,756          14.8            361
          Africa                          14.4          4,755          14.7           604           13.6           4,238          15.0            637

          Canada                          15.1          1,725          14.2           3,330         14.9           2,072          14.5           3,481
          Europe                          14.5         10,147          14.5          12,895         14.5          11,594          14.6          13,351

          All countries                   12.2         99,966          13.9          38,459         12.4          106,372         14.1          40,812

SOURCE: 2003–2016 Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group data.
NOTE: The education measure is completed years of schooling. The samples include people aged 25–59. The “first generation” consists of foreign-born
individuals, excluding those born abroad of an American parent. The “second generation” consists of U.S.-born individuals who have at least one foreign-born
parent. The bottom row labeled “all countries” reports outcomes for first- and second-generation individuals from all countries of origin (including countries not
listed individually in the table). Sampling weights were used in the calculations.
                     Table 2: Average Education, Ages 25-59, by Race/Ethnicity, Sex, and Immigrant Generation

                                                        Men, by Immigrant Generation                        Women, by Immigrant Generation
          Race/Ethnicity                             First        Second          Third+                   First       Second         Third+

          Hispanic (aggregate)                       10.3              13.0              12.8              10.6              13.2              12.9
                                                     (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)
           Mexican                                    9.5              12.7              12.7               9.6              12.9              12.8
                                                     (0.02)            (0.03)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.03)            (0.02)
           Puerto Rican                              12.2              12.7              13.2              12.4              13.0              13.4
                                                     (0.06)            (0.05)            (0.06)            (0.05)            (0.04)            (0.05)
           Cuban                                     13.0              14.3              14.0              13.2              14.7              13.9
                                                     (0.06)            (0.09)            (0.18)            (0.06)            (0.09)            (0.16)
           Central or South American                 11.0              13.8              13.2              11.6              14.2              13.6
                                                     (0.04)            (0.06)            (0.13)            (0.03)            (0.06)            (0.11)
           Other Hispanic                            12.1              13.6              13.2              12.4              13.6              13.2
                                                     (0.10)            (0.10)            (0.04)            (0.09)            (0.09)            (0.04)
          Non-Hispanic:
           White                                     14.4              14.4              13.8              14.2              14.6              14.0
                                                     (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.004)           (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.003)
           Black                                     13.5              14.0              12.9              13.3              14.5              13.3
                                                     (0.03)            (0.07)            (0.01)            (0.03)            (0.06)            (0.009)
           Asian                                     14.8              15.0              14.3              14.3              15.2              14.5
                                                     (0.02)            (0.04)            (0.04)            (0.02)            (0.04)            (0.04)
           Other race                                14.0              14.3              13.0              14.3              14.6              13.3
                                                     (0.16)            (0.07)            (0.02)            (0.13)            (0.07)            (0.02)

          All race/ethnic groups                     12.2              13.9              13.6              12.4              14.1              13.8
                                                     (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.003)           (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.003)

SOURCE: 2003–2016 Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group data.
NOTE: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The education measure is completed years of schooling. The samples include people ages 25–59. The “first
generation” consists of foreign-born individuals, excluding those born abroad of an American parent. The “second generation” consists of U.S.-born individuals
who have at least one foreign-born parent. Remaining persons are members of the “third+ generation” (i.e., the third and all higher generations), which consists
of U.S.-born individuals who have two U.S.-born parents. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.
     Table 3: Average Education of Mexicans and Puerto Ricans, Ages 25-34 and 50-59, by Sex and Immigrant Generation

                                                        Men, by Immigrant Generation                       Women, by Immigrant Generation
        National Origin and Age Group                First        Second          Third+                  First       Second         Third+

        Mexican
         Ages 25-34                                    9.9             12.7              12.6              10.2             13.0              13.0
                                                      (0.03)           (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.04)           (0.03)            (0.03)
         Ages 50-59                                    8.5             12.5              12.5               8.6             12.4              12.4
                                                      (0.06)           (0.09)            (0.05)            (0.06)           (0.09)            (0.05)
        Puerto Rican
         Ages 25-34                                   12.5             12.6              13.2              12.8             12.9              13.5
                                                      (0.10)           (0.08)            (0.09)            (0.09)           (0.07)            (0.08)
         Ages 50-59                                   11.6             12.7              13.4              11.7             13.0              13.6
                                                      (0.11)           (0.11)            (0.16)            (0.11)           (0.12)            (0.17)

SOURCE: 2003–2016 Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group data.
NOTE: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The education measure is completed years of schooling. The samples include people ages 25–34 and 50–59.
The “first generation” consists of foreign-born individuals, excluding those born abroad of an American parent. The “second generation” consists of U.S.-born
individuals who have at least one foreign-born parent. Remaining persons are members of the “third+ generation” (i.e., the third and all higher generations),
which consists of U.S.-born individuals who have two U.S.-born parents. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.
