                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    CLIMATE ADAPTIVE RESPONSE ESTIMATION:
                         SHORT AND LONG RUN IMPACTS
                OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY
                     AND NATURAL GAS CONSUMPTION USING
                                 BIG DATA

                                   Maximilian Auffhammer

                                      Working Paper 24397
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24397


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




I thank the California Energy Commission's PIER program for generous funding and PERC's
Lone Mountain Fellowship, which provided time to write. Katrina Jessoe, Joe Shapiro, Guido
Franco, Kyle Meng and seminar participants at Stanford University, UC Irvine, Iowa State
University, UCSB, UIUC, Lawrence Berkeley Labs, Arizona State University, Resources for the
Future, PERC, NBER and the 2017 ASSA Meetings have provided valuable feedback. All
remaining errors are the author's. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Maximilian Auffhammer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Climate Adaptive Response Estimation: Short And Long Run Impacts Of Climate Change
On Residential Electricity and Natural Gas Consumption Using Big Data
Maximilian Auffhammer
NBER Working Paper No. 24397
March 2018
JEL No. Q4,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a simple two-step estimation method (Climate Adaptive Response
Estimation - CARE) to estimate sectoral climate damage functions, which account for long- run
adaptation. The paper applies this method in the context of residential electricity and natural gas
demand for the world's sixth largest economy - California. The advantage of the proposed method
is that it only requires detailed information on intensive margin behavior, yet does not require
explicit knowledge of the extensive margin response (e.g., technology adoption). Using almost
two billion energy bills, we estimate spatially highly disaggregated intensive margin temperature
response functions using daily variation in weather. In a second step, we explain variation in the
slopes of the dose response functions across space as a function of summer climate. Using 18
state-of-the-art climate models, we simulate future demand by letting households vary
consumption along the intensive and extensive margins. We show that failing to account for
extensive margin adjustment in electricity demand leads to a significant underestimate of the
future impacts on electricity consumption. We further show that reductions in natural gas demand
more than offset any climate-driven increases in electricity consumption in this context.


Maximilian Auffhammer
Agricultural and Resource Economics Department
University of California, Berkeley
207 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER
auffhammer@berkeley.edu
1.     Introduction

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projects that the average global surface
temperature will rise by between 1 and 3.7◦ C (1.8 - 6.7◦ F) by the end of the century. This shift in
the mean of the global surface temperature distribution will be accompanied by significant increases
in the frequency and intensity of extreme heat events (IPCC AR5, 2013). Humans respond to hot
outdoor ambient temperatures by cooling the indoor environment at home and/or at work. If the
frequency and intensity of hot days increases due to climate change, one would expect this to cause
increased cooling and decreased heating demand. One of the three Integrated Assessment Models
used in the calculation of the federal Social Cost of Carbon concludes that increased space cooling
is the major driver of Global Climate Damages (Rose et al, 2014). This finding relies on an assumed
temperature responsiveness of a simple space cooling function in the FUND Integrated Assessment
model, which has little to no empirical basis (Anthoff and Tol, 2014).
       Air conditioning is the main option for adaptation to hotter temperatures and it has been
shown to be an effective strategy to mitigate the negative health impacts of hot days. In the United
States, the mortality effect of a very hot day decreased by roughly 80% between 1900-1959 and
1960-2004 due to the increased penetration of air conditioners (Barreca et al., 2016). This observed
trajectory of air conditioner installation has been driven by growth in incomes and falling prices
of both AC units and the electricity required to operate them (Biddle, 2008). A changing climate
represents a new driver of air conditioner adoption. If San Francisco with its pleasant coastal climate
gets Fresno’s hot climate by end of century, even cool San Franciscans will install window units in
existing apartments and new construction will be built with central air conditioning. The cost of
this adaptation mechanism comes in the form of both installation and operating costs, while the
benefits accrue in the form of better health and increased comfort.
       There is a dearth of causal estimates of empirically calibrated damage functions to quantify
the short- and long-run relationship of higher temperatures and electricity consumption from space
cooling (Auffhammer and Mansur, 2014). This paper attempts to partially fill this gap. It also
makes a significant step forward in the estimation of credible long-run climate impacts, which has

                                                  1
been the main challenge in the literature estimating climate change impacts across sectors (e.g.,
agriculture, health, labor productivity, crime) and spatial scales (Dell et al., 2014, Carleton and
Hsiang, 2016). It does so by using a combination of short-run weather variation in a panel context
and long-run climate variation in a cross-sectional context. The proposed method is applicable
beyond climate impact dose response functions. It could be applied in any setting where the short-
run and long-run response of agents differs (e.g., responses to exogenous changes in air and water
pollution, pricing, and income).
        In both the short and long run, the main adaptation response to the higher incidence of
extreme heat days will be the more frequent operation of existing air conditioning equipment,
which we will refer to as the intensive margin adjustment for the remainder of the paper. The
long-run response will be the climate change driven installation of air conditioners in areas that
currently see little penetration of this equipment. We will refer to this dimension of adaptation
as the extensive margin adjustment. While there are a number of papers attempting to quantify
the intensive margin adjustment for a number of sectors (e.g., agriculture, mortality, crime), it is
extremely difficult to carry out a full empirical characterization of the additional extensive margin
response at fine enough levels of aggregation to be useful to planners. In the case of electricity, this
is due to the lack of data on installed air conditioners over time and space in the United States.1
        The main innovation of this paper is that we lay out a simple method to estimate both the
intensive and extensive margin impacts of climate change on consumption when one does not have
data on installed capital (e.g., air conditioners). In a first step, using household-level billing data,
we estimate the causal temperature response function of household electricity consumption at a
fine level of spatial aggregation - the five-digit ZIP code level. These response functions allow us
to examine how the intensive margin adjustment (“increased usage of existing equipment”) varies
across 1,165 ZIP codes in California in our sample.
        A warmer climate has benefits as well. California’s residential consumers consume the ma-
jority of their natural gas during the winter time to heat their homes. Milder winters will require
   1
    Davis and Gertler (2015) is the only example for a large country (Mexico) which utilizes data both on appliance
holdings and electricity consumption for a large share of the population.


                                                        2
less heating and hence decrease natural gas consumption. We use our household level billing data
for natural gas to estimate a weather response of natural gas consumption for each ZIP code. Esti-
mation at this fine level of aggregation is made possible by the fact that we observe almost 2 billion
electricity and natural gas bills, which represent 79 percent of California’s households over a decade.
       In a second step, we use regression to explain cross-sectional variation in these “first-step”
estimated slopes of each ZIP code’s temperature response function as a function of long-run average
weather (“climate”) and other confounders varying across ZIP codes. The estimated marginal effect
of climate on the slope of the short-run response function allows us to capture extensive margin
adjustments to long-run changes in climate. We then use downscaled climate projections from 18 of
the IPCC’s most recent climate models to simulate future household electricity consumption at the
ZIP code level under climate change, taking into account both intensive (“first-step”) and extensive
margin (“second-step”) adjustments. We then compare the projected increases in electricity con-
sumption to climate-driven reductions in natural gas consumption, which we estimate and project
separately. We show that, in the case of California’s residential sector, the natural gas savings are
greater than the increases in electricity consumption in BTU terms.
       The main advantage of the approach proposed here is that it does not require data on where
air conditioners are installed. While there are a few surveys that record such data in the US (e.g.,
RASS, RECS), the spatial coverage is limited and the exact location of the household is masked
for privacy reasons. Our approach circumvents this data limitation, which would be very costly to
overcome, by relying on observed electricity consumption from billing data and weather only. The
approach outlined here can be (and is starting to be) adopted for other sectors as well (e.g., health,
agriculture).



2.     Literature Review

The literature quantifying the economic impacts of climate change has experienced explosive growth
over the past decade. Review articles by Carleton and Hsiang (2016), Hsiang (2016), and Dell et al.



                                                  3
(2014) provide up-to-date and comprehensive surveys of both methods and applications. The key
challenge that still has not been adequately overcome is to estimate externally valid dose response
functions between economic outcomes of interest (e.g., energy consumption, crop yields, mortality,
water consumption, labor productivity, cognitive ability) and a long (e.g., 30 year) average of
weather, which is commonly referred to as climate. This estimated long-run response is supposed
to capture both adaptive behavior at the intensive margin (e.g., increased operation of existing
air conditioners) and the extensive margin (e.g., installation of additional air conditioners). The
coefficients parameterizing said dose response function should be estimated in a way that allows a
causal interpretation. This is anything but straightforward. Below I provide a brief summary of
the methodological approaches in existing papers, while listing examples with an energy focus.
       The earliest literature relied on large-scale bottom-up structural simulation models to esti-
mate future electricity demand under varying climate scenarios. The advantage of these models is
that they can simulate the effects of climate change given a wide variety of technological and policy
responses. The drawback is that they contain a large number of assumed response coefficients and
make ad hoc assumptions about the evolution of the capital stock; there is little empirical guidance
for either approach. The early papers in this literature suggest that climate change will significantly
increase energy consumption (Cline, 1992; Linder et al., 1987, Baxter and Calandri, 1992; Rosenthal
et al., 1995).
       The recent literature has focused on providing empirical estimates of climate response func-
tions for a large number of sectors. There are four empirical approaches using distinctly different
sources of variation to parameterize climate response functions: (1) Time Series Regression (2) Ri-
cardian Approach (3) Panel Estimation (4) Long Differences. Each of these approaches has distinct
advantages and disadvantages.
       A simple and commonly practiced approach employed to quantify the impact of climate on
electricity consumption uses high frequency (e.g., daily or hourly) time series of electricity load
and regresses these on population-weighted functions of weather. Franco and Sanstad (2008) use
hourly electricity load for the entire California grid operator over the course of the year 2004 and


                                                  4
regress them on average daily population-weighted temperature. They identify a highly nonlinear
response of load to temperature. They show projected increases in electricity consumption and
peak load of 0.9 to 20.3 percent and 1.0 to 19.3 percent, respectively. Crowley and Joutz (2003)
use a similar approach for the Pennsylvania, [New] Jersey, Maryland Power Pool Interconnection.
Auffhammer et al. (2017) estimate the response of peak load and average load to daily weather for
166 load-balancing authorities, covering the vast majority of the US electricity load. They show
modest increases in consumption by the end of this century, yet significant increases in the intensity
of annual peak load (15-21%) and a twelve- to fifteen-fold increase in the frequency of peak events
by the end of century. The drawback of this approach is that it relies on short-term fluctuations in
weather and hence does not estimate a long-run climate response but rather a short-run weather
response. It simply cannot account for adaptation responses to climate change such as increased use
and installation of air conditioners or increased incidence of demand-side management and energy
efficiency programs.
       The second strand of the literature is based upon the seminal work by Mendelsohn et al.
(1994), who estimated the impact of climate change on agricultural yields by regressing yields or
net profits on climate. This cross-sectional approach has the advantage that it estimates a true
climate response. The method has been widely criticized, as any non-experimental cross-sectional
regression is bound to suffer from omitted variables bias (e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone, 2007).
Any unobserved factor correlated with climate and the outcome of interest will bias the coefficients
on the climate variable. This approach has not been widely applied in the energy literature, yet
Mansur et al. (2008) is one example of a cross-sectional approach, which endogenizes fuel choice,
something that is usually assumed to be exogenous and provides one avenue of adaptation.
       The third strand of the literature relies on panel data of energy consumption at the household,
county, state or country level to estimate a dose response function. Deschenes and Greenstone
(2011) were the first to use the panel approach to quantify the impacts of climate change on
residential electricity demand. They study variation in residential energy consumption at the state
level, using flexible functional forms of daily average temperatures. Their identifying assumption,


                                                  5
which is credible, is that weather fluctuations are random conditional on a set of spatial and time
fixed effects. As in the time series papers cited above, the authors find a U-shaped response
function. They find that the impact of climate change on annual residential energy consumption
for the Pacific Census Region (California, Oregon, and Washington) by 2099 is approximately
nine percent - yet not statistically different from zero. Aroonruengsawat and Auffhammer (2012)
use a panel of household-level electricity billing data to examine the impact of climate change on
residential electricity consumption. They use within-household variation in temperature, which
is made possible through variation in start dates and lengths of household billing periods. They
can control for household fixed effects, month fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Their projected
impacts are consistent with the findings by Deschenes and Greenstone (2011), ranging between 1%
and 6%. The panel approach has the advantage that one can control for often extensive sets of
fixed effects, which deal with the omitted variables issues from which the Ricardian model suffers.
This comes at a cost. The estimated response is again a short-run weather response, not a long-run
climate response, which fails to incorporate extensive margin adaptation. Further, the inclusion of
large suites of fixed effects may amplify measurement error issues (Fisher et al., 2012).
       A fourth approach, which due to data limitations has not yet been applied in the energy
sector, is long difference estimation. Burke and Emerick (2016) take long differences (e.g., 10 or 20
years) of economic outcomes of interest (e.g., agricultural yields) and regress these on long differences
of weather. This approach differences out unit-level unobservable cross-sectional differences. The
advantage of this method is that it estimates a long-run climate response and is robust to the
omitted variables issues raised in the Ricardian context. The data requirements are significant, as
this approach requires a panel long enough to generate a difference in weather, which is long enough
to be interpreted as climate.
       In summary, the time series and panel approaches only capture intensive margin changes and
are sensitive to time-varying confounders correlated with temperature. The Ricardian approach is
sensitive to the confounding impact of unobservable factors correlated with the climate variables.
The panel approach only estimates a short-run response. The long difference estimation approach is


                                                   6
the most robust to the possible effect of confounding factors, yet the time series data requirements
are significant. Finally, none of these approaches can separate the intensive and extensive margin
effects empirically.
       Davis and Gertler (2015) provide the only paper which combines a formal estimation of
the extensive margin adoption decision with a more traditional panel data based intensive margin
response function. They take advantage of a large database on household air conditioner ownership
and electricity consumption for a large, rapidly developing country - Mexico. They characterize the
temperature response on the intensive margin using electricity bills and observed temperature. To
characterize their extensive margin impacts, they rely on a large cross-sectional survey of appliance
ownership across households. They regress air conditioner ownership on contemporaneous Cooling
Degree Days, not climate, which makes this a short-run extensive margin response. They link the
two models to simulate impacts of growing income and warming weather on intensive and extensive
margin consumption of electricity. They find significant impacts: For the worst case climate scenario
and continued income growth, they estimate a 15.4 % increase in electricity consumption by end
of century. Once they account for the extensive margin adjustment, the impacts grow to an 83.1%
increase in consumption. The problem is that data on technology penetration and the outcome
of interest (e.g., air conditioners and electricity consumption) do not exist for most developing or
developed countries, which requires a different approach when one observes usage data only.
       In this paper, we propose a simple method which endogenizes the shape of the temperature
response function in the long run without ever observing the level and type of technology adopted
by a household. This approach, CARE, uses fixed effects estimation to obtain causal estimates of
the short-run (intensive margin) temperature response for a large number of relatively fine spatial
aggregates (ZIP codes) with differing degrees of AC penetration. In a second regression, we estimate
the sensitivity of the estimated slopes in the short-run temperature response across space as a
function of long-run climate, which endogenizes the extensive margin response. The simulation
then uses Global Climate Model (GCM) output to simulate the intensive margin impacts by moving
along a given response function, as well as the extensive margin impacts by shifting the response


                                                 7
function itself as climate changes. There is a literature which has shifted response functions in
the long run (e.g., Bigano et al., 2006; Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat, 2012b; Barreca et al.,
2016; Dell, Jones, and Olken, 2012, 2014; Hsiang and Narita, 2012; Butler et al. 2013; Heutel et
al. 2017). We build on the general insight of a climate-dependent response function and formalize
an empirical approach to do so when one observes a large number of micro-level observations on
outcomes. The application here is the perfect setting as we observe a large number of electricity
bills across a significant amount of time (allowing for the inclusion of household fixed effects) and
space (allowing for the cross-sectional variation in climate required for the second-step estimation).
This approach allows any utility to estimate the business as usual impacts of climate change on
consumption without having to engage in the costly collection of appliance stock and efficiency
data.



3.      Data

3.1     Residential Billing Data

As part of a confidential data sharing agreement with California’s investor owned utilities (IOUs),
we have obtained an extensive history of bills for all households serviced by the four IOUs in the
state: Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), Southern California
Gas Company (SoCalGas), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). SDG&E and PG&E are gas
and electric utilities, while SoCalGas only provides gas and SCE only provides electricity. Table (1)
provides an overview of the temporal data coverage for the four utilities by energy source (electricity
and natural gas).
        The dataset contains the complete bill-level consumption and expenditure information for
the population of single metered residential customers during the years for which we have data,
as outlined in Table (1). Specifically, we observe an ID number for the physical location (e.g.,
residence), a service account number (e.g., customer), bill start date, bill end date, total electricity
or natural gas consumption (in kilowatt-hours, kWh, or therms for gas), and the total amount of


                                                   8
the bill (in $) for each billing cycle, as well as the five-digit ZIP code of the premise metered. Only
customers who were individually metered are included in the dataset, hence we cannot say anything
about multi-unit buildings with a shared meter. We also cannot reliably identify households who
have moved and therefore refrain from using this as a source of econometric identification. For the
purpose of this paper, a customer is defined as a unique combination of premise and service account
number. We also can identify whether a customer receives a low-income subsidy on electricity
pricing through a state program. Further, we can determine which homes are all-electric, meaning
that they heat and cool using electricity and have their own electric water heaters. This is not
mostly by the homeowners’ choice, but is simply due to the fact that not all of California has
natural gas infrastructure to serve residences.
       It is important to note that each billing cycle does not follow the calendar month, as the
beginning date and the length of the billing cycle vary across households, with the vast majority
of households being billed on a 25-35 day cycle. We remove bills with average daily consumption
less than 2 kWh from our sample, because we are concerned that these outliers are not regular
residential homes, but rather vacant vacation homes. We also remove homes on solar tariffs from
our data, since we do not observe total consumption from these homes, but only what they take
from the grid, rendering these data useless for the purpose of this exercise. Hereafter, this dataset
is referred to as “billing data.”
       For electricity, we observe a total of 964 million bills; for gas we have 928 million bills. We
observe 658 million electric bills for “normal” households, which are neither on the subsidized tariff
nor all-electric homes. In addition, we have 92 million bills for all-electric homes in the PG&E and
SCE territories. The remaining bills are for households on the subsidized tariff in all four utility
territories. We will treat these three classes of households separately in terms of estimation and
simulation. It is important to note that we cannot match the electricity and gas data beyond the
ZIP code level because we do not observe a customer’s address and the account numbers were
anonymized by the utility.
       There is significant variation in bill-level consumption across and within households. Because


                                                  9
across-household variation may be driven by unobservable characteristics at the household level (e.g.,
income, physical building characteristics, and installed capital), we will control for unobservable
confounders at the household level using fixed effects, and we will use bill-to-bill within-household
variation at the household level as our source of identifying variation. To proceed with estimation
at the ZIP code level, we identify all ZIP codes across the four utilities’ territories for which we have
at least 1,000 bills. Our data cover 1,165 ZIP codes for which we observe such billing data.2 The
ZIP codes for which we have data represent approximately 80 percent of California’s population.


3.2       Weather Data

The daily weather observations to be matched with household consumption data have been provided
by the PRISM (2004) project at Oregon State University. This dataset contains daily gridded
maximum and minimum temperature for the continental United States at a grid cell resolution of
roughly 2.5 miles. We observe these daily data for California from 1980-2015. In order to match
the weather grids to ZIP codes, we have obtained a GIS layer of ZIP codes from ESRI, which
is based on the US Postal Service delivery routes for 2013. For small ZIP codes not identified
by the shape file, we have purchased the location of these ZIP codes from a private vendor (zip-
codes.com). We matched the PRISM grids to the ZIP code shapes from the census and averaged
the daily temperature data across the multiple grids within each ZIP code for each day. For ZIP
codes identified as a point, we simply use the daily weather observation in the grid at that point.
This leaves us with a complete daily record of minimum and maximum temperature as well as
precipitation at the ZIP code level from 1980 to 2015.


3.3       Other Data

Unfortunately, we only observe bill details about each household and are missing any sociodemo-
graphic observables. We do, however, observe the five-digit ZIP code in which each household
is located. We purchased sociodemographics at the ZIP code level from a firm aggregating this
  2
      See Figure A1 for a map of the spatial coverage of the electricity and gas data.


                                                          10
information from census estimates (zip-codes.com). We observe these data only for a single year
(2016).
          There are 1,640 five-digit ZIP codes in California that have non-zero population. Our sample
of ZIP codes with more than 1,000 bills contains households for 1,165 of these. We do not have
sufficient data for households in the remaining 475 ZIP codes. These remaining ZIP codes either
are not served by the three utilities, or we do not have a sufficient number of bills for them. Table
2 shows summary statistics for both the ZIP codes in our sample and the ZIP codes for which
we do not have billing data. The ZIP codes in our sample represent 80 percent of California’s
population. The ZIP codes in our sample are more populated, younger, richer, have more expensive
homes, have slightly more persons per household, and have a lower proportion of Caucasians and a
higher proportion of Hispanics and Asians. There is a small but statistically significant difference
in summer and winter temperature, with the in-sample ZIP codes being slightly warmer. This is
not surprising since most of the ZIP codes we are missing are in the northern part of the state and
the mountainous Sierras. The big difference in elevation confirms this. Taking these differences
into consideration is important when judging the external validity of our estimation and simulation
results.
          We will not make explicit use of this information in our first-step regression, but will control
for the observable sources of variation in our cross-sectional second step, which by design does
not allow for a fixed effects strategy. The variables we will use in the second stage are income,
population density, and summer climate.



4.     Econometric Estimation Strategy

4.1        Intensive Margin: The Usage Response to Temperature

Figure 1 visualizes our econometric estimation strategy. The figure displays stylized current inten-
sive margin dose response functions between weather and electricity consumption for a moderate, a
warm and a hot ZIP code. The horizontal axis displays the proportion of days annual temperature


                                                     11
falls into discrete temperature bins. The moderate ZIP codes have more days in the 15-24 degree
bin and fewer days in the 105-114 degree bin. Using billing data for a group of households in
the moderate ZIP codes, one can econometrically recover an estimate of its response function by
regressing billed consumption on the temperature controls, other observed confounders, and a suite
of fixed effects. For each bin, one estimates a ZIP code-specific slope of the temperature response
curve. One can do this for each ZIP code and recover a set of slope coefficients across the observed
temperature spectrum for each ZIP code. One would expect that the slope of the temperature
response in the warm ZIP codes for the bin 95-104 degrees would be steeper than the slope of the
cold ZIP codes, yet flatter than the slope of the hot ZIP codes, as AC penetration is thought to be
increasing in temperature. The second estimation step takes these β estimates for each bin and ZIP
code in the upper portion of the temperature spectrum and regresses their cross section on long-run
historical averages of observed temperature (climate). The estimated second-step coefficients can
then be used to change the slope of each ZIP code’s response curve as future climate changes.
       Equation (1) below shows our main estimating equation, which is a simple log-linear equation
estimated separately for each of the 1,165 ZIP codes indexed by j. This estimating equation has
been commonly employed in climate change impacts estimation (e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone
2011, Davis and Gertler, 2015).

                                       14
                                       X
                         log(qit ) =         βjp Dpit + γZit + αi + φm + ψy + εit                (1)
                                       p=1

       where log(qit ) is the natural logarithm of household i’s daily average electricity (natural
gas) consumed in kilowatt-hours (therms) during billing period t. Dpit are our binned measures of
temperature, which we discuss in detail below. Zit are observed confounders at the household level,
αi are time-invariant household fixed effects, φm are month of year fixed effects, and ψy are year
fixed effects. εit is a stochastic error term. Because bills do not overlap perfectly with calendar
months and years, φm and ψy are assigned as shares to individual bills according to the share of
days in a bill for each month and year.
       For estimation purposes, our unit of observation i is a unique combination of premise and

                                                      12
service account number, which is associated with a household and structure. We thereby avoided
the issue of having individuals moving to different structures with more or less efficient electricity
consuming capital, or residents with different preferences over electricity consumption moving in
and out of a given structure.
       California’s housing stock varies greatly in its energy efficiency and installed energy-consuming
capital. Further, California’s population is not randomly distributed across ZIP codes. We suspect
that there may be differences in preferences for cooling, installed capital, quality of construction,
and the associated demographics and capital across ZIP codes. The key novelty in this paper is
that we causally estimate Equation (1) separately for each of the 1,165 ZIP codes in our data.
The motivation for doing this is that we would expect the relationship between consumption and
temperature to vary across these ZIP codes according to the penetration of air conditioners and the
resident population’s propensity to use these. One could of course estimate a pooled regression with
interaction terms to limit the number of estimated coefficients. This is simply a weighted average
of our disaggregated results. Because one of the main points of this paper is to account for the
heterogeneity of impacts, we impose as little structure as possible, by estimating Equation (1) at
the ZIP code level instead of pooling.
       The main variables of interest in this paper are those measuring temperature. Following
recent trends in the literature, we include our temperature variables in a way that imposes a minimal
number of functional form restrictions, in order to capture potentially important nonlinearities of
the outcome of interest - electricity consumption - in weather (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts 2006,
2009; Deschenes and Greenstone 2011, Davis and Gertler, 2015). We achieve this by sorting each
day’s mean temperature experienced by household i into one of 14 temperature bins. For the
purposes of this study, we use the same set of bins for each ZIP code in the state. In order to define
a set of temperature bins, we split the state’s temperature distribution into a set of percentiles and
use those to sort days into the bins. As a result, not all ZIP codes will have observations in each
bin. The northern ZIP codes, for example, do not experience days in the hotter bins, while the
southwestern parts of California have few or no days in the coldest bins.


                                                  13
       We split the temperature distribution into deciles, and break down the upper and bottom
deciles further to include buckets for the first, fifth, ninety-fifth, and ninety-ninth percentiles, to
account for extremely cold/hot days. We therefore have a set of 14 buckets which we use for each
household, independent of the climate zone in which the household is located. The cutoffs for
the bins are 24, 35, 40, 46, 51, 55, 59, 63, 67, 72, 78, 83 and 92 degrees Fahrenheit mean daily
temperature. For each household and bill, we count the number of days the mean daily temperature
falls into each bin and record this as Dpit . The main coefficients of interest are the fourteen βjp
coefficients, which measure the impact of one more day with a mean temperature falling into bin
p on the log of household daily electricity consumption in ZIP code j. For small values, βjp ’s
interpretation is approximately the percent increase in daily average household electricity/natural
gas consumption during a billing period, associated with experiencing one additional day in that
temperature bin.
       Panel (a) in Figure (2) displays the daily average temperature for the months of June, July
and August, averaged over the years 1981-2015. This is a reasonable measure of summer climate (a
25 year average instead of the usual 30 year average). Figure (2) shows that the Central Valley non-
coastal areas of Southern California are very warm during the summer months. We would expect
these areas to have a significantly more temperature-sensitive electricity consumption response than
the cooler coastal areas of Northern California and higher altitude settings in the Sierras. Panel (b)
displays the winter months (December, January, February) average daily temperature. The spatial
distribution is similar to that of the summer climate. This figure simply stresses that, due to its
size and geography, California possesses significant heterogeneity in climate, which is necessary for
our two-step approach to work.
       Zit is a vector of observable confounding variables, which vary across billing periods and
households. There are two major confounders that we observe at the household level. The first is
the average electricity price for each household for a given billing period. California utilities price
residential electricity on a block rate structure. The average price experienced by each household
in a given period is therefore not exogenous, because marginal price depends on consumption (qit ).


                                                  14
Identifying the price elasticity of demand in this setting is problematic (e.g., Hanemann 1984; Reiss
and White 2005; Ito, 2014). We are not interested in estimating it, because it is simply impossible
to write a better paper than Ito (2014), who uses the same electricity data we employ here.
       However, the block rate pricing structure introduces an issue that has consequences for the
later simulation. Higher temperatures in a given month will lead to higher electricity consumption.
Block rate prices will force a share of households onto a higher pricing tier and raise average price, as
is discussed in detail in Ito (2014). By design, this induces a positive conditional correlation between
price and consumption. If we were to include price in Equation (1) as part of Zit , we later would have
to explicitly model the impact of higher temperatures on average price in a simulation framework,
which would require us to make assumptions about a future pricing regime. An alternate approach
would be to omit average price from Equation (1) and let the temperature coefficient capture both
temperature channels. We opt for the latter strategy, because predicting climate change-driven
changes in the block rate pricing schedule to the end of the century is not something any economist
should do. In the absence of major technological change, which we discuss in the conclusion, one
would expect retail prices to rise, pushing our modest impact estimates further toward zero.
       The second major time-varying confounder is precipitation in the form of rainfall. We control
for rainfall using a second-order polynomial in all regressions. A third confounder, which we do
not observe, is humidity. Humidity is not a major issue in California, as most parts of the state
are semi-arid. Our temperature coefficients hence capture the effects of humidity. Our simulations
would become invalid if the correlation patterns between humidity and temperature in the future
were projected to become different from the historical correlations, for which we could find no
evidence in the literature.
       To credibly identify the effects of temperature on the log of electricity consumption, we
require that the residuals conditional on all right-hand side variables be orthogonal to the tempera-
ture variables, which can be expressed as E[εit Dpit |D−pit , Zit , αi , φm , ψy ] = 0. Because we control for
household fixed effects, identification comes from within-household variation in daily temperature
after controlling for confounders common to all households and for rainfall. We estimate Equation


                                                     15
(1) separately for electricity and natural gas for each of the 1,165 ZIP codes in our sample, using
a least-squares fitting criterion and a household-level clustered variance covariance matrix. This
approach is the first estimation step in our overall methodology and serves as the basis for our
estimates of intensive margin adjustment due to climate change. We must make the assumption
that the within-household response to slowly changing climate over this relatively short sample
period is small, in order to be able to interpret our coefficients as the intensive margin adjustment
to the changes in usage of existing equipment in response to changing temperature; we think this
is reasonable.


4.2     Extensive Margin: The Long-Run Response to Temperature

In a warmer world, existing air conditioners will be run for more hours, which we call the intensive
margin adjustment. The second margin of adaptation is the installation of additional air condi-
tioners in existing homes and new construction. One can easily imagine that if San Francisco’s
future climate resembles that of current Fresno during the summer, the wealthy and no longer cool
residents of San Francisco will install (additional) cooling equipment in their homes. To be clear,
we are interested in the climate change-driven response, not an income- or price-driven response.
We attempt to quantify the magnitude of this response. We estimate equations of the following
form:
                                   βjp = δ1 + δ2 Cpj + δ3 Zj + ηjp                                (2)

        where βjp is a measure of ZIP code j’s temperature responsiveness in bin p  [10; 14] as
estimated in Equation (1). We would expect there to be a response only in the upper portion of the
temperature response curve, where cooling occurs, which is why we limit the estimation of Equation
(2) to bins 10-14. A common threshold for the uptick in the temperature response curve, which
we will show is valid for our data, is 65 degrees Fahrenheit, which is also a commonly used base
temperature for calculating cooling degree days (CDD).
        The variable Cpj in Equation (2) is the share of days that ZIP code j experienced in temper-



                                                 16
ature bin p during the sample years 1981-2000 from our ZIP code-level weather data produced from
the PRISM data. Cpj is bounded by 0 and 1 and adds to one when summed across all temperature
bins from 1-14. The variable(s) Zj are any confounders that may affect the temperature response
of the population in ZIP code j. One confounder we consider here is income, as higher-income
households can more easily afford the capital expenditure of an air conditioner and its associated
operating expense (Rapson 2011). We also include population density to proxy for the level of
urbanization. While we will not use the estimated coefficients on income and population density in
our simulation later, controlling for them ensures that we do not confound the temperature exten-
sive margin adjustment by income. If individuals sort into climate according to income, failing to
control for these factors would bias our estimated climate response. One could, of course, use the
second-step estimates on income and population to simulate overall demand in a more populated,
richer world.
       In terms of estimation, we could estimate five separate equations of type (2) or estimate a
pooled regression allowing for flexibility in the δ2 coefficient for higher bins. We chose to estimate a
pooled model, which restricts the coefficients on income and population density to be identical for all
bins, yet controls for bin dummies. This provided more stable estimation results than estimating
separate equations. The bin dummies control for the fact that each bin contains the response
coefficients for a different collection of ZIP codes. This arises, as we mentioned above, because we
do not have temperature coverage in all bins for all ZIP codes. Finally, we estimate Equation (2) via
Ordinary Least Squares with heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, as the dependent variables
are estimated coefficients and do not have constant variance. Running weighted least squares does
not significantly change the results, yet the least squares estimates are more stable.




                                                  17
5.      Estimation Results

5.1     Intensive Margin: The Usage Response to Temperature

As discussed in the previous section, we estimate Equation (1) for each of the 1,165 ZIP codes
that have more than 1,000 bills. While we cannot feasibly present all of the estimated temperature
response functions (which are comprised of up to 13 parameter estimates each), we can display the
distribution of the temperature response curves in a fan plot, which is shown in Figure (3). The
thick black line displays the median temperature response curve across the 1,165 ZIP codes. As
the regression has average daily consumption on the left-hand side and the number of days out of a
normalized 30 spent in each bin on the right-hand side, the coefficients indicate the percent change
in average daily consumption from one additional day spent in a given bin relative to a day in the
65 degree bin. The curve has the expected U-shape with a steep positive slope above 65 degrees and
a shallower negative slope at temperatures below 65 degrees. The trough of the U-shaped response
curve is right near the omitted bin of 65 degrees. Figure 3 displays the significant heterogeneity
in temperature response via the shaded fan areas. The palest grey fan indicates the bounds of
the 5th to 95th percentile of the distribution. Each darker shade of grey increments the interval by
10%. What we see here is a significant number of ZIP codes with an extremely steep temperature
response, as well as a significant number of ZIP codes with an almost flat temperature response. The
bottom panel displays the temperature response when including average price in the regressions.
As hypothesized, the response function flattens out significantly after controlling for price, which is
consistent with the forced positive correlation between average price and consumption.3
        Figure (4) displays the analogous results for the natural gas regressions, also excluding
price from the regressions. Because space heating is the only major ambient temperature-sensitive
use of natural gas in residences, we would expect a downward sloping line in temperature at low
temperatures and a relatively flat response curve at higher temperatures. Figure (4) impressively
   3
     Figure A2 produces analogous pictures for the subsidized households and Figure A3 for the all-electric households.
The subsidized household distribution has a slightly shallower slope at both high and low temperatures. The all-
electric distribution has slightly steeper slopes at higher and lower temperatures, which is to be expected because
these houses tend to be older, with heating and cooling systems that use electricity, not natural gas.


                                                          18
displays exactly that. There is quite a bit of variation in slope across ZIP codes, yet the median
response is exactly as expected and flattens out at almost exactly 65 degrees Fahrenheit.


5.2    Extensive Margin: The Long-Run Electricity Consumption Re-

       sponse to Temperature

As discussed in Section 4.2, we exploit the 1,165 estimated electricity temperature response curves
and examine whether we can explain variation in temperature response at high temperatures
through cross-sectional variation in “climate” as well as income and population density.
       The left-hand side variable is our measure of temperature response of electricity consumption
for each of the bins 10-14, which we estimated for each ZIP code j in the previous step, using
Equation (1). On the right-hand side, we control for the percent of days spent in the respective
bins during the years 1981-2000 (our predetermined proxy for summer climate), income, population
density and bin dummies. These dummies are important because the bins contain very different sets
of ZIP codes. Not all ZIP codes, for example, experience days in the hottest bin. The bin dummies
hence control for unobservable difference across bins. We run a pooled regression, the results of
which are shown in Table (3). Because the dependent variable is an estimated coefficient, we use
White robust standard errors. Model (1) pools the climate response across all bins; it suggests a
mildly positive impact of climate on the slope of the response function. Model (2) allows for a
differential shift in the temperature response function for the three highest bins; as expected, the
shift is significant and much larger than the pooled estimate. Models (3) and (4) run these models
for the subsidized households and the all-electric households respectively. Both display a similar
pattern.
       We use the results from Models (4), (5) and (6) in Table (3) to simulate the impacts of
climate change on the slope of each ZIP code’s temperature response curve. In the next section, we
will generate a large number of counterfactual climate futures from 18 General Circulation Models
(the technical term for climate models) and two different scenarios of emissions. We will use these
ZIP code-level climate futures to shift each ZIP code’s temperature response curve for bins 10-14,

                                                19
using the estimates from Table (3). This simulated shift in the temperature response curve will
allow us to quantify the extensive margin adaptation response.



6.    Electricity and Natural Gas Consumption Simulations

In this section, we simulate the impacts of climate change on electricity and then natural gas
consumption under two different emissions scenarios using 18 different climate models from the
latest round of the IPCC assessments (AR5, CMIP5) in their downscaled form. For electricity,
we conduct three different simulations. The first simulation holds population growth constant and
only simulates electricity consumption per household using the first-stage estimates, which do not
allow for changes in the extensive margin. In a second simulation, we incorporate the extensive
margin adjustments from the previous section. In a final simulation, we allow for population growth.
For each simulation, we can calculate the trajectory of aggregate electricity consumption from the
residential sector until the year 2099, which is standard in the climate change literature. We provide
simulated impacts for the periods 2020-2039, 2040-2059, 2060-2079 and 2080-2099.
       In our simulations, we make one key assumption. For natural gas, we only use the intensive
margin simulations, because one would not expect households to install more efficient or fewer
heaters in response to climate change. We would expect existing equipment to be operated less
frequently. But one would not install a more efficient and costly heater which is going to be used
less due to climate change.


6.1    Temperature Simulations

The simulation for this section uses the climate response parameters estimated in Section 5.1. Using
these estimates as the basis of our simulation has several strong implications. Using only the first
stage parameters via Equation (1) implies that the climate responsiveness of consumption within
climate zones remains constant throughout the century.
       As is standard in this literature, the counterfactual climate is generated by a general circu-


                                                 20
lation model (GCM). These numerical simulation models generate predictions of past and future
climate under different scenarios of atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations. The quanti-
tative projections of global climate change conducted under the auspices of the IPCC’s fifth assess-
ment report (AR5) and applied in this study are based on the so-called “RCP4.5” and “RCP8.5”
scenarios. The number after the RCP stands for the likely increase in forcing from the scenario by
end of century relative to preindustrial values, in Watts per square meter. In terms more familiar
to most economists, RCP4.5 is expected to result in warming of 1.8 ◦ C, with a likely range of 1.1.
to 2.6 ◦ C. This is a very optimistic scenario, as attaining a goal of warming less than 2 degrees is
unlikely. RCP 8.5 is the worst case scenario and is expected to result in warming of 3.7 ◦ C, with a
likely range of 2.6 to 4.8 ◦ C.
          We simulate consumption for each scenario using the 18 downscaled GCMs from the IPCC’s
CMIP5 database. The downscaled temperature scenarios were drawn from a statistical downscaling
exercise based on the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5 (Taylor et al. 2012) utilizing a
modification (Hegewisch and Abatzoglou, 2015) of the Multivariate Adaptive Constructed Analogs
(Abatzoglou and Brown, 2012) method with the Livneh (Livneh et al., 2013) observational dataset
as training data. These were provided to us by the MACA project at the University of Idaho. We
matched the fine scale grids of the downscaled climate data to ZIP codes in the same fashion that
we matched the PRISM weather grids. We calculated future climate by adding the predicted change
in monthly temperature for each model, scenario and period to our baseline weather data, in order
to avoid local biases, as the MACA project does not use the same weather data as its training data
set.4
          To obtain estimates for a percent increase in electricity consumption for the representative
household in ZIP code j and period t + h, we use the following relation:


                                                  exp( 14
                                                        P
                                         qj,t+h        p=1 bpj Dpj,t+h )
                                                =      P14                                                   (3)
                                          qj,t     exp( p=1 bpj Dpj,t )

          To display the spatial variability in intensive margin impacts for the average household across
   4
       A detailed description of the climate model output is available at http://maca.northwestknowledge.net/.


                                                        21
ZIP codes, we generate a map of average household-level impacts by ZIP code. Panel (a) in Figure
(5) plots the predicted impact for the average household by end of century using the ensemble
average prediction across all 18 GCMs for RCP8.5. What this graph shows is that the ZIP codes
in the Central Valley and non-coastal Southern California are projected to experience the largest
increases in household electricity consumption. This is due to the combination of the slope of the
temperature response function and projected warming from the GCMs. These projections ignore
potential extensive margin impacts, which we turn to next.5
        For each ZIP code, climate model and scenario, we calculate the simulated shift of the
temperature response curve using Model (2) in Table (3). As the temperature distribution shifts to
the right for the vast majority of ZIP codes in California, a higher share of days in the higher bins
is projected under both climate change scenarios for most models. It is impractical to show the
almost 44,460 counterfactual response curves. Figure (6) collapses the temperature response curves
across ZIP codes by projection period. The top panel displays the population-weighted statewide
response curve in-sample in black and the projected future response curves in blue and red. As
expected, the response curve tilts up more and more over time. The bottom panel repeats this
exercise for RCP 4.5, which results in significantly less movement.
        We now use the extensive margin adjusted response functions to simulate impacts of climate
change on electricity consumption. Panel (b) in Figure (5) displays the impacts on the average
household in a ZIP code using the ensemble average of GCMs and RCP 8.5 by end of century
across the state for the extensive margin adaptation. It is important to note that this figure plots
the “delta” from the intensive margin results. It indicates a noticeable increase in consumption
across the state relative to the intensive margin only, shown in Panel (a). The right panel shows
   5
    Figure A4 displays the projected increases in household residential electricity consumption across the approxi-
mately 1,200 ZIP codes for each of the four projection periods and the 18 GCMs for RCP8.5. The top panel displays
this for intensive margin impacts only, while the bottom panel adds the extensive margin response. The box plots
display tremendous variation across time (the box and whiskers plots for each model are shown in increasing temporal
order for each model), across models, and within models. It is quite clear that median impacts are increasing over
time and impacts range from the negative teens to increases approaching 50% for some ZIP codes. We trim the
distribution of estimated impacts at the top and bottom because some point estimates are too large to be credible.
This has to do with a lack of precision for some zip codes with very few observations in the extreme bins. We censor
the slope coefficients to be less than 0.2 in absolute value and the projected impacts to be less than 50%.



                                                        22
that these extensive margin impacts will be felt most strongly in the Central Valley and non-coastal
areas of Southern California.6
        While these maps are instructive, it is hard to determine the size of the overall impact of
allowing for extensive margin adjustment. Table (4) therefore shows the overall population-weighted
increases in total electricity consumption averaged across the 18 climate models and for both RCPs
- with and without extensive margin adjustments. The first thing to notice from this table is
that accounting for the extensive margin adjustments results in a significant difference in simulated
impacts, which is consistent with the findings in Davis and Gertler (2015) for Mexico. For RCP4.5
by the end of the century, accounting for extensive margin impacts increases the estimated impacts
by 50%. The second noteworthy fact is that the estimated impacts for electricity consumption are
relatively small even until 2059 - strictly less than 5% even for the worst case scenario incorporating
extensive margin adjustment. In terms of the electricity planners’ time horizon, the magnitude of
the impacts falls within the noise. By the end of the century, the impacts are larger, yet their
magnitudes are small enough that not overly optimistic assumptions about technological change
related to energy efficiency should more than offset these gains. A 17.6% increase in electricity
consumption from “normal” households - which is the largest effect we find - by end of century is
about a 0.2% annual growth rate. The results for low-income households are even smaller: a 16.9%
increase for the worst case scenario by the end of the century. The results for all–electric homes are
much smaller. This makes sense because, for these homes, decreased heating will offset increases in
air conditioning demand.
        For natural gas, however, we see more significant decreases in consumption, even by mid-
century. Under RCP8.5, consumption is expected to decrease by 10.4% by mid-century and by
end of century by 20.5%. Again, the end of century is a long ways away and beyond the utility
planners’ horizon, but this raises the question of whether the savings from natural gas are bigger
than the projected increases in electricity consumption in this counterfactual world. The EIA
   6
    The bottom panel in Figure A4 displays the same box and whisker plots as we did for the intensive margin
simulations earlier, but now incorporates the extensive margin changes. What stands out from this graph is an
almost uniform upward shift in the medians across models and increased variability across models - especially at the
high end.


                                                        23
states that California Homes used 0.287 quadrillion BTU of electricity and 0.439 quadrillion BTU
of natural gas in 2009. If we use the projected percentage changes from Table (4), we arrive at the
conclusion that climate change is simulated to lead to a 0.039 quad BTU net decrease in energy
consumption for the residential sector in California. We will discuss the limitations of this simulation
in the conclusions, but first it is instructive to put into perspective the impacts of other drivers of
electricity consumption over the next century.



7.     Conclusions

In the residential sector, one of the most widely discussed modes of adaptation to higher tempera-
tures due to climate change is the increased demand for cooling and decreased demand for heating
in the built environment. Due to its mild climate and heavy reliance on natural gas, California’s
residential sector uses relatively little electricity for heating. It is therefore expected that the de-
mand for electricity will increase as households operate existing air conditioners more frequently,
and in many regions will install air conditioners where there currently are few. This paper pro-
vides reduced form estimates of changes in electricity consumption due to increased use of installed
cooling equipment under a hotter climate. The study adds to the literature by incorporating the
change in temperature responsiveness due to likely increases in air conditioner penetration under
climate change, using a two-stage method. The advantage of the proposed method lies in its relative
simplicity and the fact that it only requires data on electricity consumption and not on installed
cooling equipment.
       We show that accounting for extensive margin adjustments will lead to statistically and
economically significantly higher projections of electricity consumption. However, by estimating
the response of natural gas consumption to higher temperatures, we also show that the projected
increases in electricity consumption are more than offset by savings in natural gas, making climate
change a net energy saving factor for the residential sector.
       It is important to keep in mind several caveats. These are simulations, not forecasts. We



                                                  24
think of the results provided in this paper as imposing end of century climate on a current day
economy. Many other drivers of energy consumption will change. What our paper shows is the
business as usual path, which mitigation strategy has to work against. We do not and cannot model
changes in electricity consumption due to improvements in the efficiency of heating and cooling
equipment and/or buildings. These effects will offset some or all of the increases in electricity
consumption outlined in this paper and will amplify the natural gas savings. Further, the extensive
margin adjustments in this paper cannot meaningfully control for changes in urban form, urban heat
island effects, or other variables potentially leading to a higher response, which may be correlated
with temperature. We leave the study of these effects to future work.




                                                25
References

 [1] Abatzoglou, John T., and Timothy J. Brown. 2012. “A comparison of statistical downscaling
     methods suited for wildfire applications.” International Journal of Climatology 32.5: 772-780.

 [2] Albouy, D., Graf, W. F., Kellogg, R., & Wolff, H. 2013. Climate amenities, climate change,
     and American quality of life (No. w18925). National Bureau of Economic Research.

 [3] Anthoff, David, and Richard Tol. 2014. The Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation
     and Distribution (FUND). Technical Description.

 [4] Aroonruengsawat, Anin, and Maximilian Auffhammer. 2012. Correction: Impacts of Climate
     Change on Residential Electricity Consumption: Evidence From Billing Data. California En-
     ergy Commission White Paper.

 [5] Auffhammer, Maximilian and Anin Aroonruengsawat. 2012b Hotspots of climate-driven in-
     creases in residential electricity demand: A simulation exercise based on household level billing
     data for California. California Energy Commission.

 [6] Auffhammer, Maximilian, Patrick Baylis, and Catherine H. Hausman. 2017. “Climate change
     is projected to have severe impacts on the frequency and intensity of peak electricity demand
     across the United States.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences: 201613193.

 [7] Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Erin T. Mansur. 2014. “Measuring climatic impacts on energy
     consumption: A review of the empirical literature.” Energy Economics 46: 522-530.

 [8] Auffhammer, M. and Vincent, J. R. 2012. Unobserved time effects confound the identification
     of climate change impacts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(30), 11973-
     11974.

 [9] Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, Joseph S. Shapiro. 2016.
     “Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the U.S. Temperature-Mortality
     Relationship over the 20th Century.” Journal of Political Economy. 124(1): 105-159

[10] Baxter, L. W., and K. Calandri. 1992. “Global warming and electricity demand: A study of
     California.” Energy Policy 20(3): 233-244.

[11] BEA (Bureau of Economic Analysis). 2008. Regional Economic Accounts. Washington, D.C.
     www.bea.gov/regional/spi/default.cfm?series=summary.

[12] Biddle, Jeff. 2008. “Explaining the spread of residential air conditioning, 1955-1980.” Explo-
     rations in Economic History 45: 402-423.

[13] Bigano, Andrea, Jacqueline M. Hamilton, and Richard SJ Tol. 2006. The impact of climate on
     holiday destination choice.” Climatic Change 76.3-4: 389-406.

[14] Burke, Marshall and Kyle Emerick. 2016. “Adaptation to climate change: Evidence from US
     agriculture”. American Economic Journal – Economic Policy, 8(3), 106-140.

                                                 26
[15] Butler, Ethan E., and Peter Huybers. 2013. “Adaptation of US maize to temperature varia-
     tions.” Nature Climate Change 3.1: 68-72.

[16] Carleton, Tamma A., and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2016. “Social and economic impacts of climate.”
     Science 353.6304 : aad9837.

[17] Cline, W. R. 1992. The economics of global warming. Washington: Institute for International
     Economics.

[18] Crowley, C., and F. Joutz. 2003. Hourly electricity loads: Temperature elasticities and climate
     change. In 23rd U.S. Association of Energy Economics North American Conference.

[19] Davis, Lucas W. and Paul J. Gertler. 2015 “Contribution of air conditioning adoption to future
     energy use under global warming” PNAS doi:10.1073/pnas.1423558112

[20] Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. “Temperature shocks and
     economic growth: Evidence from the last half century.” American Economic Journal: Macroe-
     conomics 4.3: 66-95.

[21] Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2014. “What do we learn from the
     weather? The new climate–economy literature.” Journal of Economic Literature 52.3: 740-798.

[22] Deschenes, O., and M. Greenstone. 2011. “Climate Change, Mortality and Adaptation: Evi-
     dence from annual fluctuations in weather in the U.S.” American Economic Journal: Applied
     Economics. 3: 152-185.

[23] Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2008. State Energy Data System. Washington, D.C.
     http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/states/_seds.html.

[24] Energy Information Administration. 2011. “Air conditioning in nearly 100 million U.S.
     homes.” http://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/reports/air_conditioning09.
     cfm?src=email.

[25] Feng, S., Oppenheimer, M., and Schlenker, W. 2012. Climate change, crop yields, and internal
     migration in the United States (No. w17734). National Bureau of Economic Research.

[26] Fisher, Anthony C., et al. 2012. “The economic impacts of climate change: evidence from
     agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather: comment.” The American Economic
     Review 102.7: 3749-3760.

[27] Franco, G., and A. Sanstad. 2008. “Climate change and electricity demand in California.”
     Climatic Change 87:139-151.

[28] Hanemann, W. 1984. “Discrete/Continuous Models of Consumer Demand.” Econometrica 52:
     541-561.

[29] Heutel, Garth, Nolan H. Miller and David Molitor. 2017. Adaptation and the Mortality Effects
     of Temperature Across U.S. Climate Regions. NBER Working Paper #23271



                                                27
[30] Hsiang, Solomon M., and Daiju Narita. 2012. “Adaptation to cyclone risk: Evidence from the
     global cross–section.” Climate Change Economics 3.02: 1250011.

[31] Hsiang, Solomon. 2016. “Climate econometrics.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 8:
     43-75.

[32] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2013. Climate Change 2013: The physical
     science basis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

[33] Ito, Koichiro. 2014. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from
     Nonlinear Electricity Pricing”. American Economic Review, 104(2): 537-63.

[34] Linder, P., M. Gibbs, and M. Inglis. 1987. Potential impacts of climate change on electric
     utilities. Report 88-2. Albany, New York: New York State Energy Research and Development
     Authority.

[35] Livneh, B., Rosenberg, E. A., Lin, C., Nijssen, B., Mishra, V., Andreadis, K. M., ... and
     Lettenmaier, D. P. (2013). A long-term hydrologically based dataset of land surface fluxes and
     states for the conterminous United States: Update and extensions. Journal of Climate, 26(23),
     9384-9392.

[36] Mansur, E., R. Mendelsohn, and W. Morrison. 2008. “Climate change adaptation: A study of
     fuel choice and consumption in the U.S. energy sector.” Journal of Environmental Economics
     and Management 55(2): 175-193.

[37] Mendelsohn, R. 2003. The Impact of Climate Change on Energy Expenditures in California.
     Appendix XI in Wilson, Tom, and Larry Williams, Joel Smith, Robert Mendelsohn. Global Cli-
     mate Change and California: Potential Implications for Ecosystems, Health, and the Economy.
     Consultant report 500-03-058CF to the Public Interest Energy Research Program, California
     Energy Commission.

[38] Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994.“The impact of global
     warming on agriculture: a Ricardian analysis.” The American Economic Review : 753-771.

[39] Feng, S., Krueger, A. B. and Oppenheimer, M. 2010. Linkages among climate change, crop
     yields and MexicoUS cross-border migration. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
     107(32), 14257-14262.

[40] Pierce, David W., et al. 2015. “Improved bias correction techniques for hydrological simulations
     of climate change.” Journal of Hydrometeorology 16.6: 2421-2442.

[41] PRISM Climate Group, Oregon State University. 2004. prism.oregonstate.edu.

[42] Rapson. D. 2011. “Durable Goods and Long-Run Electricity Demand: A Case Study of Air
     Conditioner Purchase Behavior.” Working Paper, UC Davis.

[43] Reiss, P. C., and M. W. White. 2005. “Household Electricity Demand Revisited.” The Review
     of Economic Studies. 72:853-883.


                                                 28
[44] Rose, Steven, D. Turner, G. Blanford, J. Bistline, F. de la Chesnaye, and T. Wilson. 2014.
     “Understanding the social cost of carbon: A technical assessment.” EPRI Technical Update
     Report.

[45] Rosenthal, D., H. Gruenspecht, and E. Moran. 1995. “Effects of global warming on energy use
     for space heating and cooling in the United States.” The Energy Journal 16:77-96.

[46] Sailor, D., and A. Pavlova. 2003. “Air conditioning market saturation and long-term response
     of residential cooling energy demand to climate change.” Energy 28 (9): 941-51.

[47] Sanstad, A., H. Johnson, N. Goldstein, and G. Franco. 2009. Long-Run Socioeconomic and
     Demographic Scenarios for California. PIER Report CEC-500-2009-013-D.

[48] Schlenker, W., and M. Roberts. 2006. “Nonlinear Effects of Weather on Corn Yields.” Review
     of Agricultural Economics 28(3): 391-398.

[49] Schlenker and Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear Temperature Effects indicate Severe Damages to
     U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
     106(37), September 15 2009, p.15594-15598.

[50] Taylor, Karl E., Ronald J. Stouffer, and Gerald A. Meehl. 2012. “An overview of CMIP5 and
     the experiment design.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93.4: 485-498.

[51] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1989. “The potential effects of global climate change on
     the United States.” Joel B. Smith and Dennis Tirpak, eds. Washington D.C.: Environmental
     Protection Agency.




                                                29
Table 1: Electricity and Natural Gas Bills by Utility

   Utility        Electricity Years           # of Bills          Gas Years            # of Bills
   PG&E           2003-2009                  342 Million          2004-2014           587 Million
  SDG&E           2000-2009                  153 Million          2008-2015           74 Million
    SCE           1999-2008                  469 Million
 SoCalGas                                                         2010-2015           267 Million
   Total                                     964 Million                              928 Million

Notes: This table displays the total number of bills in our dataset. We drop electricity bills with average
daily consumption less than 2kWh as well as solar homes. Further, the estimated models only include ZIP
codes for which we have more than 1,000 bills.




                                                    30
Table 2: Summary Statistics for ZIP Codes In and Out of Sample

                                               In Sample            Out of Sample            p-value
Count                                            1,165                   475
Population (in thousands)                         25.19                 16.51                 0.00
% White                                          70.07                  72.35                 0.04
% Black                                           5.13                   5.31                 0.67
% Hispanic                                       30.95                  26.08                 0.00
% Asian                                           10.87                 10.10                 0.26
% Male                                           50.14                  50.93                 0.00
Median Age (years)                                38.90                 40.31                 0.00
Persons per Household                             2.85                   2.59                 0.00
Average Home Value (in 100k US$)                   4.14                  3.98                 0.39
Income per Household (in 10k US$)                 6.52                   5.99                 0.00
Population Density                                30.21                 44.51                 0.00
Elevation (in feet)                              392.10                741.26                 0.00
Mean Summer Temperature (F)                      72.03                  70.51                 0.00
Mean Winter Temperature (F)                      50.74                  48.48                 0.00
Mean Summer Precipitation (mm)                    0.10                   0.16                 0.00
Mean Winter Precipitation (mm)                     3.25                  3.43                 0.13

Notes: This table displays the mean observable characteristics of the ZIP codes in our sample and ZIP
codes not in our sample with positive population. The t-test assumes unequal variances. The observable
characteristics were purchased from zip-codes.com.




                                                 31
Table 3: Second Stage Regressions of Temperature Response Coefficients by Tem-
perature Bin

                                 (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)

Historical Bin                0.0124***          0.0116***           0.0217***           0.0168***
Tavg Share                     (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)

Interaction                                      0.0276***           0.0758***           0.0858***
Bin 12+                                           (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)

Special Customer                 No                  No              Subsidized             All-E
Income                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
Population Density               Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
Bin Fixed Effects                Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes

Observations                    5,116               5,116               4,984               4,642

Notes: This table displays coefficients from a regression of the electricity slope coefficients estimated in
equation (1) on the share of days in a given temperature bin the ZIP code has experienced over the period
1981-2000. The regression only includes the air conditioning relevant temperature bins 10-14. The standard
errors are Huber-White. Regressions 1-2 are for “normal” households. Regression (3) is for households
with subsidized energy bills. Regression (4) is for all-electric homes.




                                                    32
   Table 4: Projected Percent Changes in Residential Electricity Consumption

 Simulation            (1)     (2)     (3)       (4)      (5)     (6)     (7)    (8)

 RCP                   4.5     8.5   4.5         8.5     4.5      8.5    4.5     8.5
 Special Customer      No      No CARE         CARE     All-E    All-E   No      No
 Fuel                 Elec.   Elec. Elec.       Elec.   Elec.    Elec.   Gas     Gas
 Price Controls        No      No    No          No      No       No     No      No

 Intensive Margin
 2020-39               0.8    1.1      0.8       1.1     -0.2    -0.2     -4.0 -4.9
 2040-59               2.2    3.2      2.0       2.9     0.0      0.3     -7.9 -10.4
 2060-79               3.2    6.7      2.9       6.0     0.3      1.9    -10.3 -16.1
 2080-99               3.7    10.8     3.3       9.8      0.5     4.3    -11.3 -20.5

 Extensive Margin
 2020-39               1.2    1.6      1.1      1.5       0.3    0.4     NA      NA
 2040-59               3.2    4.8      3.0      4.5       1.2    1.9     NA      NA
 2060-79               4.8    10.6     4.5      10.1      1.9    5.4     NA      NA
 2080-99               5.6    17.6     5.3      16.9      2.4    10.2    NA      NA

Notes: This table displays the simulated percent increase in total residential electricity consumption
relative to 2000-2015 climate for the two IPCC Representative Concentration Pathways with low emissions
(4.5) and high emissions (8.5). Columns (1) and (2), indicate simulated increases for normal households
Columns (3) and (4) simulate increases for subsidized households. Columns (5) and (6) simulate changes
for households which are all-electric. Columns (7) and (8) display the impacts on natural gas consumption
for households with gas bills.




                                                   33
        Figure 1: Conceptual Identification of Short and Long Run Response




Notes: This figure displays the temperature response of electricity consumption in three fictional ZIP
codes with differing climates - moderate, warm and hot. The bars at the bottom display the temperature
(weather) distribution for the three ZIP codes. The colors of the response functions match the colors of
the weather distribution(s). The figure displays that the hot ZIP code has a steeper temperature response
at higher temperatures than the warm and moderate ZIP codes. The first step in the estimation identifies
the ZIP code specific temperature response curves using household level data. The second estimation
step estimates the effect of climate (average time spent in a portion of the temperature spectrum) on the
slope of the response curves across ZIP codes for the air conditioning relevant portion of the temperature
spectrum.




                                                   34
Figure 2: California’s Summer (June-August) and Winter (December-February) Cli-
mate: Average Daily Temperature 1981-2015




                  (a) Summer                             (b) Winter




                                      35
Figure 3: Distribution of Estimated Electricity Temperature Response Coeffi-
cients across ZIP Codes




Notes: This figure displays the empirical distribution of the estimated electricity temperature response
function across ZIP codes in the sample across percentile temperature bins. The lightest grey shading
indicates the range of the 5th to 95th percentile. Each darker shading represents a 5% increase in the
percentile. The solid black line represents the median temperature responsiveness. The vertical grey lines
indicate the cutoffs of the temperature bins.




                                                   36
Figure 4: Distribution of Estimated Natural Gas Temperature Response Coeffi-
cients across ZIP Codes




Notes: This figure displays the empirical distribution of the estimated natural gas temperature response
function across ZIP codes in the sample across percentile temperature bins. The lightest grey shading
indicates the range of the 5th to 95th percentile. Each darker shading represents a 5% increase in the
percentile. The solid black line represents the median temperature responsiveness. The vertical grey lines
indicate the cutoffs of the temperature bins.




                                                   37
Figure 5: Intensive and Extensive Margin Adjustment: Projected Percent In-
creases in Average Household Electricity Consumption 2080-2099 over 2000-2015
for RCP 8.5




                    (a) Intensive Margin                              (b) Extensive Margin Delta

Notes: This figure plots the average per household increase across all 18 GCMs for RCP8.5 for the last two
decades of this century over the years 2000-2015. Panel (a) holds the temperature response curve fixed at
the values estimated in-sample. Panel (b) allows for the empirically guided extensive margin adjustment.




                                                   38
Figure 6: In–Sample and Simulated Future Population-Weighted Temperature Re-
sponse Curves.




Notes: This figure plots the population weighted average of the temperature response curves across all 18
GCMs (climate models) in blue and red. The solid black line displays the in-sample estimated population
weighted average across all zip codes.
                                                   39
Figure A1: California’s Summer (June-August) and Winter (December-February)
Climate: Average Daily Temperature 1981-2015




                       (a) Electricity                                      (b) Natural Gas

Notes: Notes: The maps above display the five-digit ZIP codes for which we have more than 500 bills
over the estimation period from either PG&E, SCE, SCG or SDG&E. Zip codes with no data either have
fewer than 500 bills total or are served by one of California’s many municipal utilities. Panel (a) displays
coverage for our electricity data. Panel (b) displays coverage for our natural gas data.




                                                    40
Figure A2: Distribution of Estimated Electricity Temperature Response Coeffi-
cients across ZIP Codes for Subsidized Households




Notes: This figure displays the empirical distribution of the estimated electricity temperature response
function across ZIP codes in the sample across percentile temperature bins. The lightest grey shading
indicates the range of the 5th to 95th percentile. Each darker shading represents a 5% increase in the
percentile. The solid black line represents the median temperature responsiveness. The vertical grey lines
indicate the cutoffs of the temperature bins. This figure is estimated for the subset of households receiving
a 20% discount on their utility pricing due to their low income status.




                                                     41
Figure A3: Distribution of Estimated Electricity Temperature Response Coeffi-
cients across ZIP Codes for All-Electric Households




Notes: This figure displays the empirical distribution of the estimated electricity temperature response
function across ZIP codes in the sample across percentile temperature bins. The lightest grey shading
indicates the range of the 5th to 95th percentile. Each darker shading represents a 5% increase in the
percentile. The solid black line represents the median temperature responsiveness. The vertical grey lines
indicate the cutoffs of the temperature bins. This figure is estimated for the subset of households identified
as all–electric by the utilities.




                                                     42
Figure A4: Intensive margin [Top Panel] and Extensive Margin [Bottom Panel] per
household impacts across ZIP codes and Climate Models.




                                      43
