                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    GRAIN TODAY, GAIN TOMORROW:
   EVIDENCE FROM A STORAGE EXPERIMENT WITH SAVINGS CLUBS IN KENYA

                                      Shilpa Aggarwal
                                        Eilin Francis
                                     Jonathan Robinson

                                     Working Paper 24391
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24391


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




We are grateful to Ashwini Chhatre, Maitreesh Ghatak and Dahyeon Jeong for useful discussions,
and to 2 anonymous referees and seminar participants at IIM Bangalore, the Indian School of
Business, and the Naval Postgraduate School for helpful comments. We thank Claudia Casarotto
for research support. We thank ATAI and the University of California, Santa Cruz for funding,
and IPA Kenya for administrative support. We thank Michael Dalious, Kathryn Dutile, Maira
Reimao, and Dario Sidhu of Evidence Action for their collaboration. This research protocol was
approved by the IRBs of Maseno University, UCSC, ISB, and IPA. The project operated under a
research permit granted by the Kenyan National Commission for Science, Technology, and
Innovation. This trial is registered in the American Economic Association’s registry for
randomized controlled trials (AEARCTR–0002188). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Shilpa Aggarwal, Eilin Francis, and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Grain Today, Gain Tomorrow: Evidence from a Storage Experiment with Savings Clubs in
Kenya
Shilpa Aggarwal, Eilin Francis, and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 24391
March 2018
JEL No. D14,O12,O13,O16

                                           ABSTRACT

Many farmers in the developing world lack access to effective savings and storage devices. Such
devices might be particularly valuable for farmers since income is received as a lump sum at
harvest but expenditures are incurred throughout the year, and because grain prices are low at
harvest but rise over the year. We experimentally provided two saving schemes to 132 ROSCAs
in Kenya, one designed around communally storing maize and the other around saving cash for
inputs. About 56% of respondents took up the products. Respondents in the maize storage
intervention were 23 percentage points more likely to store maize (on a base of 69%), 37
percentage points more likely to sell maize (on a base of 36%) and (conditional on selling) sold
later and at higher prices. We find no effects of the individual input savings intervention on input
usage, likely because baseline input adoption was higher than expected.

Shilpa Aggarwal                                   Jonathan Robinson
#8105                                             Department of Economics
Indian School of Business                         University of California, Santa Cruz
Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500032                      457 Engineering 2
India                                             Santa Cruz, CA 95064
shilpa aggarwal@isb.edu                           and NBER
                                                  jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
Eilin Francis
UCSC Economics Department
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
elfranci@ucsc.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2188
1        Introduction
Over one billion people are employed in agriculture worldwide (World Development Report, 2008),
and like many of the world’s poor, the vast majority of these farmers lack access to good savings
instruments (Demirgüç-Kunt et al., 2015).1 A spate of recent research studies has shown that
providing households with savings accounts can increase cash savings, particularly among micro-
enterpreneurs who generate cash income.2 In contrast, research on the effect of providing savings
services to farmers has been sparse.
        However, there are several potential reasons to believe that farmers’ saving challenges are unique
and deserve attention. First, most farmers receive the bulk of their income as a single lump sum
soon after harvest, and then need to gradually draw on this over the rest of the year to meet
anticipated and unanticipated cash needs. This is a particularly daunting task in the absence of
financial instruments and many farmers struggle. For instance, Mullainathan and Shafir (2014)
document that sugarcane farmers in India have a 4% likelihood of having pawned something to
meet cash needs in the month after harvest, and that this likelihood climbs up to 78% in the month
just before harvest. Second, rural farmers, particularly in Africa, are part of kinship networks with
deeply embedded sharing norms (Collier and Garg, 1999; Baland, Guirkinger, and Mali, 2011),
which can make saving challenging (Dupas and Robinson, 2013).3 Third, by focusing exclusively
on cash savings, the current literature disregards an important aspect of agricultural markets, which
is that agricultural commodities display large price fluctuations over the season, from post-harvest
lows to pre-harvest peaks,4 implying that farmers would be better off saving grain instead of selling
output at low prices soon after harvest. However, storing grain brings the additional challenge that
it may be spoiled by pests or consumed.
        In this paper, we evaluate the effect of a savings experiment geared towards addressing the
special savings needs of farmers, and administered via farmers’ existing savings clubs (Rotating
Savings and Credit Associations or ROSCAs) in Kenya. The experiment was designed around two
ideas. First, we designed a product to make it easier to store maize after harvest, which we called the
Group Savings and Reinvestment Account (GSRA). We encouraged randomly selected ROSCAs
to set aside maize together in communal bags, stored at a single member’s house (usually the
ROSCA treasurer). In order to facilitate this, we provided GSRA ROSCAs with storage supplies,
namely triple-layered plastic bags capable of being hermetically sealed and designed specifically for
the purpose of grain storage,5 and a heavily subsidized wooden stand to keep the maize elevated
    1
     According to the 2014 Global Findex Report, about half of the world’s farmers lack access to a basic bank account
or mobile money account. In our study context of western Kenya, less than a quarter of the farmers in our sample
have a bank account and two-thirds have a mobile money account.
   2
     See Prina (2015) and Dupas et al. (2017) for a review of recent savings studies.
   3
     Saving may also be difficult if farmers are present-biased (see Duflo, Kremer and Robinson 2011).
   4
     See Gilbert et al. (2017) and Bergquist et al. (2017) for recent evidence summarizing price gaps across multiple
countries. This phenomenon is particularly severe in rural areas of developing countries due to the spatially fragmented
nature of markets.
   5
     Specifically,   we provided them with the Purdue Improved Crop Storage (PICS) bags:
https://ag.purdue.edu/ipia/pics/Pages/home.aspx. These bags have been found so effective at arresting post-harvest
losses that a USAID initiative in Kenya has projected that if a million farmers in Kenya adopt them by 2019, domestic




                                                           2
from the ground (and less susceptible to pests and water damage). In order to enable record-
keeping of maize deposits and withdrawals, we supplied a ledger book to log transactions, to be
maintained by the ROSCA treasurer. We also provided encouragement that the stored maize be
used for later sale, and the proceeds from the sale be used for reinvestment in the farm via input
purchases. We hypothesized that moving the maize out of farmers’ homes would make it less prone
to being claimed by others or falling prey to temptation. Moreover, separating this portion of their
maize-holding from the rest of the stock, and mentally allocating it to the purpose of “later sale for
buying inputs” (i.e., labeling) might increase savings.6 The GSRA intervention is thus an amalgam
of the physical technology (bags and stand) aimed at minimizing spoilage, the mental accounting
aspect from labeling, and the social or interpersonal channel due to the ROSCA storing grain as
a collective.7 The ultimate goal of this combined technology is to increase the amount of maize
stored for later use and to increase cash income from maize sales at a time when maize prices have
risen.
    Second, we designed a cash savings product which was meant to take advantage of mental
accounting through allocating the saved money to a pre-specified purpose. We called this the
Individual Savings and Reinvestment Account (ISRA). This product was inspired by the health
savings accounts held at ROSCAs in Dupas and Robinson (2013a), but was configured towards
inputs. A recent paper by Carter, Laajaj, and Yang (2013) is also based on a similar idea of utilizing
mental accounting for saving up for inputs, but through individual mobile money accounts, and
therefore, does not harness the social commitment aspects of saving with the ROSCA. In each
ROSCA, we provided guidance to people to set up an account with the ROSCA in which they
could save cash towards a goal, and similar to the GSRA, we encouraged that the goal be farm
reinvestment, i.e., input purchases. The treasurer kept a ledger of all transactions.
    The final feature of the experimental design was the provision of coupons for discounts on
inputs at the local agricultural input retailer. In every ROSCA, enumerators distributed coupons
which could be redeemed at their local shop. The price of the coupon was randomized (from
10-90% discount), at the ROSCA level. The rationale for this intervention was to spur fertilizer
investment, and to be able to examine the effect of the savings interventions on input usage through
administrative data on redemption alone.8
    We have five main findings. First, take-up of both the GSRA and the ISRA was high: records
kept by the ROSCA treasurers suggest that 57 percent of respondents in the GSRA treatment and
supply of maize would increase by 450,000 tons (https://www.fintrac.com/sites/default/files/HST A3 11.16.pdf).
   6
     See Thaler (1999) on mental accounting, and Dupas and Robinson (2013a) for evidence on labeling savings in
Kenya.
   7
     While the idea of harnessing mental accounting and peer pressure through communal grain storage is novel,
storing grain communally has precedent. Historically, many communities have had such systems, largely to ensure
food security for everyone. In the 1970s, several NGOs sponsored the setting up of communal grain storage geared
towards weathering poor market conditions, especially in West Africa and the Sahel. More recently, the Millennium
Villages project also supported cereal banks with a similar objective (World Bank, 2011).
   8
     Participants were not told beforehand that they would receive coupons as part of this study. Further, coupons
were distributed much later in the season, so the coupon discount amounts were not known to participants at the
time when storage decisions were being made (see Web Appendix Figure A1 for the full timeline of events).




                                                        3
56 percent of respondents in the ISRA treatment made at least 1 deposit.9 Second, individuals in
the GSRA were 23 percentage points more more likely to store maize (which we defined as saving
maize for at least a month after harvest), compared to a base of 69 percent in the control group.
Third, GSRA farmers were 37 percentage points more likely to have sold maize in the market by
endline, compared to only 36% in the control group. Conditional on selling, treatment farmers sold
later: sales in the GSRA group were on average 1 month later than in the control group, and fetched
6 percent higher prices. Fourth, though respondents used the ISRA, we find no consistent effects
of the ISRA on downstream outcomes. Since the ISRA was not designed around maize storage, we
did not expect to find effects on storage or on sales. Surprisingly, however, we find an increase in
maize stored at home in our main specification. This result is surprising and not entirely robust
and so we do not wish to read too much into it, but we conjecture that it may be possible that the
savings intervention triggered respondents to think about savings more generally, and to choose to
save maize. However, we find no effect on other outcomes like sales, nor on our expected outcome of
input usage. This last result may be attributable to the fact that baseline input usage was already
surprisingly high (89% of control farmers used hybrid seeds and fertilizer, much higher than earlier
studies in this part of Kenya, i.e. Duflo et al. 2011).
       Fifth, using our coupon redemption information, we are able to plot a demand curve for agricul-
tural inputs. We find near-universal coupon redemption among those who received a 90% discount,
but redemption rate falls to 10% for those who receive a 10% discount. However, in this context
in which baseline input usage is high, much of this redemption was simply reshuffling of purchases
that would have happened anyway. We do not find differential rates of coupon redemption between
the treatment and control groups.
       Our paper makes several contributions. First, it is an addition to the literature which examines
the reasons due to which large intertemporal arbitrage gains are not exploited. So far, this literature
has mainly focused on financial constraints, namely credit constraints (Stephens and Barrett, 2011;
Bergquist et al., 2017), or liquidity constraints (Lee and Sawada, 2010; Sun et al., 2013; Dillon,
2016), or high alternative returns to capital (Nash and McCloskey 1984). An older literature has
looked at price risk as a potential explanation (Saha and Stroud, 1994; Barrett and Dorosh, 1996);
however, the current consensus among academics as well as policy-makers is that this is largely
implausible given how predictable and regular these price increases are. We further this literature
by showing that part of the explanation might be that farmers do not have access to the appropriate
storage technology for food grains.
       Second, by evaluating the effect of a novel savings scheme, but one that is focused around saving
harvest grain, we contribute to the voluminous savings literature, which has almost exclusively
focused on cash savings, especially among microentrepreneurs.10 The closest paper to ours is Basu
and Wong (2015), in which farmers were offered free weather-sealed storage drums and storage
   9
     The take-up of the GSRA at the ROSCA-level was nearly universal – 96 percent of treatment ROSCAs agreed
to participate in the study and paid the subsidized price for the wooden stand.
  10
     Our design has similarities to studies such as Brune et al. (2016) and Duflo et al. (2011), though our focus is on
realizing seasonal gains in prices rather than in setting aside income for future input use.




                                                          4
sacks or lean-season consumption loans to be repaid after harvest, and which finds that the storage
interventions increased an index of consumption and income, in both the harvest and lean seasons.
Our paper is complementary in several ways. First, we provide another data point in favor of
storage as an effective intervention and validate their findings in a different setting. Second, our
data allows us to look at mechanisms through which storage is effective. We find that it is not only
the technological improvement of reduced harvest losses which was effective, but also the mental
accounting of setting aside maize. In particular, while a majority (53%) said that the GSRA was
effective because it reduced spoilage, large minorities also said it helped them consume less (38%)
or give away less to others (24%).11 Lastly, we show that income gains were also not solely from
reducing spoilage, but occurred because farmers were more likely to sell maize, and sold maize
later in the season at higher prices. Another related paper is Bergquist et al. (2017) which worked
with an NGO to offer loans to farmers in the post-harvest period and observed that farmers sold
less maize immediately after harvest and more in the lean season. Since that study did not change
storage technology, the interpretation is that conditional on the existing storage technology, farmers
sell some maize due to liquidity needs.12
    Third, we contribute to the literature on agricultural technology adoption by estimating an
experimental demand curve for agricultural inputs. There is a very large literature in development
that examines the various demand- and supply-side factors that may depress adoption of these
inputs. These include credit, liquidity, and insurance constraints (Karlan et al. 2014; Maitra et al.,
2017), social learning and experience (Conley and Udry, 2010; Emerick, 2017; Foster and Rosen-
zweig, 1996), and behavioral biases (Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson, 2011; Hanna, Mullainathan and
Schwartztein, 2014) on the demand side; and the role of quality uncertainty (Bold et al., 2017) and
infrastructural bottlenecks (Aggarwal, 2018; Aggarwal et al., 2018; Shamdasani, 2016; Suri, 2011)
on the supply side.13 However, simply documenting the sensitivity of demand to price is important,
especially for sub-Saharan Africa because many countries in the region have sizeable and expen-
sive input subsidy programs.14 Estimating the price sensitivity is also important because there
is significant spatial heterogeneity in input prices due to limited road infrastructure in developing
countries, particularly when accounting for travel costs (Aggarwal et al. 2018).
    Finally, our project is related to the nascent literature on ASCAs/VSLAs, which has tended to
show large positive effects from such groups (see Ksoll et al. 2015; Beaman et al. 2014; Greaney
  11
     Multiple responses were allowed. People also cited as reasons the ability to share costs and that they were able
to allocate money to agricultural inputs.
  12
     This paper also adds to a niche literature about how cooperatives help farmers improve their incomes. The
bulk of these papers are about agricultural marketing cooperatives (Fischer and Qaim, 2011; Wollini and Zeller,
2007; Bernard et al., 2008), but there is also some evidence suggesting that farmers’ cooperatives might be able to
improve access to financial services and inputs (Desai and Joshi, 2013). The results from this paper suggest that the
cooperative structure can be useful even in the absence of intermediation benefits that are central to marketing or
input acquisition efforts. In the case of storage, collective action not only provides commitment benefits as described
above, but can also help defray costs. Specifically, when asked about why the GSRA was helpful, 38 percent of the
respondents reported the sharing of costs as a reason.
  13
     See Foster and Rosenzweig (2010) and Jack (2013) for reviews.
  14
     In Malawi, for example, 170,000 tons of fertilizer, costing about 4% of the GDP, was distributed to smallholder
farmers in 2008-09 (Chibwana and Fisher, 2011).




                                                          5
et al. 2015; Karlan et al. 2017). The key distinction with financing agricultural inputs is that all
participants are on the same agricultural cycle, making within-group lending for agricultural loans
difficult. Communal storage can help facilitate intertemporal transfer of resources from harvest to
later in the agricultural cycle.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the basic experimental design and
data. We present our results in Section 3, and briefly discuss the cost and benefit implications of
the GSRA intervention. Section 4 concludes with a discussion.


2     Experimental Design and Data
2.1    Background on seasonal price changes
This project took place in Busia District of Western Kenya. The staple crop in this area is maize and
there are two main growing seasons: a longer, more productive “long rains” season with a harvest
occurring around August; and a shorter season which harvests around December or January. Prices
typically reach a peak around June, just before the long rains harvest, and fall to a low during the
harvest period, increasing steadily thereafter.
    Many previous papers have documented large seasonal price variations for grains in rural Africa.
Price increases as high as 100 percent have been observed in some countries like Madagascar (Moser
et al., 2009), Malawi (Dillon 2016), Southern Tanzania (van Campenhout et al., 2015), and Zambia
(Ricker-Gilbert et al., 2013). These cases are likely in the right tail of the seasonality distribu-
tion, however (for example, because road networks are very poor in these countries, limiting trade
between rural locations with differing harvest schedules).15 Price fluctuations in countries with
somewhat better road networks are more modest, though still meaningful. For example, Bergquist
et al. (2016) document an average price increase of 25-50% in 5 countries in East Africa using data
from RATIN; similarly, Gilbert et al. (2017) document an average price increase of 33 percent for
maize in 7 African countries.
    We have two sources of data to document price increases: (1) reported prices from maize sales
made by our respondents during the study period; and (2) responses to questions about month-by-
month prices from retailers located in the study area. Both sources show increases of about 30-40%
(see Figure 1). Though we lack historical price data in Busia, we look at prices in the nearby city
of Kisumu using several public data sources in Table 1. We find an average price increase of 46%
in the 2006-16 period (33% if 2011, a major famine year, is removed).16
   15
      According to the CIA World Factbook, the density of roads in Madagascar, Malawi, Tanzania, and Zambia is
respectively 0.06, 0.13, 0.09, and 0.05 kilometers per square kilometer of land area. Kenya, by contrast, has 0.28
kilometers of roads per square kilometer area. As benchmark, the United States has 0.67 kilometers of roads per
square kilometer area.
   16
      A final point worth making regarding seasonality in this context is about price expectations. During our baseline
survey, people reported expecting much larger price changes (the average expected price change was 100 percent –
see Figure 1). Given the results in Table A1, we take this as suggestive that people overestimated increases in the
survey. Interestingly, Bergquist et al. (2017) also find that farmers expect a doubling of prices, compared to actual
prices increase of 20 to 30 percent.




                                                          6
2.2    Experimental Design
A. Sampling and Randomization

In July 2015, we conducted a door-to-door census of 552 individuals in 17 villages spread across
three counties in Western Kenya. The census asked people for a list of all ROSCAs in which they
participated and collected basic identifying information about each ROSCA, as well as contact
information for ROSCA officials. A total of 497 ROSCAs were identified in this way. After collecting
this list, we randomly sampled 274 ROSCAs for project inclusion. Enumerators called the treasurers
of selected ROSCAs to schedule an initial meeting (at one of the normally scheduled ROSCA
meetings).
    We randomized ROSCAs into 3 treatment groups: (1) the Group Savings and Reinvestment
Account (GSRA), (2) the Individual Savings and Reinvestment Account (ISRA), and (3) control.
Details of the experimental design are included in Web Appendix Figure A1.
    Of the 274 sampled ROSCAs, 163 were successfully reached.17 Since non-participation occurred
before treatment was announced, it should not be possible that treatment affected project partici-
pation. However, due to random chance, more GSRA ROSCAs were reachable by phone than the
other groups (of the 163 ROSCAs that were traced, 60 were GSRA, 52 were control, and 51 were
ISRA). An additional 24 attrited before the intervention, leaving 139 ROSCAs.18 Of these, 132
were traced for the endline.19 For the reason listed above, there are therefore more GSRA ROSCAs
(51) than ISRA (43) and control (38). Web Appendix Table A1, Column 1, shows compliance by
treatment status, finding no evidence of differential compliance.
    Web Appendix Table A2 shows some statistics on ROSCAs. The average ROSCA has existed
for about 6 years, has about 21 members, and the average round length is about 1 year. Nearly all
ROSCA members farm, and many ROSCAs provide financial services aside from the pot, including
credit (66%) and welfare insurance in case of emergencies (83%). ROSCAs also provide loans to
members, at high interest rates (the average rate is approximately 13% per month). We find little
difference across ROSCAs in these characteristics (Column 2) – one of nine variables is significant
at 10%.

B. GSRA Intervention

At the initial meeting, each ROSCA was read a script about the benefits of setting maize aside after
the harvest, of using farming inputs such as chemical fertilizer, and of saving. This basic script was
augmented for GSRA ROSCAs to also explain the group savings intervention. ROSCA members
  17
     Ten ROSCAs were identified as duplicates. The remaining 101 were not reachable by phone, either because the
treasurer did not pick up the phone when called (field staff called up to 4 times before stopping), or the phone number
was incorrect.
  18
     This attrition occurred before ROSCAs knew or enumerators knew their treatment status. The 24 ROSCAs who
were not enrolled did not participate because they were unable to schedule a meeting time or because they were not
interested in the project.
  19
     Of the 7 that could not be traced, 4 had disbanded by midline and were not further contacted. No members
could be traced in the other 3.




                                                          7
were encouraged to collectively set aside some portion of their harvest, and hold it to sell when
prices had risen. ROSCAs were each given four hermetically sealed storage bags (called Purdue
Improved Crop Storage, or PICS bags)           20   Hermetically sealed bags are likely a major technological
improvement for farmers: several studies have compared the PICS bags to other techniques such
as solarization, fumigation, metal drums, or storage with ash/mud (all of which are likely superior
to the technology our farmers use), and have found PICS bags to be more effective at preventing
and arresting infestation (for instance, see Williams et al., 2017).21 Moreover, PICS bags are also
less labor-intensive and more cost-effective. Specifically, the prevalent method of on-farm storage
in gunny sacks requires pre-storage application of insecticide, with follow-up reapplications every 3
months (Kimenju and DeGroote, 2010). PICS bags, on the other hand, work through cutting off
oxygen which causes insects to suffocate, obviating the need for artificial insecticides.
       In addition to the bags, ROSCAs were provided a heavily subsidized wooden stand to keep
the maize elevated from the ground (and less susceptible to pests and water damage). Finally,
ROSCAs were provided ledger books in which the treasurer could keep track of all deposits and
withdrawals of maize by individual members. After describing the program, ROSCAs were given a
month to think it over. Project staff emphasized that not all members of a participating ROSCA
were required to contribute maize for their ROSCA to qualify for the program.22
       The GSRA could encourage savings through three main channels. First, the GSRA may be a
technological improvement on the alternative of storing maize in burlap sacks at home. Second,
the fact that the GSRA maize is held outside the home (for all but the treasurer) will limit access
to the maize and may discourage withdrawals of maize for unplanned consumption or early sales.
Third, the group nature of the intervention may further encourage participation. The experiment
was not designed to test between these pathways, but rather was designed to maximize the chances
that the intervention might be effective.

C. ISRA Intervention

The individual savings intervention was inspired by the fact that in this part of Western Kenya,
average plot sizes are small and many people who farm also do other small businesses on the side to
earn cash. The savings intervention was an individual account labeled for agricultural input usage,
held at the ROSCA.23 ROSCA treasurers were provided a ledger to keep track of deposits, and
  20
     PICS bags are one of several types of hermetically sealed storage bag solutions that have been developed in recent
years for the specific purpose of storing grain. Other examples include the IRRI superbag, the AgroZ bag, and the
GrainPro SuperGrain bag.
  21
     Also see https://www.entm.purdue.edu/PICS2/Abstracts.pdffor a summary of other studies on the efficacy of
PICS bags.
  22
     Besides initiating a basic set-up with the bags, stand, and ledger books, we did not provide any guidance on
the governance of the GSRA, such as decisions on whether everyone contributes equally, finding consensus on the
amounts being deposited or withdrawn, distribution of spoilage risk across members, or the timing and price of
collective sales by the GSRA. During a phone check-in with GSRA treasurers in November 2015, however, we did
ask them about how they anticipated handling this last aspect, and 89% expected that decisions about sales would
be made communally by those holding deposits.
  23
     The accounts were inspired by the health savings accounts in Dupas and Robinson (2013), but for inputs instead
of health emergencies.




                                                          8
ROSCAs were encouraged to use savings for inputs (though this was not explicitly enforced). The
accounts allowed deposits only of cash, not maize, and so provided no direct mechanism to allow
arbitrage of harvested maize.

D. Coupon Intervention

The first main growing season after our intervention was the 2016 long rains. ROSCAs were
randomly sampled to receive a discount on inputs at a local agricultural retailer on any input
(including fertilizer, seeds, herbicide, and pesticide). The value of the coupon randomly varied
from 10-90% off of the cost of inputs.24 The logic of this intervention was that farmers who saved
money in the individual savings treatment or stored grain in the GSRA might be more likely to
redeem the coupons. In retrospect we realize the intervention was not well-timed because prices do
not much increase between the long rains harvest (August) and the time inputs are needed for the
next season (redemption was in February-March) – this is because the smaller short rains occur in
December or January, and thus prices only really rise starting in February. In addition, baseline
input usage was much higher than we expected, limiting the possible effect of the coupons.

2.3    Data
We utilize four main data sources for this analysis (see Web Appendix Figure A2 for the timeline
of activities). First, we conducted a baseline survey with all ROSCAs in August-September 2015.
During the same time period, we also conducted a baseline survey with a randomly selected subset
of respondents at each ROSCA meeting. We targeted 6 members per ROSCA. In addition to
basic demographic questions, the survey included questions on harvest amounts, storage, and input
usage. Second, we conducted an in-person midline survey in January and February 2016, in which
we collected data on storage as well as on take-up of the GSRA. For this survey, we attempted to
enroll 3 respondents per ROSCA. We initially attempted to enroll baseline respondents; if there
were not 3 baseline respondents present at the meeting, a respondent would be replaced by another
randomly selected ROSCA member who was present at that meeting. We enrolled a total of 529
respondents in this survey. Third, we conducted an endline survey over the phone from July-
November 2016. We attempted to interview those respondents who had previously completed
interviews and successfully interviewed 583 respondents. We use the endline as our primary measure
of outcomes, since it is more comprehensive and had more refined modules to measure key outcomes
of interest. Fourth, we asked all GSRA ROSCAs to keep logs of deposits, withdrawals, and reason
for withdrawal. We visited ROSCAs at midline and endline to inspect these records. We successfully
collected logbooks with every GSRA ROSCA at midline, and with 47 out of 52 at endline. Of the
5 remaining ROSCAs, 4 were untraceable because the treasurer was out of town at endline and 1
ROSCA never kept records. In addition to doing endline surveys with individual farmers, we also
  24
    The 3 main inputs that people purchased were DAP and CAN fertilizer, and hybrid seeds. The average prices of
these inputs was about $37 for a 50 kg bag of DAP, $27 for a 50 kg bag of CAN, and $4.50 for a 2 kg bag of seeds.




                                                       9
did ROSCA-level endlines with the treasurer of each ROSCA. We were able to do endlines with
93% of the ROSCAs that were in the baseline sample.25
       Attrition for the midline and endline is shown in Appendix Tables A1 (at the ROSCA level)
and A3 (at the individual level). We find no evidence of differential attrition between the GSRA
and control groups.

2.4      Summary Statistics and Balance Check
Table 2 presents summary statistics on our (post-attrition) sample, as well as a test for randomiza-
tion balance. From Panel A, the average farmer is 39 years old, has close to 7 years of education,
owns about $340 in durable good and animal assets, and owns 1.8 acres of land. Ninety percent
of farmers live in homes with mud walls. Twenty-three percent of farmers have a bank account,
though 67% have a mobile money account.
       Panel B shows that farm productivity is very low: the average farmer reported a yield of just
480 kg, which is worth only about $135 at immediate post-harvest prices in 2015 ($180 if held until
the peak price reached in 2015). Surprisingly, input usage (Panel C) is fairly high: 81% of farmers
used fertilizer in the past year, and 75% used hybrid seeds.26 Farmers use 52 kg of fertilizer per
acre, close to recommended amounts.
       Finally, Panel D presents some figures on maize storage. Virtually all households (89%) store
some maize for some period of time (since the alternative is to sell the entire output immediately
after harvest). However, as we show later, many farmers sell or consume much of this maize within
a fairly short period of time. Nearly all households who store maize do so on a raised platform
or table in the house, typically in a burlap sack. Storing in this way may be subject to pest and
rodent infestation, which is borne out in reported losses: farmers report that at least some maize
was lost in 30% of seasons and that these losses were substantial (1/3 of storage in those years).
Another issue is that people may be tempted to consume the maize faster than if it were out of
sight: a non-negligible minority of households (26%) report that they consume “too much” maize
when it is stored in the home. We find that most households are net buyers of maize: only 34%
sell maize, while 78% buy.
       We check for randomization in Column 4, which shows the p-value from an F-test of equality
of the coefficients from regressions of each of these variables on indicators for GSRA, ISRA, and
control, as well as the log price after discount, with standard errors clustered by ROSCA. We
find five significant differences out of 22 in this table: an indicator for having a bank account,
an indicator for having a mobile phone, a measure of spoilage in the past 5 years, and whether a
farmer bought or sold maize in the last planting season. Though these are unfortunate outcomes
on which to have pre-existing differences, we attempt to address this by controlling for each of
these variables in our main specifications. Further, we do not think it is likely that these drive our
  25
    We also did a brief take-up survey with GSRA treasurers in November 2015.
  26
    This is much higher than previously reported in this part of Kenya, for example in Duflo, Kremer and Robinson
(2011), suggesting that input usage has increased in Kenya over time.




                                                       10
treatment effects on sales, since the effect on sales is 3 times this baseline difference. Nevertheless,
these baseline differences should be kept in mind.

2.5    Estimation Strategy
To estimate treatment effects, we rely primarily on the endline survey (we use the midline as
supportive evidence). For each outcome for individual i in ROSCA r, we run the following Intent
to Treat regression
                                    Yir = α0 + β1 Gr + β2 Ir + θXir + ir                                     (1)

    where Gr is a dummy for receiving the GSRA treatment and Ir is a dummy for receiving the
ISRA treatment. Xir includes the following controls: the four variables that are significantly differ-
ent in Table 2, a control for harvest output in August 2015, which is exogenous to treatment since
ROSCAs were visited either just before or slightly after harvest (and so there was no opportunity
to change investment decisions), and the log of the percentage price payable of inputs, net of the
coupon. The harvest output has been included as a control to improve precision since it is the
primary determinant of storage behavior. However, this control does not materially change results
(see Panel A in Appendix Table A4). We cluster standard errors at the ROSCA level.


3     Results
3.1    Take up
Table 3 shows statistics on take-up of GSRA and ISRA, using data from the ROSCA logs and
the endline. According to the logs, 57% of ROSCA members contributed to the GSRA and 56%
contributed to the ISRA. This percentage is higher (70% for GSRA and 76% for ISRA) among
respondents who completed the endline survey. We conjecture that the main reason for this is that
the respondents who were present at ROSCA meetings were likely to be the more active members
of the ROSCA, and were therefore somewhat more likely to use the product than the average
respondent. This should not affect the internal validity of our results, however, since the same
types of respondents should have been present in treatment and control ROSCAs.27 Of those who
used the savings products, many used it quite a bit – see Figure 2, Panel A for a CDF of total
deposits into the GSRA, and Panel B for the ISRA counterpart. Among GSRA users, the average
amount deposited was 44 kg on the logbooks (38 kg among endline respondents), equivalent to
roughly 8-9% of average harvest output (480 kg – see Table 2). While this is a small amount in
absolute terms (worth about $14-$17 at immediate post-harvest prices), it is a sizeable percentage
of harvest income (since harvested output is very low). As a percentage, this effect size compares
favorably to other papers in the savings literature, most of which are about cash savings. For
example, recent studies have found treatment effects for deposits of 11% of income (Dupas and
  27
     In order to allay doubts about overreporting however, we run the storage regressions using the administrative
information on ROSCA storage. These results are presented in Panel B of Appendix Table A4.




                                                       11
Robinson 2013b in Kenya), 6% (Prina 2015 in Nepal), 12% (Dupas, Keats and Robinson 2017 in
Kenya), 8% (Dupas et al. 2017 in Malawi) and 18% (Dupas et al. 2017 in Uganda). For the ISRA,
the average amount deposited was about $5.50, which is equivalent to about 12% of baseline input
purchases in the control group.28

3.2    Storage
Table 4 shows results on storage of harvested maize. To measure storage, we asked respondents
the following question: “How much maize did you store which you intended to sale or consume
more than a month after harvest?” Though the specific cutoff of one month is arbitrary, this
question is meant to measure longer-term maize storage, rather than storage of just a few days or
weeks. We code an indicator for storage in Column 1, and observe a large, statistically significant
treatment effect: while only 69% of control farmers reported yes to this question, this increased by
23 percentage points in the GSRA group.
    Columns 2-4 show quantities. Column 2 shows all storage outside the home, pooling GSRA
with any other storage outside the home. While individuals in control group ROSCAs did not store
any maize outside the home, individuals in GSRA ROSCAs stored an average of 51 kg. Column 3
shows home storage, which was lower in the treatment group (by 21 kg), suggesting that some of
the GSRA maize was shifted from home storage. Even in itself, this type of crowd out might be a
desirable outcome due to the inefficient nature of home storage. Column 4 sums Columns 2 and 3
into total storage, showing a 30 kg increase in the GSRA group (though statistically insignificant).
The point estimate is sizeable compared to the control base of only 160 kg, equivalent to 19%.                    29

    Surprisingly, we also find an effect of the ISRA on home storage, which was not the intent of
that treatment. This may be noise or, perhaps, it may be the case that getting people to think
about saving stimulated an interest in saving up intertemporally even though this was not the
intent of the treatment. This is only conjecture however so we do not make too much of this result.

3.3    Sales
Table 5 shows effects on maize sales and farm cash income (note that these measures were only
collected at endline). Column 1 shows that GSRA farmers were 37 percentage points more likely
to sell maize in the year after the harvest. This is over a doubling in sales, compared to the control
group mean of 36%. Though effects on quantities and revenues (Columns 2-3) are not significant,
  28
     Web Appendix Table A5 shows regressions of take-up of the GSRA on baseline characteristics, showing some
weak evidence that more affluent individuals may have been more likely to use the GSRA. However, few covariates
are significant, likely due to the limited sample size.
  29
     Web Appendix Table A4 shows 4 robustness checks: removing the harvest control (Panel A), using administrative
data for GSRA storage (Panel B), and either not winsorizing at all (Panel C) or at 1% (Panel D). Results are robust
across all specifications and total storage is actually stronger (and statistically significant) in the untrimmed, the
1% winsorized, as well as the administrative data specifications. Appendix Table A6 shows estimates using only the
midline data, finding broadly similar effects. Note, however, that the indicator for storage was defined differently
than in the endline – in the midline, we asked about storing maize for any length of time, including maize that was
sold or consumed within a month. For this reason, the mean of this measure is much higher and the treatment effect
attenuated.




                                                         12
point estimates show increases in sales of about 20-25% on the control group. We examine the
timing of the sales in Columns 4 and 5, and find that GSRA farmers are no more or less likely than
control to sell within a month of harvest (i.e. in August or September, 2015), but 40 percentage
points more likely to sell later in the season. As Figure 1 shows, prices are already 10% higher than
the immediate post-harvest trough by this time. Of people who sold, Columns 6-7 show that GSRA
farmers sold later (by about a month, on average, significant at 5%) and received higher prices for
output (about 6% on average, significant at 5%). In line with our initial expectations, we do not find
any treatment effects of the ISRA on sales. While consistent with the pre-intervention hypothesis,
this is slightly surprising given the large storage effects of the ISRA. It is possible that the GSRA
farmers benefited from collective bargaining and intermediation, features that were absent in the
ISRA. This is only speculation, however. Finally, we also see a negative effect of the log price on
selling. Speculatively, it is possible that those who had to pay more for coupons were compelled to
sell sooner in order to finance the remainder of the input purchase amount, while those who had to
pay less could hold to their maize for late season consumption.
   Figure 3 shows the timing effect for the GSRA graphically, but conditional on making a sale. We
calculate average maize sales per month by treatment group, and find that GSRA sales are shifted
back in time – conditional on selling, GSRA respondents are less likely to sell maize immediately,
and more likely to hold onto maize until prices rise before the following year’s harvest.

3.4   Effects on input adoption and other outcomes
Ex ante, one of our main outcomes was intended to be redemption of the experimental coupons.
However, in retrospect, the intervention was not particularly appropriate to the context. First,
input usage is quite high in this part of Kenya by this time – 90% of control group farmers were
using fertilizer and 88% were using seeds, much higher than the 30-40% found in earlier work
(i.e. Duflo et al. 2011). Second, as can be seen in Figure 1, prices reach a peak during the hungry
season just before the long rains harvest, around June, about 10 months after the long rains harvest.
However, planting is in March, by which point prices have not yet risen (due in part to the short
rains harvest which occurs near the end of the year). Thus, the GSRA intervention was not well
suited for the coupons.
   Nevertheless, we show the experimental demand curve in Figure 4 for each treatment group.
The GSRA lies above the control for most price points, but differences in redemption are small
and jump around. We find near-universal redemption at heavily subsidized prices but virtually no
redemption at prices near retail – which is consistent with high baseline input usage, in which many
of these purchases are crowding out purchases that would have been made anyway. We show the
effect of the treatments on redemption using a regression in Table 6, Columns 1-2, but coefficients
are not significant. We examine total input usage in Columns 3-5, finding no effect of either the
GSRA or ISRA. Finally, we examine food security in Columns 6-7. We find high baseline levels
of insecurity: 45% of control respondents ran out of maize and could not afford more, and 45%
reduced food intake to buy inputs, but the treatments had no effect on these outcomes.



                                                  13
3.5      Pathways
In designing the project, we anticipated at least three main reasons why the GSRA might be
effective: (1) a reduction in losses due to pests or spoilage; (2) reducing demands on income from
others; and (3) discouraging consumption of maize kept at home. In the endline, we included a
number of questions to explore these possibilities, which we tabulate in Table 7. Starting with
Panel A, we see descriptive evidence in favor of intra- and inter-household demands on income: 66
percent of respondents agree with the statement “If I have maize at home, my household is tempted
to eat more than we need” while 50 percent agree with the statement “If a friend or relative comes
to me to ask for maize, and if I have maize at home, I am obligated to give him/her some.”                    30 We

find limited evidence in favor of spoilage: in the season of the program, only 6 percent of maize
stored at home was spoiled (conditional on spoilage, farmers lost 21 percent of their total maize).
This is somewhat smaller than spoilage reported in Table 1, perhaps due to lower spoilage in the
year of study than in previous years.
       Panel B tabulates responses to a number of open-ended questions about the GSRA. Ninety-
four percent of respondents reported that the GSRA was helpful (this number actually exceeds
the number that took it up in the first place, perhaps because people expected to use it in future
years).31 Those reporting yes were asked for reasons why they liked the GSRA: 53 percent reported
lower spoilage, 39 percent reported that they used the GSRA to allocate money towards inputs, 38
percent reported the benefit of defraying costs of storage across members, 38 percent reported that
they reduced consumption, and 24 percent reported giving away less maize to others. Forty percent
agreed with the statement “The GSRA program prevented my household from eating more maize
than needed” while 62 percent reported that they gave away less maize as a result of the GSRA.
Of those who reported giving away less, 38 percent reported that they got fewer requests because
less maize was in the house while 55 percent reported that it was easier to say no.
       Finally, Panel C shows perceptions of the ISRA. The vast majority of respondents thought the
ISRA were helpful and said that they would use it in the future. Even though the ISRA had no
effect on outcomes, this result is suggestive that the accounts might have had a small positive effect
on people’s ability to save (for example, it might have been a place to save up a small percentage of
the money needed for inputs). In Table 6 for example, we found a negative point estimate for the
  30
      We also find some differences between GSRA and control respondents in some of these questions. GSRA respon-
dents are more likely to say that they are tempted to eat more maize when it’s around the house. We do not have a
good explanation for this, other than that perhaps having the GSRA made these respondents more cognizant of the
problem of holding maize at home. We also find that GSRA respondents are less likely to report that others are less
likely to help them if they refuse requests. This response could be due to the treatment – since the maize is out of
the home, people are less obligated to give. Finally, GSRA respondents are more likely to say that they consumed
maize stocks before they had planned. Again, we do not have a great explanation for this, but we conjecture that
they may have been overly optimistic about having less maize around the house.
   31
      It is also possible that at least some of the ROSCAs ran into a capacity constraint. Ledger records kept by
ROSCAs suggest that about half the ROSCAs stored more then 360 kilograms of maize, which was the capacity
of the bags we provided (Appendix Figure A3). It is possible therefore, that some people were rationed out of the
GSRA. In the individual endline, 55 people (i.e., 25% of the endline GSRA sample) said that they saved less than
what they desired, of which, 6 people said that they did so because the ROSCA decided that everyone would save
the same amount.




                                                        14
ISRA on needing to reduce food intake to fund inputs – perhaps with a larger sample, this effect
might have been significant.

3.6      Cost-Benefit Calculation
Our results strongly suggest that the GSRA is cost-effective, since the intervention targeted a
number of respondents at once and the costs on a per-person basis were fairly modest. In this
subsection, we perform a back of the envelope calculation to show this somewhat more formally.
However, we should note that the data collection was not set up to measure all the possible benefits
of the GSRA. In particular, the GSRA may have had effects on the seasonality of consumption, as
well as on purchases of maize during the season, and we are not able to pick this up with the surveys
we have (indeed, the GSRA could be cost-effective even if no sales were made).32 In addition, the
small sample in this study does not give much precision on key outcomes such as the revenue gain.
       These (major) caveats in mind, we estimate that revenues in the GSRA group increased by
about $5 on a base of $34, i.e. 15% (see Table 5), but this is not statistically significant. For a
ROSCA of 21 members, the revenue gain is therefore about $105.
       The costs of the intervention are fairly straightforward. Each ROSCA received 4 PICS bags
(costing $2.50 each) and one stand (costing about $25).33 There are some additional costs to storing
extra maize. Farmers may have to transport the maize from the treasurer’s home to the nearest
market center to sell the maize. While we do not have good data on this cost in Kenya, companion
work in Tanzania (Aggarwal et al. 2017) finds that the cost of transporting a bag of maize one-way
to the nearest market is about $2 (for a distance of about 5.7 kilometers) in Northern Tanzania,
whereas a bag is worth about $27.00, so that the ad valorem cost is roughly 7.5%.34 This would
reduce the value of the revenue gain to about $98. In addition, maize would have to be transported
from the farmer’s home to the treasurer’s home. However, this is unlikely to be a major cost
since the ROSCAs operate within villages. Other costs of storing maize, like the labor time for
periodically re-drying the maize, or the money and time costs of buying and applying pesticides,
are close to zero since the PICS bags cut off oxygen entirely such that fungus and insects cannot
survive.35
       Ultimately, then, we estimate roughly $98 per ROSCA in gains against $35 in costs, for a ratio
of approximately 2.8/1. We believe this is a lower bound, however, for several reasons. First, it was
a new technology and farmers might have held off in the first year. Second, we only provided 4 bags
  32
     We did ask about month-by-month consumption in the surveys, but people had difficulty recalling consumption
months in the past and for this reason consumption showed no seasonality.
  33
     Note that ROSCAs paid $1 in cost-sharing.
  34
     Please note that this is likely an upper bound on the transportation cost as the markets are located closer-by
and the roads are likely better in the Kenyan context relative to Tanzania. For instance, using data from 2004, Suri
(2011) reports a mean distance of 3.5 kilometers to the fertilizer seller, which is a reasonable proxy for the distance to
market. According to the CIA World Factbook, the density of roads in Kenya is 0.28 kilometers per square kilometer
of land area, while it is 0.9 kilometers per square kilometer of land area in Tanzania.
  35
     While outside the scope of this cost-benefit analysis, please note that storage without chemicals can enable farmers
to access higher market prices due to the premium on pesticide-free food.




                                                           15
but people may have chosen to store more in future years.36 Third, it is likely possible to lower
the cost of the stand and the bags if purchased in bulk, at scale. Moreover, once procured, a stand
and the bags can be reused several times (according to scientists at Purdue University, a PICS bag
lasts for 3 seasons), making the intervention nearly costless during the subsequent seasons.
         Having said all this, please note that our calculations above do not take into account non-
pecuniary costs that may deter GSRA storage. For instance, there may be some discomfort involved
in storing grain at someone else’s house, especially if it impacts the power dynamic between the
parties involved. GSRA may also disrupt the informal insurance networks in rural communities
by concentrating the risk of spoilage or theft during storage faced by the members of the ROSCA.
Finally, there may be physical or psychological costs involved for the person responsible for storing
everyone’s grain.


4         Discussion and Conclusion
This paper shows that a group-based savings scheme can increase storage among smallholder farmers
– providing savings clubs with a simple way to set aside maize increased the likelihood that a
farmer stored maize by 23 percentage points and approximately doubled the probability of selling
maize. This increase in storage could potentially have a substantial effect on cash income from
the farm: we find an increase in revenue of about 15% (though not statistically significant).37 We
find encouraging evidence that ROSCAs continued the GSRA even after the evaluation: in ongoing
follow-up work conducted in early 2018, we find that 90% of ROSCAs that could be traced are still
implementing the GSRA, 2.5 years after the original intervention.
         This paper is differentiated from much of the literature because it focuses on storage of grain
rather than cash. The seasonality inherent in agricultural prices almost mechanically makes grain
storage not just an act of saving, but also one of investment, with nearly guaranteed nominal returns
(and real returns as well, so long as spoilage is limited). On the other hand, the real return to
savings in the types of banks available in rural Africa often have negative real rates of return due
to high fees and high inflation. This suggests that interventions to help farmers store maize could
potentially have larger welfare effects on outcomes like real income than would encouraging savings
in the banking options that are currently available.
         An important caveat is that our experiment was not designed to test for pathways. The GSRA
could have worked through the safe-keeping afforded by the bags, the impact of labeling that comes
about due to segregating the grain for storage with the ROSCA, or the peer-effects generated by
the communal storage. However, we do not think this diminishes the importance of our findings, as
there may be benefits from combining the treatments. Specifically, no amount of mental accounting
or social commitment will spur storage if farmers view it as fundamentally risky due to the potential
    36
     Indeed, more than half the GSRA ROSCAs added more bags to the GSRA in the first year itself (Web Appendix
Figure A3).
  37
     It is possible that increases in storage were also accompanied by a decrease in purchases, and therefore, had an
even larger effect on welfare than shown here, but our data are not equipped to measure this.




                                                         16
for spoilage. Similarly, merely providing insulated bags that continue to locate grain in plain sight
is unlikely to arrest intra and interpersonal issues.38 Indeed, Basu and Wong (2015) who studied
a similar question in Indonesia by providing storage supplies and lean season in-kind loans as two
separate interventions, found that while storage in the absence of credit had a small positive effect
on lean season consumption, credit in the absence of reliable storage had no effect. This point is
of great importance even outside of the immediate context: the poor often operates under multiple
binding constraints (for instance, a farmer’s storage choices are guided by financial limitations as
well as the lack of physical storage technology). Good policy will need to remove these constraints
simultaneously in order to be effective.39
       Multilateral agencies and NGOs like Feed the Future, One Acre Fund, and USAID are currently
working to commercialize PICS bags by building local capacity.40 There is ample entomological
evidence to suggest that these bags could be helpful, for poor smallholder farmers whose current
storage technology is inefficient. The basic social structure of the ROSCA, on which we layered
the storage intervention, is widely prevalent in this part of the world, and comes about organically
without outside intervention – suggesting that the GSRA could be easily scaleable. Even now,
PICS bags are commercially available in moderate-sized Kenyan towns (like Busia), and usage of
PICS bags has been expanding in recent years: the distribution and sale of PICS bags under the
USAID’s KAVES program went from 69,209 in 2014 to 215,248 in 2015 to over 300,000 by January
2016 (equivalent to more than 27,000 metric tonnes of maize in storage capacity).41 Our results
suggest that the effect of programs like USAID’s might be larger if policy makers also encourage
farmers to use their bags for setting aside a portion of their maize for communal storage in order
to take advantage of seasonal fluctuations in maize prices.
       An open question for future research concerns the general equilibrium effects of such an in-
tervention. Bergquist et al. (2017) find a general equilibrium effect on prices from their credit
intervention – inducing people to hold maize will affect prices even for those who sell earlier. Anal-
ogously, returns will also be impacted for those who currently do benefit from seasonal arbitrage,
notably large farmers and traders. Such general equilibrium effects will lessen incentives to hold
maize in the first place. As the return to storage declines, people may find it less profitable to
store maize then to invest elsewhere at potentially high returns (i.e. de Mel et al. 2008). Our
paper suggests that at current prices, many farmers evidently find storage more profitable than
the next-best alternative, but such storage would become less attractive as more people do it and
seasonal price fluctuations diminish.

  38
     Our results on pathways show that the treatment effects are not explained by safe-keeping alone as people also
report consuming and giving away less.
  39
     We should caveat all of this however, by saying that there is likely an upper bound on the benefits from such
an intervention relative to an individual storage one if for instance, farmers feel uncomfortable about storing their
grain in somebody else’s house or if there are space constraints at the treasurer’s house. There may also be power
dynamics at play. It is also worth considering that storing collectively in this manner concentrates the risk faced by
the ROSCA members.
  40
     Efforts are already underway in Burundi, DRC, and Kenya by USAID, in Tanzania and Sierra Leone by CRS,
and in Ethiopia and Rwanda by the One Acre Fund.
  41
     See https://picsnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Newsletter 2016 4-22-16.pdf.



                                                         17
References
 [1] Abay, Kibrewossen, and Kalle Hirvonen (2016). “Does market access mitigate the impact of
        seasonality on child growth?: Panel data evidence from northern Ethiopia.” IFPRI working
        paper.
 [2] Aggarwal, Shilpa (2018). “Do Rural Roads Create Pathways out of Poverty? Evidence from
        India.” Forthcoming, Journal of Development Economics.
 [3] Aggarwal, Shilpa, Brian Giera, Dahyeon Jeong, Jonathan Robinson, and Alan Spearot (2018).
       “Market Access, Trade Costs, and Technology Adoption: Evidence from Northern Tanza-
        nia.” Working Paper.
 [4] Baland Jean-Marie, Catherine Guirkinger, and Charlotte Mali, ”Pretending to Be Poor: Bor-
        rowing to Escape Forced Solidarity in Cameroon,” Economic Development and Cultural
        Change 60 (1): 1-16
 [5] Barrett, Christopher and Paul Dorosh (1996). “Farmers’ Welfare and Changing Food Prices:
        Nonparametric Evidence from Rice in Madagascar.” American Journal of Agricultural Eco-
        nomics 78 (3): 656-669.
 [6] Basu, Karna and Maisy Wong (2015). “Evaluating Seasonal Food Storage and Credit Programs
        in East Indonesia. ” Journal of Development Economics 115: 200-216.
 [7] Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan and Bram Thuysbaert (2014). “Saving for a (not so) Rainy Day:
        A Randomized Evaluation of Savings Groups in Mali.” Unpublished.
 [8] Bergquist, Lauren, Marshall Burke and Edward Miguel (2017). “Selling Low and Buying High:
        An Arbitrage Puzzle in Kenyan Villages.” Unpublished.
 [9] Bernard, Tanguy, Marie-Hélène Collion, Alain de Janvry, Pierre Rondot, and Elisabeth
        Sadoulet (2008). “Do Village Organizations make a Difference in African Rural Devel-
        opment? A study for Senegal and Burkina Faso.” World Development 36 (11): 2188-2204
[10] Bold, Tessa, Kayuki C. Kaizzi, Jakob Svensson, David Yanagizawa-Drott (2017). “Lemon
        Technologies and Adoption: Measurement, Theory and Evidence from Agricultural Markets
        in Uganda.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3): 1055–1100.
[11] Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, and Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang (2014). “Facilitating Savings
        for Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.” Economic Development and
        Cultural Change 64 (2): 187-220.
[12] Carter, Michael, Rachid Laajaj, and Dean Yang (2013). “The Impact of Voucher Coupons
        on the Uptake of Fertilizer and Improved Seeds: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in
        Mozambique.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 95 (5): 1345–1351.
[13] Chibwana, Christopher and Monica Fisher (2011). “The Impacts of Agricultural Input Subsi-
        dies in Malawi.” MASSP Policy Note No. 5, IFPRI, Washington, D.C.




                                                18
[14] Christian, Paul and Brian Dillon (2017). “Growing and Learning when Consumption is Sea-
        sonal: Long-term Evidence from Tanzania.” Working Paper
[15] Collier, Paul and Ashish Garg (1999). “On Kin Groups and Wages in the Ghanaian Labour
        Market.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 61 (2): 133-151.
[16] Conley, Timothy and Christopher Udry (2010). “Learning about a new technology: Pineapple
        in Ghana.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 35-69.
[17] de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2008). “Returns to Capital in
        Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
        123 (4): 1329- 1372.
[18] Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, and Peter Van Oudheusden (2015). “The
        Global Findex Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World.” World
        Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7255.
[19] Desai Raj and Shareen Joshi (2014). “Can Producer Associations Improve Rural Livelihoods?
        Evidence from Farmer Centres in India.” Journal of Development Studies 50 (1): 64-80.
[20] Dillon, Brian (2016). “Selling crops early to pay for school: A large-scale natural experiment
        in Malawi.” Unpublished.
[21] Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson (2011). “Nudging Farmers to Use
        Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review
        101 (6): 2350-2390.
[22] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013a). “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence
        from Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review 103 (4): 1138-1171
[23] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013b). “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise
        Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics 5 (1): 163-192.
[24] Dupas, Pascaline, Anthony Keats and Jonathan Robinson (2017). “The Effect of Savings Ac-
        counts on Interpersonal Financial Relationships: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
        Rural Kenya.” Forthcoming, Economic Journal.
[25] Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson and Diego Ubfal (2017). “Banking the
        Unbanked? Evidence from three countries.” Forthcoming, American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics.
[26] Emerick, Kyle (2017). “Trading Frictions in Indian Village-Economies.” Forthcoming, Journal
        of Development Economics.
[27] Fischer, Elisabeth and Matin Qaim (2012). “Linking Smallholders to Markets: Determinants
        and Impacts of Farmer Collective Action in Kenya.” World Development 40 (6): 1255-1268.
[28] Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig (1995). “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
        Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture.” The Journal of Political Economy



                                                19
        103(6): 1176-1209
[29] Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig (2010). “Microeconomics of Technology Adoption.” An-
        nual Review of Economics 2: 395-424.
[30] Gilbert, Christopher L., Luc Christiaensen, Jonathan Kaminski (2017). “Food price seasonality
        in Africa: Measurement and extent.” Food Policy 67: 119-132.
[31] Greaney, Brian, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Eva Van Leemput (2016). “Can Self-Help Groups
        Really Be ”Self-Help?” Review of Economic Studies 83 (4): 1614-1644.
[32] Hanna, Rema, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein (2014). “Learning through
        Noticing: Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
        129: 1311–1353
[33] Jack, B. Kelsey (2013). “Market Inefficiencies and the Adoption of Agricultural Technologies in
        Developing Countries.” White Paper. Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative, JPAL
        (MIT) and CEGA (UC Berkeley)
[34] Karlan, Dean, Robert Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry (2015). “Agricultural
        Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        129(2), 597-652.
[35] Karlan, Dean, Beniamino Savonitto, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry (2017). “Impact
        of savings groups on the lives of the poor.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
        114 (12): 3079–3084.
[36] Kimenju, Simon and Hugo De Groote (2010). “Economic Analysis of Alternative Maize Storage
        Technologies in Kenya.” Unpublished.
[37] Ksoll, Christopher, Helene Bie Lilleor, Jonas Helth Lonborg, and Ole Dahl Rasmussen (2016).
       “Impact of Village Savings and Loans Associations: Evidence from a Cluster Randomized
        Trial.” Journal of Development Economics 120: 70-85.
[38] Lee, Jeong-Joon and Yasuyuki Sawada (2010). “Precautionary Saving under Liquidity Con-
        straints: Evidence from Rural Pakistan.” Journal of Development Economics 91, 77–86.
[39] Maitra, Pushkar, Sandip Mitra, Dilip Mookherjee, Alberto Motta, and Sujata Visaria (2017).
       “Financing Smallholder Agriculture: An Experiment with Agent-Intermediated Microloans
        in India.” Journal of Development Economics 127: 306 – 337.
[40] McCloskey Donald and John Nash (1984). “Corn at Interest: The Extent and Cost of Grain
        Storage in Medieval England.” American Economic Review 74 (1): 174-187
[41] Moser, Christine, Christopher Barrett, and Bart Minten (2009). “Spatial integration at multiple
        scales: rice markets in Madagascar.” Agricultural Economics 40: 281–294.
[42] Mullainathan, Sendhil and Eldar Shafir (2014). “Freeing Up Intelligence.” Scientific American
        Mind 25, 58-63.




                                                 20
[43] Prina, Silvia (2015). “Banking the Poor via Savings Accounts: Evidence from a Field Experi-
       ment.” Journal of Development Economics 115: 16-31.
[44] Ricker-Gilbert, Jacob, Nicole Mason, Thomas Jayne, Francis Darko, and Solomon Tembo
       (2013). “What are the Effects of Input Subsidy Programs on Equilibrium Maize Prices?
       Evidence from Malawi and Zambia.” Unpublished
[45] Saha, Atanu and Janice Stroud (1994). “A Household Model of On-Farm Storage Under Price
       Risk.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 76 (3): 522-534.
[46] Shamdasani, Yogita (2016). “Rural Road Infrastructure and Agricultural Production: Evidence
       from India.” Unpublished.
[47] Stephens, Emma and Christopher Barrett (2011). “Incomplete Credit Markets and Commodity
       Marketing Behaviour.” Journal of Agricultural Economics 62 (1): 1–24.
[48] Sun, Dingqiang, Huanguang Qiu, Junfei Bai, Haiyan Liu, Guanghua Lin, and Scott Rozelle
       (2013). “Liquidity Constraints and Postharvest Selling Behavior: Evidence from China’s
       Maize Farmers.” The Developing Economies 51: 260–277
[49] Thaler, Richard (1999). “Mental accounting Matters.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
       12: 183–206.
[50] van Campenhout, Bjorn, Els Lecoutere and Ben D’Exelle (2015). “Inter-Temporal and Spatial
       Price Dispersion Patterns and the Well-Being of Maize Producers in Southern Tanzania.”
       Journal of African Economies 24 (2): 230-253.
[51] Williams, Scott B., Larry L. Murdock, and Dieudonne Baributsa (2017). “Storage of Maize in
       Purdue Improved Crop Storage (PICS) Bags.” PLOS One 12(1): e0168624
[52] World Bank (2010). “World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development.” Wash-
       ington, DC: World Bank.
[53] World Bank (2011). “Missing Food: The Case of Postharvest Grain Losses in Sub-Saharan
       Africa.” Report Number 60371-AFR World Bank, Washington D.C.




                                               21
                                                                                           Figure 1. Prices Over Season




        Price (normalized relative to Aug 2015)
                                                                                    Observed and Expected Prices, 2015-16
                                                    2
                                                  1.9
                                                  1.8
                                                  1.7
                                                  1.6
                                                  1.5
                                                  1.4
                                                  1.3
                                                  1.2
                                                  1.1
                                                    1
                                                        8-2015

                                                                 9-2015




                                                                                                           1-2016

                                                                                                                     2-2016

                                                                                                                              3-2016

                                                                                                                                       4-2016

                                                                                                                                                5-2016

                                                                                                                                                         6-2016

                                                                                                                                                                  7-2016

                                                                                                                                                                           8-2016
                                                                                      11-2015
                                                                          10-2015




                                                                                                12-2015

                                                                                                                    Month

                                                                                                          Observed (Sales data)
                                                                                                          Expected (Baseline survey)
                                                                                                          Retail price (shops)


Notes: The vertical axis shows the price, normalized to August 2015. Vertical loans show the long rains harvest
(around August) and the short rain harvest (around January). Expectations data comes from the baseline survey;
observed sales data comes from sales data collected from respondents during surveys; data for shops comes
from interviews with shop-owners conducted in the primary markets for our respondent farmers (10 markets in
all).




                                                                                                                22
                                                            Figure 2. CDFs of deposits


                                                                   Panel A. GSRA




                    1          .8
        Percentage at or below
             .4     .2
                    0  .6



                                        10

                                             20

                                                  30

                                                       40

                                                              50

                                                                    60

                                                                         70

                                                                               80

                                                                                    90



                                                                                                110
                                    0




                                                                                         100



                                                                                                      120

                                                                                                            130

                                                                                                                   140

                                                                                                                         150
                                                       Kilograms of maize deposited in GSRA


                                                                   Panel B. ISRA
                   1
                   .8
        Percentage at or below
             .4    .2
                   0   .6




                                                  10


                                                            15


                                                                    20


                                                                              25


                                                                                    30


                                                                                               35


                                                                                                      40


                                                                                                                  45


                                                                                                                         50
                                    0


                                         5




                                                         Amount deposited in ISRA (USD)


Notes: For readability, CDF in Panel A shows values below the 99th percentile. A kilogram of maize was worth
about US $0.27 in August 2015, rising to US $0.36 by June 2016. Average total harvest was approximately 480
kilograms (see Table 2). The exchange rate at the time was approximately 1 dollar to 100 Ksh.




                                                                         23
                                              Figure 3. Timing of sales, treatment and control groups


                                                                   Timing of sales, 2015-16

      100 150 200 250 300
         Average sales
               50




                                               10-2015


                                                         11-2015


                                                                   12-2015
                            8-2015


                                     9-2015




                                                                             1-2016


                                                                                           2-2016


                                                                                                    3-2016


                                                                                                             4-2016


                                                                                                                      5-2016


                                                                                                                               6-2016


                                                                                                                                        7-2016


                                                                                                                                                 8-2016
                                                                                      Month

                                                                                            GSRA
                                                                                            non-GSRA



Notes: y-axis shows average sales (in kilograms), by month. The long rains harvest was in August 2015. The
unit of analysis is the average monthly sales by treatment group, where ISRA and Control are pooled. This
figure is based on the endline survey (sales were not recorded in the GSRA logbooks).




                                                                                      24
                                                                      Figure 4. Experimental Demand Curves


                                                                           Panel A. Extensive Margin

                                                                                   Extensive margin
                        1
      0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
            Percentage redeeming




                                                         0   10     20       30       40       50         60      70   80   90
                                                                                   Price (% of retail)

                                                                                   Control                GSRA
                                                                                   ISRA



                                                                     Panel B. Total Value of Inputs Purchased


                                                             Total market value of inputs purchased with coupon (USD)
          Market Value of Inputs Purchased with Coupon
             0     5     10     15    20   25     30




                                                         0    10     20       30       40       50        60      70   80   90
                                                                                    Price (% of retail)

                                                                                    Control                GSRA
                                                                                    ISRA



Notes: Figures show experimental demand curves from coupon experiment. See text for more details.




                                                                                         25
Table 1. Peak-trough variation in maize prices in Kisumu, 2006-2016
           (1)                     (2)            (3)           (4)                       (5)
                                                Dataset                             Average across
          Year
                                  FAO           RATIN          WFP                     datasets
Panel A. Year by year
          2006                      1.42            1.48            1.40                 1.43
          2007                      1.17            1.18            1.15                 1.17
          2008                      1.50            1.44            2.07                 1.67
          2009                      1.22            1.21            1.18                 1.20
          2010                      1.61            1.62            1.54                 1.59
          2011                      2.81            2.88            2.36                 2.69
          2012                      1.40            1.44            1.45                 1.43
          2013                      1.14            1.16            1.13                 1.14
          2014                      1.30            1.44            1.38                 1.37
          2015                      1.28            1.16            1.15                 1.20
          2016                      1.20            0.00            1.04                 1.12


Panel B. Average, 2006-16
Mean peak/trough ratio              1.46
Standard deviation                  0.45
Notes: Based on maize price data reported for Kisumu (the nearest major city to Busia). The reported
statistic is the highest monthly price as a percentage of the lowest monthly price for that year. The
year 2011 was a famine in the horn of Africa.




                                                  26
Table 2. Baseline characteristics and randomization check
                                                          (1)                (2)           (3)                 (4)                   (5)
                                                                                       Savings treatments                      Coupon treatment
                                                    Control Mean       Coefficient     Coefficient     p-value for F-test      Coefficient on Log
                                                                       on GSRA          on ISRA        GSRA = ISRA = 0               (price)
Panel A. Demographics and asset ownership
Age                                                      39.59            -0.58            0.39               0.81                    0.43
                                                       (13.52 )           (1.62)         (1.87)                                      (0.86)
Years of education                                        6.89              0.3            0.51               0.42                   -0.21
                                                        (3.41 )           (0.38)         (0.38)                                      (0.25)
Home has mud walls                                        0.90            -0.01           -0.04               0.56                    0.03
                                                                          (0.04)         (0.04)                                     (0.03 )
Value of durable goods owned (USD)                      131.50             2.28          13.22                0.27                   -8.50
                                                       (73.86 )           (9.67)         (9.62)                                      (6.98)
Value of animals owned (USD)                            211.70             9.81         70.83*                0.15                   -1.49
                                                      (240.70 )          (26.62)        (37.37)                                     (15.16)
Has a mobile phone                                       0.79              0.04          0.10**               0.1*                    0.03
                                                                          (0.05)         (0.05)                                      (0.03)
Has a bank account                                       0.23              0.04         0.17***             0.01***                   0.04
                                                                          (0.05)         (0.05)                                      (0.03)
Has a mobile money account                               0.66              0.04            0.09               0.24                    0.00
                                                                          (0.05)         (0.06)                                      (0.03)
Acres of land owned                                      1.79              0.35            0.32               0.36                    0.17
                                                        (1.99 )           (0.28)         (0.30)                                      (0.23)
                          1
Panel B. Harvest output
Harvest output from 2015 long rains (kg)                480.60             7.47           26.79               0.84                    2.06
                                                      (341.50 )          (42.71)         (47.04)                                    (37.18)
Value of harvest output at post-harvest                 131.10             2.04            7.31               0.84                    0.56
 price (60 Ksh / goro-goro)                            (93.13 )          (11.65)         (12.83)                                    (10.14)
Panel C. Input usage
Used fertilizer (2015 long rains)                        0.81             0.06            0.05                0.24                     0.00
                                                                         (0.04)          (0.04)                                      (0.02)
Used hybrid seeds (2015 long rains)                      0.74             0.02            0.07                0.28                   -0.01
                                                                         (0.05)          (0.05)                                      (0.04)
Kilograms of fertilizer per acre planted                54.04            11.57*           2.98                0.20                    -1.11
                                                       (49.04 )          (6.62)          (6.64)                                      (3.92)
Panel D. Maize storage and sales
Do you ever store maize?                                 0.88             0.05*            0.05               0.22                   -0.02
                                                                         (0.03)          (0.03)                                      (0.02)
Percentage of seasons in which some                      0.30              0.05            0.04               0.35                   -0.01
  maize was spoiled (past 5 years)                                       (0.04)          (0.04)                                      (0.02)
In those seasons, average percentage                     0.32             0.05*            0.00               0.1*                    0.00
   of maize lost                                        (0.20 )          (0.02)          (0.02)                                      (0.02)
Did you sell maize in the 2014 long rains?               0.32           0.13***          0.11**              0.02**                   0.00
                                                                         (0.05)          (0.06)                                      (0.03)
Do you buy maize?                                        0.79            -0.09*           -0.01              0.05**                   0.02
                                                                         (0.05)          (0.05)                                      (0.03)
Do you ever feel that you consume "too much"             0.28             -0.03            0.02               0.61                    0.02
 maize when you have bags in the house?                                  (0.05)          (0.06)                                      (0.03)
Number of observations                                   668
Number of ROSCAs                                         135
Notes: Sample restricted to those that completed a midline or endline survey. Each row shows means and coefficients from a regression of the
dependent variable on treatment indicators and the (log) price of inputs after the coupon discount. In Column 1, standard deviations in
parentheses; in Columns 2 and 3, standard errors (clustered by ROSCA) in parentheses. Harvest output (Panel B) is from the endline but should
be exogenous to the treatment since the intervention began only just before harvest. There are 511 observations for this variable. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                                                        27
Table 3. Take-up
                                                              (1)                       (2)
                                                                              Respondents in endline
                                                        All respondents
                                                                                  survey sample
Panel A. ROSCA Logbooks
GSRA
Contributed maize to GSRA (N=1,105)                          0.57                      0.70


If yes, kilograms contributed                                44.45                    37.95
                                                            (73.03)                   (32.93)
ISRA
Contributed money to ISRA (N=910)                            0.56                      0.76
                                                            (0.50 )                   (0.43 )
If yes, amount deposited (USD)                               9.63                      9.03
                                                            (9.27 )                   (8.20 )
Panel B. Endline survey
GSRA
Contributed maize to GSRA (N=221)                              -                       0.84


If yes, kilograms                                              -                      63.43
                                                                                      (66.52)
ISRA
Contributed money to ISRA (N=191)                              -                       0.90

Notes: Panel A is from logbooks kept by treasurers. Panel B is from the endline survey. Deposits and
withdrawals are winsorized at 1%. Standard deviations in parentheses. The exchange rate at the time
was approximately 1 dollar to 100 Ksh.




                                                  28
Table 4. Effects on storage
                                               (1)                        (2)                   (3)                   (4)
                                       Stored maize to be                                    Quantities
                                   consumed or sold at least 1      Amount stored
                                   month after 2015 long rains                           Amount stored at
                                                                     outside home                             Total amount stored
                                                                                             home
                                            harvest2              (including GSRA)
GSRA                                         0.23***                   50.52***               -21.15                 29.37
                                              (0.05)                    (4.06)                (19.54)               (19.47)
ISRA                                           0.10                      0.84                 43.22**               44.06**
                                              (0.06)                    (1.56)                (20.66)               (20.63)
Log (price after coupon rebate)                0.04                      2.00                  8.68                  10.69
                                              (0.04)                    (2.02)                (14.28)               (14.42)
                          1
2015 Long Rains Harvest                      0.24***                   0.02***                0.42***               0.44***
                                              (0.06)                    (0.01)                 (0.04)                (0.03)


Control mean                                   0.69                      0.00                 185.20                185.20
Control sd                                     0.46                        -                  196.70                196.70
Number of respondents                          583                        583                   583                   583
Number of ROSCAs                               132                        132                    132                   132
Notes: All variables measured from the 2015 long rains harvest, from the endline survey. Quantities are winsorized at 5%. All
weights in kilograms. In addition to the covariates shown here, all regressions control for variables that are imbalanced in Table
2. Standard errors clustered by ROSCA in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
1
  Harvest is measured in 1,000 kilograms in Columns 1, and in kilograms in the remaining Columns.




                                                                 29
Table 5. Effects on maize sales, prices received, and farm revenue
                                        (1)               (2)            (3)                       (4)                     (5)               (6)                  (7)
                                        Sales between Aug 2015 and Aug 2016                              Timing of Sales                        For those who sold
                                    Indicator for                                             Sold within a       Sold later in the   Days between sale    Log (average sales
                                                       Quantity sold    Total Revenue                                                                  2
                                  selling any maize                                          month of harvest           year          and 2015 harvest           price)3
GSRA                                  0.37***             18.32              4.82                   0.02              0.39***             36.21***              0.06**
                                       (0.06)            (21.93)            (7.22)                (0.03)               (0.06)              (13.63)              (0.03)
ISRA                                    -0.04             14.44              3.09                  -0.02                -0.03                -7.21               -0.01
                                       (0.06)            (21.76)            (7.35)                (0.03)               (0.06)              (18.56)              (0.04)
Log (price after coupon rebate)       -0.08**             -23.99             -7.33                 -0.03               -0.07*               12.60                 0.00
                                       (0.04)            (14.98)            (5.00)                (0.02)               (0.04)               (8.81)              (0.02)
2015 Long Rains Harvest1              0.31***            0.31***           0.10***                  0.05              0.31***                 0.01              0.08**
                                       (0.06)             (0.04)            (0.01)                (0.04)               (0.06)               (0.01)              (0.03)

Control mean                              0.36             103.30              33.62                 0.07                 0.32                 169.80                 -1.19
Control sd                                0.48             196.70              66.78                 0.26                 0.47                  91.60                  0.19
Number of respondents                      583               583                583                   583                 583                    294                   294
Number of ROSCAs                          132               132                 132                  132                  132                   106                   106
Notes: All data is from endline survey. All variables measured from the 2015 long rains harvest. Monetary values in USD. All weights in kilograms. Quantities in columns 2-3
are winsorized at 5%. In addition to the covariates shown here, all regressions control for variables that are imbalanced in Table 2. Standard errors clustered by ROSCA in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
1
  Harvest quantity is measured in 1,000 kg in Columns 1 and 7 and in kg for the remaining columns.
2
  Harvest occurs around August. For people with multiple sales, average is weighted by the quantity of maize sold per transaction.
3
  Average is weighted by quantity.




                                                                                        30
Table 6. Other outcomes
                                                (1)                (2)                   (3)               (4)             (5)                    (6)                     (7)
                                                                         1
                                               Input coupon experiment                           Agricultural Inputs                                    Food security
                                                             Market value of                          Quantity of                         Ran out of maize       Reduced food intake
                                            Redeemed                               Used chemical                       Used hybrid
                                                            inputs purchased                         fertilizer used                      during season and       around planting to
                                             Coupon                                  fertilizer                           seeds
                                                                 (USD)                                     (kg)                         could not afford more        afford inputs
GSRA                                           0.06               1.56                   0.00             -0.27             0.02                  0.02                      0.02
                                              (0.05)             (1.92)                 (0.04)            (4.13)           (0.03)                (0.07)                    (0.07)
ISRA                                           0.01               1.10                   0.02              2.38             0.01                  -0.07                     -0.07
                                              (0.05)             (2.28)                 (0.03)            (4.83)           (0.03)                (0.08)                    (0.08)
Log (price after coupon rebate)             -0.39***          -10.23***                -0.05**             -2.33          -0.03**                 -0.07                     -0.07
                                              (0.04)             (1.32)                 (0.02)            (2.63)           (0.02)                (0.05)                    (0.05)
2015 Long Rains Harvest2                       0.04              5.17*                 0.14***          70.90***          0.11***             -0.20***                   -0.20***
                                              (0.06)             (2.69)                 (0.04)            (6.67)           (0.03)                (0.06)                    (0.06)
Control mean                                   0.31               9.98                   0.88             50.90             0.90                  0.45                      0.45
Control sd                                       -               17.81                     -              45.94               -                     -                         -
Number of respondents                          2966               2966                   577                576             577                    583                       583
Number of ROSCAs                               141                141                    132               132              132                   132                       132
Notes: All data is from endline survey. Farming questions are in relation to the 2016 long rains season. All regressions in columns 3-7 control for variables that are imbalanced in
Table 2. Quantity of hybrid seeds wsa not asked in the survey (only expenditures). Quantity of fertlizer winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered by ROSCA in parentheses. *,
**, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
1
  Regressions in Columns 1-2 are from experimental coupon intervention, and include all members of ROSCAs (2,966 respondents). See text for details.
2
  Harvest quantity is in 1,000 kg.




                                                                                           31
Table 7. Pathways
                                                                                           (1)                   (2)
                                                                                                     Difference between GSRA
                                                                                     Control Group
                                                                                                            and control
Panel A. Barriers to home storage (all respondents)
Agrees with statement: "If I have maize at home, my                                       0.39                0.11*
 household is tempted to eat more than we need"                                                               (0.06)
Agrees with statement "If a friend or relative comes to me to ask for                     0.60                 0.06
 maize, and if I have maize at home, I am obligated to give him/her some."                                    (0.06)
Agrees with statement: "If I refuse requests when people ask me                           0.75               -0.14**
 for maize, they are going to be less likely to help me out in the future."                                   (0.06)
Some maize stored at home after 2015 harvest was spoiled                                  0.04                 0.03
                                                                                                              (0.03)
If yes: percentage spoiled                                                                0.20                 0.02
                                                                                                              (0.07)
Consumed maize stocks earlier than had planned and/or                                     0.04               0.10***
 consumed maize intended for sale                                                                             (0.03)

If yes: percentage consumed                                                               0.39               0.11*
                                                                                                             (0.06)
Panel B. GSRA respondents only
Do you think the GSRA was helpful?                                                        0.94

If yes, why?
   Less spoilage                                                                          0.53
   Helped save for inputs                                                                 0.39
   Shared costs                                                                           0.37
   Consumed less                                                                          0.37
   Gave away less                                                                         0.24

Agrees with statement: "The GSRA program prevented my                                     0.36
 household from eating more maize than needed."

Do you think you gave away less maize because of GSRA?                                    0.62

If yes: why do you think you gave away less?
   Fewer people asked for maize because I had less in house                               0.39
   It was easier to say no because I had less maize in the house                          0.55

Some maize stored in the GSRA in 2015 was spoiled                                         0.05

If yes: percentage spoiled                                                                0.02

Will you adopt the GSRA next year?                                                        0.98

                                                                   1
Will the ROSCA continue with the GSRA program next year?                                  0.92

Panel C. ISRA respondents only
Do you think the ISRA was helpful?                                                        0.91

Will you adopt the ISRA next year?                                                         0.93
Notes: Data from midline and endline surveys. N = 583 for endline survey, 529 for midline.
1
  Based on an endline survey with ROSCA treasureres only (N=49).

                                                                       32
                              Web Appendix

Grain Today, Gain Tomorrow: Evidence from a Storage Experiment with
                     Savings Clubs in Kenya

              Shilpa Aggarwal, Eilin Francis and Jonathan Robinson




                                       33
             Web Appendix Figure A1. Project and Survey Timeline

               Sampling             Surveys                 Intervention

2015   Jul      Census
       Aug
       Sep                      Baseline surveys      GSRA/ ISRA introduced
       Oct
       Nov
       Dec
2016   Jan                                             Coupon distribution &
                                 Midline surveys
       Feb                                                 redemption
       Mar
       Apr                      Midline logbooks
       May
       Jun
       Jul
       Aug
       Sep                      Endline surveys &
       Oct                      endline logbooks
       Nov
       Dec




                                     34
                      Web Appendix Figure 2. Experimental Design




                                  Sample = 132 ROSCAs




      GSRA (N=51)                      ISRA (N=43)                  CONTROL (N=38)




Coupons Distributed to All ROSCAs (randomization at ROSCA level, for discounts of 10-90% of
                                         inputs)




                                             35
                                   Web Appendix Figure A3. Amount of maize stored by GSRA ROSCAs


                                                   Net Amount Stored by GSRA ROSCAs

                 1          .8
     Percentage at or below
          .4     .2
                 0 .6




                                                                                       1060



                                                                                                     1260

                                                                                                            1360

                                                                                                                   1460

                                                                                                                          1560

                                                                                                                                 1660
                                 160

                                       260

                                             360

                                                   460

                                                         560

                                                               660

                                                                     760

                                                                           860

                                                                                 960



                                                                                              1160
                                                         Kilograms of maize stored in GSRA


Notes: Amount of maize (in kilograms) reported stored by GSRA logs. The storage capacity provided as part of
the experiment was 360 kilograms




                                                                           36
                                         Web Appendix Figure A4. Timing of Deposits into Savings Products


                                                                                  Panel A. GSRA


                                                                         GSRA Deposits by Month
                       4000
        Quantity deposited (kilograms)
          1000      2000
                       0       3000


                                         8-2015


                                                   9-2015




                                                                                                            1-2016


                                                                                                                          2-2016


                                                                                                                                        3-2016


                                                                                                                                                          4-2016


                                                                                                                                                                            5-2016


                                                                                                                                                                                              6-2016
                                                              10-2015




                                                                                            12-2015
                                                                           11-2015




                                                                                                       Month

                                                                                     Panel B. ISRA


                                                                           ISRA Deposits by Month
                       600   500
         Amount deposited (USD)
        200   300    400
                       100


                                         8-2015


                                                  9-2015




                                                                                                        1-2016


                                                                                                                     2-2016


                                                                                                                                   3-2016


                                                                                                                                                 4-2016


                                                                                                                                                                   5-2016


                                                                                                                                                                                     6-2016
                                                            10-2015




                                                                                        12-2015
                                                                        11-2015




                                                                                                       Month


Notes: Data from administrative records kept by ROSCAs. The exchange rate at the time was approximately 1
dollar to 100 Ksh.




                                                                                                  37
                                                      Web Appendix Figure A5. Quantile Regressions


                                                            Panel A. Total Quantity of Maize Stored



                    100
                 20 40 60 80
                                              Quantile Treatment Effect for Total Quantity of Maize Stored
        Estimated Treatment Effect
      -20 0         -40




                                          0    .1     .2        .3       .4     .5      .6        .7       .8      .9     1
                                                                        Percentile of Sales

                                                      Estimated Treatment Effect - GSRA                          95% CI




                                                                      Panel B. Maize Sales


                                                        Quantile Treatment Effect for Maize Sales
                           100
                       20 40 60 80
             Estimated Treatment Effect
            -20 0          -40




                                          0     .1     .2        .3       .4     .5      .6           .7    .8      .9    1
                                                                         Percentile of Sales

                                                       Estimated Treatment Effect - GSRA                         95% CI



Notes: These are quantile regressions, controlling for the same controls as in other tables. The y-axis shows
treatment effect on sales (in kilograms), relative to Control. 95% CI is shown in red.



                                                                              38
Web Appendix Table A1. ROSCA-level compliance and attrition
                           (1)                        (2)                                (3)                         (4)
                                                                                If completed baseline:     If completed baseline:
                                                    If traced: ROSCA
                      ROSCA could be traced                                   ROSCA completed midline     ROSCA completed endline
                                                  completed baseline visit
                                                                                        visit                      visit
GSRA                            0.08                        0.06                         0.05                       0.04
                               (0.07)                      (0.06)                       (0.04)                     (0.05)
Control mean                    0.53                        0.87                         0.93                       0.93
Number of ROSCAs                264                         153                          139                        139
                                                   Sample traced for              Sample traced for           Sample traced for
                             All
Sample                                                intervention                   intervention               intervention
Notes: Duplicate ROSCAs removed. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.




                                                                    39
Web Appendix Table A2. Baseline ROSCA characteristics and randomization check
                                                          (1)                       (2)
                                                                           Difference between
                                                     Control Mean
                                                                           GSRA and control
Years ROSCA has existed                                     5.81                     -1.06
                                                           (4.54)                   (0.96)
Length of ROSCA round (years)                               0.92                      0.02
                                                           (0.64)                   (0.13)
Number of members                                          21.05                      3.40
                                                           (9.08)                   (4.71)
Percentage of members who farm                              0.97                      0.02
                                                           (0.16)                   (0.03)
ROSCA is mixed gender                                       0.78                     -0.08
                                                           (0.42)                   (0.10)
ROSCA is female only                                        0.22                      0.08
                                                           (0.42)                   (0.10)
ROSCA provides loans                                        0.66                      0.03
                                                           (0.48)                   (0.11)
If yes, interest rate on loans (monthly)                   13.28                    4.22*
                                                           (5.27)                   (2.35)
ROSCA has welfare insurance1                                0.83                     -0.07
                                                           (0.38)                   (0.09)
Number of ROSCAs                                            131
Notes: The ROSCA-level questionnaire was missing for 1 ROSCA, so there are 131 ROSCAs in
this table. In Column 1, standard deviations in parentheses; in Column 2, standard errors in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
1
  Welfare insurance is a term for an insurance fund that pays out in case of emergencies such as
funerals or medical hospitalization.




                                                40
Web Appendix Table A3. Individual-level attrition
                             (1)            (2)                     (3)

                                Has midline survey          Has endline survey

GSRA                             0.05          0.00                 0.04
                                (0.04)        (0.02)               (0.06)

Did baseline survey?               Y            N                    Y
Control mean                     0.44          0.07                 0.62
Number of respondents             795         2267                  795
Number of ROSCAs                 141           141                  141
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the ROSCA level in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.




                                         41
Web Appendix Table A4. Robustness checks for storage regressions
                                               (1)                          (2)                 (3)                   (4)
                                                                                             Quantities
                                       Stored maize to be
                                   consumed or sold at least 1          Amount stored
                                                                                         Amount stored at
                                                         1               outside home                         Total amount stored
                                      month after harvest                                    home
                                                                      (including GSRA)
Panel A. Removing harvest control
GSRA                                         0.22***                     49.58***             -40.76*                 8.83
                                              (0.05)                      (4.01)              (23.02)               (23.48)
ISRA                                           0.09                        0.28                31.44                 31.72
                                              (0.06)                      (1.33)              (26.72)               (26.66)
Log (price after coupon rebate)                0.04                        2.04                 9.38                 11.42
                                              (0.04)                      (1.99)              (17.67)               (17.87)
Control mean                                   0.69                        0.00               185.20                185.20
Control sd                                       -                           -                196.70                196.70

Panel B. Measuring GSRA storage with administrative data
GSRA                                     -                               91.77***                -                 70.62***
                                         -                                (4.32)                 -                  (20.04)
ISRA                                     -                                 1.40                  -                  44.62**
                                         -                                (1.04)                 -                  (20.63)
Log (price after coupon rebate)          -                                 1.90                  -                   10.59
                                         -                                (3.28)                 -                  (13.96)
                         1
2015 Long Rains Harvest

Control mean                                    -                           0.00                 -                  185.20
Control sd                                      -                             -                  -                  196.70

Panel C. No Winsorizing
GSRA                                            -                        65.29***               -7.81              57.47**
                                                -                         (14.35)             (23.55)              (26.28)
ISRA                                            -                           0.61              67.43**              68.03**
                                                -                          (2.28)             (28.46)              (28.41)
Log (price after coupon rebate)                 -                           -0.77               16.16                15.39
                                                -                          (4.64)             (17.48)              (17.83)
2015 Long Rains Harvest                         -                         0.03***             0.53***              0.56***
                                                -                          (0.01)              (0.07)               (0.06)
Control mean                                    -                           0.00               143.20               143.20
Control sd                                      -                             -                160.60               160.60

Panel D. 1% Winsorizing
GSRA                                            -                        54.85***              -16.65               38.21*
                                                -                          (5.70)             (21.24)              (21.23)
ISRA                                            -                           0.58              55.42**              56.01**
                                                -                          (1.83)             (23.36)              (23.34)
Log (price after coupon rebate)                 -                           2.10                7.21                 9.31
                                                -                          (2.36)             (15.72)              (15.73)
2015 Long Rains Harvest                         -                         0.03***             0.48***              0.50***
                                                -                          (0.01)              (0.04)               (0.04)
Control mean                                    -                           0.00               143.20               143.20
Control sd                                      -                             -                160.60               160.60

Number of respondents                          -                          583                   583                   583
Number of ROSCAs                               -                          132                   132                   132
Notes: All variables measured from the 2015 long rains harvest, from the endline survey. All weights in kilograms. Standard errors
clustered by ROSCA in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                 42
Web Appendix Table A5. Correlates of GSRA take-up
                                                             (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)
                                                               Bivariate regressions                      Multivariate regressions

                                                                          Inverse hyperbolic                            Inverse hyperbolic
                                                    Dummy = 1 if made                            Dummy = 1 if made
                                                                              sine of kgs                                   sine of kgs
                                                        deposit                                      deposit
                                                                               deposited                                     deposited
Respondent is female                                         0.08               0.63*                      0.12               0.82**
                                                           (0.09)               (0.37)                   (0.09)               (0.36)
Age (in tens)                                                0.04                0.19                      0.04                 0.17
                                                           (0.03)               (0.12)                   (0.03)               (0.12)
Years of education                                           0.01               0.07*                      0.01               0.08*
                                                           (0.01)               (0.04)                   (0.01)               (0.04)
Log (value of animal and durable goods owned)                0.02               0.39**                    -0.01                 0.20
                                                           (0.04)               (0.17)                   (0.04)               (0.17)
Housing index                                               -0.13               -1.05*                    -0.04                -0.37
                                                           (0.13)               (0.58)                   (0.13)               (0.56)
Owns a mobile phone                                         -0.01                0.24                     -0.05                 0.02
                                                           (0.07)               (0.29)                   (0.09)               (0.35)
Acres of land owned                                          0.01               0.06*                      0.00                 0.00
                                                           (0.01)               (0.04)                   (0.01)               (0.04)
Faces challenges storing maize                              -0.01                0.13                     -0.01                 0.00
                                                           (0.09)               (0.40)                   (0.10)               (0.42)
Inverse hyperbolic since of 2015 harvest output              0.03                0.19                      0.04                 0.13
                                                           (0.03)               (0.13)                   (0.03)               (0.14)
Inverse hyperbolic sine of 2015 agricultural                 0.04                0.18                      0.03                 0.11
  expenditures                                             (0.03)               (0.13)                   (0.03)               (0.14)

Mean of dependent variable                                  0.68                 2.68                    0.68                   0.66
Standard deviation of dependent variable                                         2.02                      -                    0.47
Number of observations                                      283                  266                     283                    266
Number of ROSCAs                                             52                   48                      52                     48
Notes: The housing index is a sum of having a thatch roof, mud walls, and a mud floor. Higher values indicate lower quality. Standard errors
(clustered by ROSCA) in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.




                                                                     43
Web Appendix Table A6. Effects on storage (midline survey)
                                                (1)                        (2)                   (3)                   (4)
                                                                                             Quantities
                                     Stored any maize after            Amount stored
                                     2015 long rains harvest                              Amount stored at
                                                                        outside home                          Total amount stored
                                                                                              home
                                                                     (including GSRA)
GSRA                                         0.07***                      24.64***              5.55                  30.20
                                              (0.03)                      (3.97)               (21.38)               (22.09)
ISRA                                           0.01                       -3.41                 15.57                 12.16
                                              (0.03)                      (3.47)               (27.09)               (27.40)
Log (price after coupon rebate)               -0.01                      7.16***                6.09                  13.25
                                              (0.02)                      (2.10)               (20.18)               (20.58)
                          1
2015 Long Rains Harvest                      0.11***                      20.61                -48.75                -28.13
                                              (0.03)                     (14.96)               (30.99)               (39.74)


Control mean                                   0.89                        7.18                280.10                287.30
Control sd                                     0.31                       26.96                271.60                272.60
Number of respondents                          529                         529                   529                   529
Number of ROSCAs                              135                          135                     135                  135
Notes: All variables measured from the 2015 long rains harvest, from the midline survey. Quantities are winsorized at 5%.
Weights of all dependent variables in kilograms. All regressions control for all variables that are imbalanced in Table 1. Standard
errors clustered by ROSCA in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
1
  Harvest is measured in 1,000 kilograms in Columns 1, and in kilograms in the remaining Columns.




                                                                44
