                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CONCENTRATION IN US LABOR MARKETS:
                       EVIDENCE FROM ONLINE VACANCY DATA

                                         José A. Azar
                                       Ioana Marinescu
                                     Marshall I. Steinbaum
                                         Bledi Taska

                                      Working Paper 24395
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24395


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2018, Revised February 2019




José Azar gratefully acknowledges the financial support of Secretaria d’Universitats I Recerca del
Departament d’Empresa I Coneixement de la Generalitat de Catalunya. Ref.2016 BP00358.
Steinbaum acknowledges the support of the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by José A. Azar, Ioana Marinescu, Marshall I. Steinbaum, and Bledi Taska. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Concentration in US Labor Markets: Evidence From Online Vacancy Data
José A. Azar, Ioana Marinescu, Marshall I. Steinbaum, and Bledi Taska
NBER Working Paper No. 24395
March 2018, Revised February 2019
JEL No. J21,J42,K21

                                         ABSTRACT

Using data on the near-universe of online US job vacancies collected by Burning Glass
Technologies in 2016, we calculate labor market concentration using the Herfindahl-Hirschman
index (HHI) for each commuting zone by 6-digit SOC occupation. The average market has an
HHI of 4,378, or the equivalent of 2.3 recruiting employers. 60% of labor markets are highly
concentrated (above 2,500 HHI) according to the DOJ/FTC guidelines. Highly concentrated
markets account for 20% of employment. For manufacturing industries, we show that labor
market concentration is distinct from product market concentration, and is negatively correlated
with wages in each industry’s top occupation.

José A. Azar                                   Marshall I. Steinbaum
IESE Business School                           Roosevelt Institute,
Universidad de Navarra                         1789 Lanier Pl, NW Apt 1
Avinguda Perason 21                            Washington, DC 20009
08034 Barcelona, Spain                         msteinbaum@gmail.com
jazar@iese.edu
                                               Bledi Taska
Ioana Marinescu                                Burning Glass Technologies
University of Pennsylvania                     One Lewis Wharf
School of Social Policy & Practice             Boston, MA 02110
3701 Locust Walk                               btaska@burning-glass.com
Philadelphia PA, 19104-6214
and NBER
ioma@upenn.edu
1      Introduction

     While interest in labor market monopsony power has increased in recent years (Ashenfel-
ter, Farber and Ransom, 2010; Manning, 2011; CEA, 2016), the effects of mergers and other
anti-competitive conduct on labor markets are generally not taken into account in antitrust
practice. Antitrust enforcement is based on the consumer welfare standard, i.e. examining the
adverse effects of anticompetitive behavior for consumers. This is despite substantial evidence
of market power in the labor market (Staiger, Spetz and Phibbs, 2010; Falch, 2010; Ransom and
Sims, 2010; Dube, Lester and Reich, 2016). But this empirical work has generally focused on
particular labor markets (e.g. Matsudaira, 2013), and there is little evidence to inform the de-
bate about how widespread labor market concentration is, and how it varies across occupations
and geographies in the US.
     In this paper, we directly quantify the level of labor market concentration across nearly all
occupations and for every commuting zone in the US. Adequately measuring concentration is
important because concentration is associated with lower wages (Azar, Marinescu and Stein-
baum, 2017)1 , and the antitrust authorities rely on the levels of concentration for enforcement.
We use a dataset from Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) covering the near-universe of online
US vacancy postings in 2016. This allows us to give a comprehensive picture of labor market
concentration in the US. Furthermore, this paper carefully discusses the definition of a labor
market. In particular, we make use of a hypothetical monopsonist test analogous to the hy-
pothetical monopolist test in antitrust practice. The essence of such a test is to ask whether
significant wage suppression is profitable for firms; the profitability of wage suppression de-
pends on how many workers will leave in the face of wage suppression, i.e. the labor supply
elasticity.
     We calculate Herfindahl Hirschman Indices (HHIs) for labor markets at the occupation (6-
    1 This
         working paper uses data for the most frequent occupations from one single online job board (Career-
Builder.com), therefore presenting a partial measure of concentration.



                                                     1
digit SOC), commuting zone, and quarterly level. For manufacturing, we can show that labor
market concentration is barely correlated with product market concentration, which shows
that, practically speaking, it would make a difference if antitust authorities examined labor
market concentration rather The average market has an HHI of 4378, which is the equivalent
of 2.3 recruiting firms with equal shares of the total vacancy pool. 60% of markets are highly
concentrated (above 2,500 HHI) by the standard of the Department of Justice / Federal Trade
Commission 2010 horizontal merger guidelines. To understand the threshold for high concen-
tration, note that a market with four firms and equal market shares has an HHI of 2,500, so an
HHI of 2500 is the equivalent of 4 recruiting firms with equal shares of the total vacancy pool.
Another 11% of markets are moderately concentrated by the standard of the Department of Jus-
tice / Federal Trade Commission 2010 horizontal merger guidelines, i.e. have an HHI between
1,500 and 2,500. When we weight markets by BLS total employment, we find that 20 percent
of workers work in highly concentrated labor markets (by our measure of concentration from
Burning Glass), and a further 8 percent work in moderately concentrated markets. Concentra-
tion is lower in large commuting zones, which explains why weighting by employment lowers
the prevalence of high concentration.
   We discuss the definition of a labor market, and provide a justification for our choice of the
6-digit SOC by commuting zone by quarter; we also calculate concentration for a number of
alternative market definitions in terms of occupation, location and time. According to several
plausible alternative market definitions, we find that at least 40% of markets are highly con-
centrated. Given the observed level of concentration, company mergers have the potential to
significantly increase employers’ labor market power. The labor market concentration measure
we develop here can be usefully leveraged in merger reviews and the litigation of other anti-
competitive behaviors in the labor market, as detailed in Marinescu and Hovenkamp (2018)
and Naidu, Posner and Weyl (2018).2
  2 Examples  include no-poaching agreements (Ashenfelter and Krueger, 2017), and, in some cases, non-
competition agreements (Starr, Prescott and Bishara, 2017).




                                                  2
   Our measure of concentration is distinct from the industry concentration measures used
in antitrust practice and by Autor et al. (2017) and Barkai (2016). Our measure is based on
concentration in the labor market rather than concentration in the product market. Our con-
tribution is complementary to the existing literature on product market concentration, and it
is the first economy-wide measure of labor market concentration to have been made in many
decades.3 Using the case of manufacturing in 2012, we demonstrate that labor market con-
centration in an industry’s top occupation is much greater than product market concentration:
based on an unweighted average across NAICS-4 industries, product market concentration is
411 and labor market concentration (weighted by local employment) is 3,955. Furthermore,
there is only a correlation of 0.1 between labor market concentration and product market con-
centration across NAICS-4 manufacturing industries, implying that some industries that have
relatively low product market concentration can have relatively large labor market concen-
tration in their top occupation. Finally, labor market concentration is significantly negatively
correlated with occupational wages across NAICS-4, but not with product market concentra-
tion. This suggests that antitrust enforcement guided by labor market concentration would be
different from antitrust enforcement guided by product market concentration alone.
   The recent working paper that comes closest to our approach is Benmelech, Bergman and
Kim (2018), which uses Census data for manufacturing industries over a long time horizon
to measure employment concentration (as opposed to vacancy concentration) and its negative
effect on wages. Even more recently, Rinz (2018) calculated labor market concentration by
county and industry for the whole economy and investigated the impact on wage inequality.
Those authors focus on county-industries as the analogues to local labor markets, whereas we
use commuting zones and six-digit SOC occupations.
   In contrast to Benmelech, Bergman and Kim (2018), we measure concentration using job
openings rather than employment because we view vacancies as a better gauge of how likely
searching workers (whether employed or unemployed) are to receive a job offer. Recent stud-
  3 The   last, to our knowledge, is Bunting (1962); see review of literature by Boal and Ransom (1997).


                                                          3
ies show that workers remain in jobs for longer.4 The corollary is that jobs are vacated less
frequently, and so the concentration of employment is a less relevant gauge of available work
and employer market power than is the concentration of vacancies among the relatively few
firms who are likely to be hiring at any given time.
     Section 2 describes the Burning Glass data, section 3 addresses market definition for labor
markets, and section 4 gives our estimates of labor market concentration. Section 6 places
our results in the larger debate over inter-firm inequality compares concentration in the labor
market to concentration in the product market, and section 7 concludes.



2      Data

     We use data from Burning Glass Technologies (BGT). The company examines about 40,000
websites and believes to be able to capture the near-universe of online US vacancies. Hersh-
bein and Kahn (2016); Deming and Kahn (2017); Modestino, Shoag and Ballance (2016) have
used this data and provide a more in-depth description. Importantly, BGT data is fairly similar
in terms of industry composition when compared to all vacancies recorded in the Job Open-
ings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) (Hershbein and Kahn, 2016). Furthermore, the oc-
cupational distribution is similar to the one found in the Occupational Employment Statistics
(Hershbein and Kahn, 2016).
     We restrict the data to 2016 because this is the year with the highest data quality and the
greatest coverage for vacancies across the US. Indeed, the tools used by BGT improve over
time, and more and more of the US vacancies are online.5 To understand the share of job
openings captured by BGT, it is important to note BGT only measures new postings (the same
posting appears only on the first month it is recorded) while JOLTS measures active postings
(the same posting can appear in two or more consecutive months if time to fill is more than
30 days). Help Wanted Online (HWOL) measures both. Therefore, the number of postings on
    4 See   Haltiwanger et al. (forthcoming), Molloy et al. (2016), and Konczal and Steinbaum (2016).
    5 Average    concentration levels in 2007-2015 are comparable to average concentration levels in 2016.


                                                            4
BGT can be inflated using the new jobs to active jobs ratio in HWOL, i.e. the same method used
in Carnevale, Jayasundera and Repnikov (2014). Based on this calculation, BGT shows that the
share of jobs online as captured by BGT is roughly 85% of the jobs in JOLTS in 2016. The jobs
that are not online now are usually in small businesses (the classic example being the “help
wanted” sign in the restaurant window) and union hiring halls. Overall, however, research
shows the online job market has consistently expanded over the last few years.
   The data is cleaned by Burning Glass to remove vacancy duplicates and extract key charac-
teristics for each vacancy. Of interest to our work are the location of the vacancy (county), name
of the employer, and the occupation. The name of the employer is normalized by BGT so that
similar employer names are grouped together into a single employer: for example, “Bausch
and Lomb”, “Bausch Lomb”, and “Bausch & Lomb” would be grouped together. Still, 35.9% of
employer names are missing, partly due to staffing companies not disclosing which employer
the job is at. To calculate concentration, we will assume that all these missing employer names
are different, thus providing a lower bound for labor market concentration.
   The BGT dataset contains many variables describing the occupation of each vacancy. These
include the SOC code, the standardized job title, and the BGT occupation. The standardized
job title is based on the full text job title of the job vacancy: the full text job title is cleaned
and similar job titles are grouped together. The BGT occupation starts with the SOC code, and
either consolidates SOC codes or divides them into several categories based on the similarity
of skills, education and knowledge requirements.
   We drop internships and data with missing SOC or commuting zones, which represents
5.2% of the initial sample. We are left with a sample of 22,682,265 observations.
   For our benchmark analysis, we keep 200 occupations, which represent 90% of vacancy
postings in the BGT dataset. We trim away very small occupations because they may be de-
fined too narrowly. We note that this choice results in lower HHI than if we had included all
occupations. The total number of markets (6-digit SOC occupation by commuting zone) we
consider in our main analysis is 117,369.


                                                 5
    Our main summary statistics on HHI treat each cell (commuting zone by 6-digit SOC by
quarter) as an observation. But we also want to understand how the summary statistics change
when we weight by employment in each of these markets. When we report HHI weighted by
employment, we include every occupation in the data, since small and possibly ill-defined
occupations will not be overly influential after weighing by employment. To analyze HHI
weighted by employment, we use the May 2016 Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan Area Oc-
cupational Employment and Wage estimates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The
BLS data is only available at the CBSA level, and not at the commuting zone level. To get
commuting zone employment, we first estimate BLS county-level employment: we use county
population shares within a CBSA and multiply these shares with the BLS employment by 6-
digit SOC at the CBSA level. Finally, to get commuting zone 6-digit SOC employment numbers,
we aggregate the 6-digit SOC employment numbers across the counties that form a commuting
zone.



3     Herfindahl-Hirschman Index and Labor Market Definition

3.1     Herfindahl-Hirschman Index

    Our baseline measure of concentration in a labor market is the Herfindahl-Hirschman In-
dex (HHI) calculated based on the share of vacancies of all the firms that post vacancies in that
market. The HHI is directly related to wages in the Cournot model of oligopsonistic compe-
tition. An increase in HHI leads to a proportional increase in the gap between the marginal
productivity of labor and wages, i.e. Pigou’s rate of exploitation or the wage markdown (Boal
and Ransom, 1997).
    The HHI is widely used as a measure of market concentration in the industrial organization
literature and in antitrust practice. Nocke and Schutz (2018) show that it provides an adequate
measure of the welfare distortions introduced by market power in the horizontal merger con-



                                               6
text. A further practical advantage of this measure of market concentration is that there are
guidelines for what represents a high level of market concentration. The DOJ/FTC guidelines:
an HHI above 1500 is "moderately concentrated", and above 2500 is "highly concentrated".
Also, a merger that increases the HHI by more than 200 points, and leads to a highly concen-
trated market is "presumed likely to increase market power".
   While these measures and thresholds are generally used to evaluate market concentration
in product markets, the antitrust agency guidelines state that “[t]o evaluate whether a merger
is likely to enhance market power on the buying side of the market, the Agencies employ
essentially the framework described above for evaluating whether a merger is likely to enhance
market power on the selling side of the market.” This implies that adverse effects of mergers on
the inputs market, including the labor market, are part of the legal framework for evaluating
mergers.
   The formula for the HHI in market m and time t is

                                                    J
                                      HHIm,t =     ∑ s2j,m,t                               (3.1)
                                                   j =1


where s j,m is the market share of firm j in market m expressed as a number between 0 and 100.
The market share of a firm in a given market and time is defined as the sum of vacancies posted
by a given firm in a given market and time divided by total vacancies posted in that market
and time. The inverse of the HHI multiplied by 10,000, 10,000/HHI, gives the “equivalent”
number of firms in the market, or the number of firms that would result in such an HHI if each
had the same share of the market. When reporting average HHI, we first take the average over
time t for each market m. A key question is how the labor market should be defined.


3.2   Frictions to worker mobility across markets

   The economic literature shows that there are substantial frictions associated with transi-
tioning between labor markets, however defined (Artuc, Chaudhuri and McLaren, 2010; Dix-


                                               7
Caneiro, 2014; Artuc and McLaren, 2015; Traiberman, 2017; Macaluso, 2017). Marinescu and
Rathelot (2017) (and Manning and Petrongolo (2017) for the UK) find that job search behavior
is quite local, implying that geographic labor markets are also narrowly defined.
   No work, to our knowledge, attempts to define labor markets in the education space. Macaluso
(2017) defines the concept of "skill remoteness" on the supply and demand sides of a labor mar-
ket and finds that workers whose skills are further away from the available jobs in their local
labor market (defined by city and occupation) are more likely to either move or exit the labor
force in response to a layoff. Hershbein and Kahn (2017) and Modestino, Shoag and Ballance
(2016) use the same dataset we employ in this paper to characterize the skill distribution of job
vacancies as changing in response to the severity of local labor market recessions. But the ex-
tent to which workers confine their job searches to an education- or skills-delimited segment of
available jobs has not yet been systematically explored (but see some evidence on search across
occupations in Marinescu and Rathelot (2017)).
   It is important to note that monopsony and market power may render observed transition
rates endogenous. For example, workers displaced from their job in a local labor market will
be more likely to transition to an unconcentrated than a concentrated labor market.
   Based on this literature, it is clear that labor markets are relatively narrow, but how exactly
a labor market should be defined remains unclear.
   Conceptually, to define a market, we have to strike a balance between too narrow a defini-
tion and too broad a definition. If the definition is too narrow, there are plenty of opportunities
outside the market. If the definition is too broad, it overestimates the similarity of jobs within
the market, and therefore overestimates the opportunities available within a market. Given
that workers do transition occasionally across essentially any market, it is not reasonable to
define a market by the requirement that no worker ever goes outside the boundaries of this
market. Instead, a market can conceptually be defined by a threshold level of across-market
transitions such that if transitions are above this threshold, the market is too narrow, and if
they are below this threshold the market is too broad.


                                                8
   We now turn to the legal practice of product market definition, which develops a thresh-
old concept, the critical elasticity. We will show how this concept can be applied to the labor
market.


3.3      Market definition: legal framework

   In this subsection and the next two, we discuss our choice of the commuting zone by 6-digit
SOC by quarter as our baseline market definition.
   Under §7 of the Clayton Act the court must identify some “line of commerce” and “sec-
tion of the country” in which a contemplated merger threatens lower output and higher prices.
Ever since the Supreme Court’s Brown Shoe decision, it has become conventional to identify
these two statutory requirements, respectively, as a relevant product market and a relevant ge-
ographic market. Under the approach laid out in the 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines, the
government first makes out a prima facie case that a merger is likely to result in an anticompet-
itive price increase in at least one affected market. A merger challenge only needs to identify
one market and geography in which anticompetitive results would be substantially likely to
occur.


3.4      Market definition: time and geography

   For our baseline analysis, we calculate HHI at the quarterly level, since the median duration
of unemployment is about 10 weeks in 2016 BLS (2017).6 We consider for our market share
calculations all vacancies that occur within a given quarter. We will also show results for other
time aggregations.
   We use commuting zones (CZs) to define geographic labor markets. Commuting zones are
geographic area definitions based on clusters of counties that were developed by the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) using data from the 2000 Census on commuting pat-
  6 While  most job transitions are employment-to-employment, no equivalent concept of search duration exists
for such transitions.


                                                     9
terns across counties to capture local economies and local labor markets in a way that is more
economically meaningful than county boundaries. According to the USDA documentation,
“commuting zones were developed without regard to a minimum population threshold and
are intended to be a spatial measure of the local labor market.” Marinescu and Rathelot (2017)
also show that 81% of applications on CareerBuilder.com are within the commuting zone, with
the probability of submitting an application strongly declining in the distance between the ap-
plicant’s and the job’s zip code. We also conduct robustness checks using other geographical
areas for our market definition instead of commuting zones.


3.5   Market definition: occupation

   To organize the discussion of market definition in terms of line of work (corresponding to
the “line of commerce” in the Clayton Act), we can think of it in terms of the “hypothetical
monopsonist test” (HMT). The HMT is analogous to the hypothetical monopolist test that is
commonly used for product market definition. Since 1982, the horizontal merger guidelines
have included the hypothetical monopolist test to determine whether a product market could
be profitably monopolized. The idea of the hypothetical monopolist test is to use as the relevant
antitrust market the smallest market for which a hypothetical monopolist that controlled that
market would find it profitable to implement a “small significant non-transitory increase in
price” (SSNIP).
   In the 1982 horizontal merger guidelines, there were no specific instructions about how
this SSNIP test could be applied, but an influential paper soon defined a methodology (Har-
ris and Simons, 1991): critical loss analysis. Analogously, the hypothetical monopsonist test
would suggest as the relevant antitrust market the smallest labor market for which a hypothet-
ical monopsonist that controlled that labor market would find profitable to implement “small
significant non-transitory reduction in wages” (SSNRW).
   Consider a simple model of monopsony, with a constant value of marginal product of labor
given by a, a wage w which depends on the employment level of the monopsonist L. The

                                               10
profits of the monopsonist are
                                       π ( L) = ( a − w) L.

   If the monopsonist changes wages by ∆w, and this generates a change in labor supply ∆L,
the change in profits is
                             ∆π = ∆L × ( a − w − ∆w) − ∆w × L.

   Thus, the SSNRW is profitable for the monopsonist if and only if


                                 ∆L × ( a − w − ∆w) > ∆w × L.


   Dividing on both sides by wL, we obtain

                                                           
                                 ∆L   a−w                ∆w 
                                                              > ∆w .
                                    ×                −
                                  L     w }
                                       | {z               w      w
                                         Markdown µ

   Rearranging terms (and taking into account that the change in wage is negative, which
changes the direction of the inequality):

                                     ∆L/L       1
                                          <          .
                                     ∆w/w   µ − ∆w/w

   Since the left-hand side is approximately the elasticity of labor supply, which we denote η,
we have that the critical elasticity (see Harris and Simons (1991) for the corresponding concept
in the product market) for the wage reduction to increase profits is:

                                                  1
                                         η≈            .
                                              µ − ∆w/w

   The antitrust practice typically considers a 5% increase in price (for at least a year) as the
SSNIP. Therefore, we will consider a 5% “small significant non-transitory reduction in wages”
(SSNRW). The market is too broad if the actual labor supply elasticity is less than the critical

                                                11
elasticity. For example, if the markdown µ of wages relative to the value of the marginal prod-
uct of labor is 45% and the wage reduction is 5%, then the critical elasticity is 1/(.45+.05)=2,
implying that if the market-level elasticity of labor supply corresponding to the proposed mar-
ket definition is less than 2, the market definition is too broad, and it should be defined more
narrowly. On the other hand, if the market-level elasticity of labor supply is higher than 2, the
market is too narrow, and it should be defined more broadly.
   Empirically, we have estimates of the labor supply elasticity to the individual firm, which
should be larger than the labor supply elasticity to an entire market η. Estimates of the elasticity
of labor supply to the individual firm typically range between 0.1 and 4, with most estimates
being below 2 (Manning, 2011). Even in online labor markets like Amazon Mechanical Turk,
where frictions should be minimal, the labor supply elasticity is only 0.1 (Dube et al., 2018).
Therefore the elasticity of labor supply to the market is typically below 2. This implies that,
unless we believe that the markdown is above 45%, markets with an elasticity below 2 are well
defined according to the SSNRW.
   The low elasticity of labor supply to the individual firms found in the literature suggests
that even the narrowest definition of a labor market can pass the test: most individual firms
already have very low elasticities of labor supply, and so each firm may be seen as a market
of its own. For the purpose of the present paper, we take a less radical approach. We want
to determine whether our baseline choice of the 6-digit SOC occupation is a reasonable market
definition. Using online job board data from CareerBuilder.com, Marinescu and Wolthoff (2016)
show that, within a 6-digit SOC, the elasticity of applications with respect to wages is negative.
Therefore, the 6-digit SOC is too broad of a market according to the SSNRW.
   When narrowing the market definition to look at job titles, as opposed to 6-digit occupa-
tions, the elasticity of applications with respect to wages is positive and equal to 0.77 (Mari-
nescu and Wolthoff, 2016). The elasticity of applications with respect to wages, when inter-
preted as a recruitment elasticity, is roughly equal to half the elasticity of labor supply (Ashen-
felter, Farber and Ransom, 2010). Therefore, the elasticity of labor supply for job titles is around


                                                12
1.5, which is below the critical elasticity of 2 implied by a 45% markdown on wages. This anal-
ysis suggests that, according to the SSNRW test, a job title is a legitimate labor market for the
purpose of antitrust analysis.
    Ultimately, we choose to define the line of work as a 6-digit SOC as the baseline. This
choice is conservative in that the 6-digit SOC is likely too broad, and therefore labor market
concentration as measured by HHI will tend to be underestimated. In any case, we will report
the HHI for alternative definitions of the occupation.



4     Labor Market Concentration Estimates

    Table 1 shows summary statistics for the HHI. In our baseline market definition as a SOC-
6 occupation by commuting zone by quarter, the average HHI is 4378. 60% of markets are
highly concentrated, i.e. above the 2,500 HHI threshold established by the horizontal merger
guidelines. To put the average HHI into perspective, one firm with 50% of vacancies, another
one with 35% of vacancies, and a third with 15% yield an HHI of 3,950. On average, the number
of firms is 12.6, which seems high7 , but the average HHI of 4378 indicates that most vacancies
are posted by just a few firms. In fact, the average HHI implies that the equivalent number
of firms recruiting is just 2.3 on average. Furthermore, note that the 25th percentile for the
number of firms is 1.5, i.e. in a quarter of the markets there are fewer than two firms recruiting
on average.
    Looking at percentiles of the HHI beyond the mean, the 75th percentile of HHI is 7279.
Again, to place this 7279 number in perspective, a market with one firm having 80% of va-
cancies and another one having 20% yields an HHI of 6,800. While 60% of markets are highly
concentrated, another 11% of markets are moderately concentrated, i.e. have an HHI between
1,500 and 2,500. Only 29% of markets have low concentration (below 1,500 HHI).
    7 The
        maximum number of firms, at 1983.8, is the average number of firms across the four quarters of 2016 for
"Sales Representatives, Wholesale and Manufacturing, Except Technical and Scientific Products" in the New York
commuting zone. Overall, there are 29 markets with more than 1000 firms.



                                                      13
   To complement these national statistics, Figure 1 shows a map of all the commuting zones
in the United States color-coded by the average HHI, based on vacancy shares. Commuting
zones around large cities have lower levels of labor market concentration than smaller cities
or rural areas. Figure 3 illustrates the relationship between commuting zone and concentra-
tion: we see that the relationship is roughly linear in logs, with commuting zones with larger
populations having lower concentration. This suggests a new explanation for the city-wage
premium (Yankow, 2006; Baum-Snow and Pavan, 2012): cities, and especially large cities, tend
to have less concentrated labor markets than rural areas.8
   In Figure 2, we show the quartiles of HHI across the US, and reveal substantial heterogene-
ity in concentration across occupations even within a commuting zone. For each commuting
zone, we define quartiles of concentration of the top 200 6-digit SOC: the first quartile contains
the 25% least concentrated occupations on average over 2016 Q1-Q4 in that commuting zone,
the second quartile contains the next 25% least concentrated occupations in the commuting
zone, etc. Therefore, the quartiles can contain different occupations in each commuting zone
depending on the local level of the HHI. The map is color coded according to the average level
of the HHI in each quartile for each commuting zone. There are few commuting zones that
have highly concentrated occupations in the first quartile of concentration. Most of the com-
muting zones with highly concentrated occupations in the first quartile are in the middle of the
country at the west end of the Great Plains. At the other extreme, occupations in the fourth
quartile of concentration are extremely highly concentrated with an HHI above 5,000 in almost
all (86%) of the US commuting zones. Therefore, for much of the country, the least concentrated
25% of occupations have low concentration, while the most concentrated 25% of occupations
have extremely high concentration.
   To further explore the variation in HHI by occupation, we report the average HHI in the
largest 30 occupations in Figure 4. There is substantial heterogeneity across the most frequent
occupations: over a third are highly concentrated, about one third are moderately concentrated
  8 Manning   (2010) shows evidence on plant size that is consistent with lower monopsony power in cities.


                                                      14
and less than one third have low concentration. The most concentrated frequent occupation
is marketing managers and the least concentrated frequent occupation is registered nurses.
The top 5 most concentrated occupations are all high skilled occupations, while the rest of
occupations are more of a mix and of high and low skill.
   The majority of labor markets are highly concentrated according to our baseline definition
of concentration. The frequency of highly concentrated labor markets is important for merger
policy because, as mentioned above, a merger challenge needs to identify only one market in
which anticompetitive results would be substantially likely to occur. At the same time, it is
also interesting to examine the extent to which US workers as a whole face high concentration.
When weighing each labor market by the number of employed workers, we find that HHI
is 1638 on average, implying an equivalent number of recruiting firms of 6.1. This relatively
low level of concentration is due to the fact that, as mentioned above, concentration is lower in
commuting zones with higher population. However, even after taking into account the unequal
distribution of employment across markets, we find that 20% of employment is in SOC-6 by
CZ by quarter cells that have high levels of concentration. Another 8% of employment is in
markets that are moderately concentrated. Overall, 28% of employment is in moderately or
highly concentrated markets, and these markets represent 71% of all labor markets.
   The legal standard for merger review is that a merger that substantially reduces competition
in any market is illegal, and under the precedent of United States v. Philadelphia National
Bank, pro-competitive benefits in one market cannot be used to offset the loss of competition
in another. Therefore, the existence of many highly concentrated labor markets matters for
antitrust enforcement, even if most workers work in less concentrated markets.
   So far, we have discussed variation in concentration while holding the market definition in
terms of 6-digit SOC by commuting zone by quarter fixed. We now examine how concentration
changes when we vary the definition of each one of these elements. Starting with occupation,
we report HHI for four alternative definitions. As mentioned above, there are reasons to think
that the job title may be the most appropriate definition of the labor market. When using


                                               15
standardized job titles to define an occupational labor market, we find that the average con-
centration is higher than in the benchmark, at 5,892 (Table 1). This higher concentration was
to be expected, since job titles are more detailed than 6-digit SOC. When using job titles as the
definition of an occupation, 78% of markets are highly concentrated.
   Next, instead of using the SOC-6 definition, we use the Burning Glass Technology (BGT)
occupation. This classification is based on the SOC, but expands or consolidates SOC categories
using the similarity of skills, education and knowledge requirements. This classification gives
results (Table 1) that are almost identical to the baseline. We then broaden the occupational
categories by using either the BGT broader occupation group or the 3-digit SOC (for the 3-digit
SOC, we use top 60 occupations, representing 98% of vacancies). The BGT broader occupation
group categorizes occupations based on similar work functions, skills, and profiles of education
and training. When using either the BGT broader occupation group or the 3-digit SOC, HHI
levels are very similar: the average market is a few hundred points above the 2,500 threshold
for high concentration, and 40% of markets are highly concentrated.
   We now examine the impact of alternative geographical market definitions. As would be
expected, county-level HHIs are higher than CZ-level HHIs, and state-level HHIs are lower
than CZ-level HHIs (Table 1). State-level HHIs are very low and only 7% of markets are highly
concentrated according to this definition. However, a state is very likely too broad a market.
By contrast, a county is smaller than a commuting zone and is sometimes used to define a
geographic market, e.g. by the Federal Reserve to calculate banking concentration (Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2017). If we adopt the county as a definition of the geography for a
labor market, 78% of labor markets are highly concentrated.
   Finally, we examine time aggregations other than the quarter. Table 1 shows that the average
HHI calculated using monthly data is higher than the baseline, and the HHI using semesters is
lower but still highly concentrated.
   In summary, we find that reasonably defined local labor markets are highly concentrated
on average. In our preferred definition of the labor market, the majority of US labor markets


                                               16
are highly concentrated (above 2,500 HHI).



5    Labor Market Concentration and Product Market Concentra-

     tion in Manufacturing

    Antitrust enforcement is focused on product market competition, and product concentra-
tion (HHI) is one of the ways to measure competition. To illustrate how taking into account
labor market concentration would make a difference, we examine the case of manufacturing.
We choose to focus on manufacturing because, unlike labor markets, the manufacturing prod-
uct market is generally national (Ashenfelter, Hosken and Weinberg (2013), for example), so
we expect important differences between product market and labor market concentration. We
compare labor market concentration and product market concentration, and examine the rela-
tionship of each with occupational wages.
    Since the most recent available product market HHI for manufacturing is 2012, the analy-
sis in this section uses 2012 data from all sources. Product market HHI is from the Economic
Census at the national NAICS-4 level. The HHI is based on the value of shipments, in order
to measure concentration in sales, as is customary in antitrust enforcement. We compute labor
market concentration for each industry based on the occupation with the largest national em-
ployment in each industry; call this occupation the “top occupation”. By choosing the largest
occupation in each industry, we are more likely to find a positive correlation between labor
and product market concentration than if we were using all employment, including occupa-
tions that are not particularly specific to that industry. Using the Occupational Employment
Statistics (OES), we calculate the national average hourly wage for the top occupation in each
industry. Using Burning Glass Technologies data, we calculate the labor market HHI for the
top occupation in each industry at the commuting zone (CZ) by quarter level. To calculate HHI,
we include vacancies in that occupation that are not in that industry, so that the HHI calculated
here is calculated in exactly the same way as our baseline HHI for 2016. We calculate the aver-

                                               17
age national labor market HHI for the top occupation in each industry by averaging first over
quarters by CZ, and then over CZ weighing by OES employment in the top occupation and
NAICS-4 in each CZ. Because in Azar, Marinescu and Steinbaum (2017), we have shown that
the relationship between wages and concentration is linear in the log-log space, we log each
measure of concentration here in order to correlate it with wages.
   Overall, labor market and product market concentration are positively but not very strongly
correlated (Figure 5). The raw correlation between log labor market HHI and log product mar-
ket HHI is 0.11 across the 86 industries, and 0.33 when weighing by OES employment in the
top occupation. In a weighted regression of labor market HHI on product market HHI, the
coefficient is significant at the 5% level. In general, labor market HHIs are much higher than
product market HHI: across industries, the average product market HHI is 411 and the average
labor market HHI (weighted by local employment) is 3,955. Therefore, while the manufactur-
ing product market is unconcentrated on average, the labor markets for the top occupations
employed by each industry are highly concentrated on average according to the FTC/DOJ
standards. One reason is that labor markets are, inherently, local, while product markets for
durable goods like manufacturing are often national.
   While labor and product market HHIs are positively correlated, they are far from being
perfectly aligned. For example, we can compare two large (by employment) industries with
similarly low product market HHI: plastics product manufacturing and cement and concrete
product manufacturing, with each industry employing about 50,000 people in its top occupa-
tion. In plastics product manufacturing, the top occupation is “Molding, Coremaking, and
Casting Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic”. Plastics product man-
ufacturing has a product market HHI of 30 (83rd most concentrated out of 86) and a labor
market HHI of 5,726 (21st most concentrated): this industry is thus relatively unconcentrated
in the product market but highly concentrated in the labor market both in relative and absolute
terms (the industry that has a log HHI between 3 and 4 and is well above the fitted line in Fig-
ure 5). For comparison, consider cement and concrete product manufacturing, where the top


                                              18
occupation is “Heavy and Tractor-Trailer Truck Drivers”. The cement and concrete products
industry has a product market HHI of 100 (the 70th most concentrated industry) and a labor
market HHI of 473 (the 85th most concentrated industry, essentially the least concentrated): the
industry appears well below the fitted line in Figure 5, having a log product market HHI be-
tween 4 and 5 and a log labor market HHI between 6 and 6.5. In cement and concrete product
manufacturing, the labor market concentration in the top occupation is low by the FTC/DOJ
standards, presumably because truck drivers work in many industries besides cement and con-
crete products. Based on HHIs in the product market and the top occupation, mergers in the
cement and concrete product manufacturing industry are unproblematic, at least with respect
to the top occupation, truck drivers. In contrast, while mergers in the plastics product manu-
facturing industry are not problematic for the product market, they merit scrutiny for the labor
market due to the high levels of labor market concentration in this industry’s top occupation.
   Labor market concentration is different from product market concentration, and occupa-
tional wages are lower when labor market concentration is higher, not when product market
concentration is higher. Using the OES, we calculate the national average hourly wage by
industry for the top occupation in each industry. Across industries, labor market concentra-
tion has a negative and statistically significant effect on wages (Figure 6), and the elasticity of
the wage with respect to labor market concentration is about -0.1, whether weighing by em-
ployment or not (Table 2, col. 1 and 2). So, across industries, a 10% increase in labor market
concentration is associated with a 1% lower wage in the top occupation. This magnitude is of
the same order of magnitude as the one obtained in our previous work with CareerBuilder.com
data on labor market concentration and posted wages (Azar, Marinescu and Steinbaum, 2017).
What about product market concentration? The impact of product market HHI on wages is
positive and marginally significant in unweighted regressions, but smaller and insignificant
in weighted regressions (Table 2, col. 3 and 4). The positive effect of product market concen-
tration on wages, if it exists indeed, may be due to rent sharing with workers, especially in
more unionized industries. Including both labor market and product market HHIs in the same


                                                19
regression does not alter the conclusions (Table 2, col. 5 and 6): labor market concentration
is negatively associated with wages while product market concentration has a much smaller
positive and not always significant association with wages.
    In a nutshell, we have shown that labor market concentration in manufacturing is higher
than product market concentration and not perfectly predicted by product market concentra-
tion. Occupational wages are negatively associated with labor market concentration, but not
product market concentration. These results suggest that broadening antitrust policy to include
labor markets on top of product markets can make a difference to enforcement and workers’
outcomes.



6    Discussion

    One potential explanation of firm-specific earnings premia (Card et al., 2016; Song et al.,
2016) is a lack of competition among employers: if job offers are not frequent enough to equi-
librate earnings of similar workers across firms, then firms likely have market power in wage
setting. The increase in the degree of inter-firm earnings inequality for similar workers in sim-
ilar industries is an indication that firm-level wage-setting power has become relatively more
important as job offers become less frequent. Empirical studies of the declining frequency of
incoming job offers for employed workers (Hyatt and Spletzer (2016) and Molloy et al. (2016))
are thus consistent with a decrease in labor market competition among employers.
    The estimates we offer of labor market concentration are comparable with estimates of mar-
ket concentration in many antitrust product markets that are considered concentrated in the
Industrial Organization literature. For example, Kwoka, Hearle and Alepin (2016) report an
average HHI of 3930 in their sample of high-traffic airline routes. Azar, Schmalz and Tecu
(forthcoming) estimate mean route-level concentration at 5202.
    Cooper et al. (2015) find that mean HHI in hospital markets, defined by number of beds
within a 15-mile radius, is 4160. For health insurers, for which the relevant market is the state,


                                               20
given state-level insurance regulation, the same authors calculate mean HHI as 2120. Another
commonly-studied output market in which geography matters is retail groceries: Hosken, Ol-
son and Smith (2012) find that in markets in which a merger occurred during their study pe-
riod (2005-2009), the ex-ante HHI averaged 2334, while in their control group of markets that
experienced no consolidation, concentration was 3368. Finally, concentration in local banking
markets is typically measured at the county level; Azar, Raina and Schmalz (2016) estimate
mean HHI for deposit-taking institutions is 1840. Altogether, many antitrust markets are very
concentrated. In this sense, what we find in labor markets is not anomalous.
    However, a crucial final point to be made is that labor markets are different from the goods
markets which are the usual domain of antitrust analysis and hence of the concentration thresh-
olds contained in the Horizontal Merger Guidelines. Goods markets are typically thought of
as one-sided, and hence the extent of the market is delimited by the options among which con-
sumers substitute. Labor markets, on the other hand, are two-sided: workers not only have to
find an employer; they have to find an employer who is willing to hire them (Naidu, Posner
and Weyl, 2018). This implies that traditional concentration measures overestimate the options
available to workers, and thus underestimate concentration. Indeed, 55% of job offers are ac-
cepted by the non-employed, showing that in practice workers have few offers they could have
accepted (Faberman et al., 2017). The two-sided nature of labor markets therefore implies that
job choice sets are typically more restricted than product choice sets.



7    Conclusion

    Since the release of Barkai (2016), Autor et al. (2017) and De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017),
and other papers documenting rising product market concentration and discussing its effect
on the labor market, there has been a great deal of academic and popular interest in whether
market concentration might be the cause of monopsony power, wage stagnation, and other
macro labor trends.


                                               21
   In this paper, we contribute to this growing debate by calculating measures of market con-
centration in local labor markets for the near-universe of 2016 online vacancy postings con-
structed by Burning Glass, and building on Azar, Marinescu and Steinbaum (2017). We have
shown that concentration is high (above 2,500 HHI) in 60% of US labor markets according to
our baseline market definition, and in at least a third of US labor markets according to alterna-
tive labor market definitions. Employment-weighted average concentration is lower at 1638,
but still moderately concentrated. Finally, we show that in manufacturing in 2012, labor mar-
ket concentration in top occupations is associated with significantly lower wages (elasticity of
-0.1), while product market concentration does not have a robust impact on wages. Our results
suggest that the anti-competitive effects of concentration on the labor market could be impor-
tant, and are not captured by product market concentration. As detailed in Marinescu and
Hovenkamp (2018), the type of analysis we provide could be used to incorporate labor market
concentration concerns as a factor in the legal review of company mergers.




                                               22
References

Artuc, Erhan, and John McLaren. 2015. “Trade policy and wage inequality: A structural anal-
  ysis with occupational and sectoral mobility.” Journal of International Economics, 97: 28–41.

Artuc, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. 2010. “Trade Shocks and Labor Ad-
  justment: A Structural Empirical Approach.” American Economic Review, 100: 1008–1045.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Alan B. Krueger. 2017. “Theory and Evidence on Employer Collusion
  in the Franchise Sector.” Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper.
  DOI: 10.3386/w23396.

Ashenfelter, Orley C., Henry Farber, and Michael R. Ransom. 2010. “Labor market monop-
  sony.” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2): 203–210.

Ashenfelter, Orley, Daniel S. Hosken, and Matthew C. Weinberg. 2013. “The Price Effect of
  a Large Merger of Manufacturers: A Case Study of Maytag-Whirlpool.” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 5.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen.
  2017. “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.” National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 23396. DOI: 10.3386/w23396.

Azar, Jose, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall Steinbaum. 2017. “Labor Market Concentration.”

Azar, Jose, Martin Schmalz, and Isabel Tecu. forthcoming. “Anti-Competitive Effects of Com-
  mon Ownership.” Journal of Finance.

Azar, Jose, Sahil Raina, and Martin Schmalz. 2016. “Ultimate Ownership and Bank Competi-
  tion.”

Barkai, Simcha. 2016. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.”


                                               23
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Ronni Pavan. 2012. “Understanding the City Size Wage Gap.”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 79(1): 88–127.

Benmelech, Efraim, Nittai Bergman, and Hyunseob Kim. 2018. “Strong Employers and Weak
  Employees: How Does Employer Concentration Affect Wages?”

BLS. 2017. “Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment.” Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Boal, William M., and Michael R Ransom. 1997. “Monopsony in the Labor Market.” Journal of
  Economic Literature, 35(1): 86–112.

Bunting, Robert. 1962. Employer Concentration in Local Labor Markets. University of North Car-
  olina Press.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2016. “Firms and Labor
  Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory.”

Carnevale, Anthony P, Tamara Jayasundera, and Dmitri Repnikov. 2014. “Understanding on-
  line job ads data.”

CEA. 2016. “Labor market monopsony: trends, consequences, and policy responses.” White
  House Council of Economics Adivsors.

Cooper, Zack, Stuart V. Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen. 2015. “The Price Ain’t
  Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the Privately Insured.”

De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic
  Implications.”

Deming, David, and Lisa B. Kahn. 2017. “Skill Requirements across Firms and Labor Mar-
  kets: Evidence from Job Postings for Professionals.” National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 23328. DOI: 10.3386/w23328.



                                               24
Dix-Caneiro, Rafael. 2014. “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics.” Econometrica,
  82: 825–885.

Dube, Arindrajit, Jeff Jacobs, Suresh Naidu, and Siddharth Suri. 2018. “Monopsony in On-
  line Labor Markets.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24416.

Dube, Arindrajit, William T. Lester, and Michael Reich. 2016. “Minimum Wage Shocks, Em-
  ployment Flows, and Labor Market Frictions.” Journal of Labor Economics, 34: 663–704.

Faberman, R. Jason, Andreas I. Mueller, Ayşegül Şahin, and Giorgio Topa. 2017. “Job Search
  Behavior among the Employed and Non-Employed.” National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 23731. DOI: 10.3386/w23731.

Falch, Torberg. 2010. “The Elasticity of Labor Supply at the Establishment Level.” Journal of
  Labor Economics, 28(2): 237–266.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 2017. “Competitive Analysis and Structure Source Instru-
  ment for Depository Institutions.”

Haltiwanger, John, Henry R. Hyatt, Lisa B. Kahn, and Erica McEntarfer. forthcoming. “Cycli-
  cal Job Ladders by Firm Size and Firm Wage.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Harris, Barry C., and Joseph J. Simons. 1991. “Focusing Market Definition: How Much Substi-
  tution is Necessary The DOJ Merger Guidelines Part I: Market Definition 12 Research in Law
  and Economics 207 (1989).” Journal of Reprints for Antitrust Law and Economics, 21: 151–172.

Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa B. Kahn. 2016. “Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Techno-
  logical Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings.” National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 22762. DOI: 10.3386/w22762.

Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa Kahn. 2017. “Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Technolog-
  ical Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings.”


                                              25
Hosken, Daniel, Luke M. Olson, and Loren Smith. 2012. “Do Retail Mergers Affect Competi-
  tion? Evidence from Retail Grocery.”

Hyatt, Henry R., and James R. Spletzer. 2016. “The Shifting Job Tenure Distribution.” Labour
  Economics, 41: 363–377.

Konczal, Mike, and Marshall Steinbaum. 2016. “Declining Entrepreneurship, Labor Mobility,
  and Business Dynamism: A Demand-Side Approach.”

Kwoka, John, Kevin Hearle, and Philippe Alepin. 2016. “From the Fringe to the Fore-
  front: Low Cost Carriers and Airline Price Determination.” Review of Industrial Organization,
  48: 247–268.

Macaluso, Claudia. 2017. “Skill remoteness and post-layoff labor market outcomes.”

Manning, Alan. 2010. “The plant size-place effect: agglomeration and monopsony in labour
  markets.” Journal of Economic Geography, 10(5): 717–744.

Manning, Alan. 2011. “Imperfect competition in the labor market.” Handbook of labor economics,
  4: 973–1041.

Manning, Alan, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2017. “How Local Are Labor Markets? Evidence
  from a Spatial Job Search Model.” American Economic Review, 107(10): 2877–2907.

Marinescu, Ioana, and Herbert Hovenkamp. 2018. “Anticompetitive Mergers in Labor Mar-
  kets.” Social Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3124483, Rochester, NY.

Marinescu, Ioana, and Roland Rathelot. 2017. “Mismatch Unemployment and the Geography
  of Job Search.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Marinescu, Ioana, and Ronald Wolthoff. 2016. “Opening the Black Box of the Matching Func-
  tion: the Power of Words.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22508.
  DOI: 10.3386/w22508.

                                              26
Matsudaira, Jordan D. 2013. “Monopsony in the Low-Wage Labor Market? Evidence from
  Minimum Nurse Staffing Regulations.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1): 92–102.

Modestino, Alicia Sasser, Daniel Shoag, and Joshua Ballance. 2016. “Downskilling: Changes
  in Employer Skill Requirements Over the Business Cycle.”

Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, Ricardo Trezzi, and Abigail Wozniak. 2016. “Under-
  standing declining fluidity in the U.S. labor market.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  183–237.

Naidu, Suresh, Eric N. Posner, and E. Glen Weyl. 2018. “Antitrust Remedies for Labor Market
  Power.”

Nocke, Volker, and Nicolas Schutz. 2018. “An Aggregative Games Approach to Merger Analy-
  sis in Multiproduct-Firm Oligopoly.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  24578.

Ransom, Michael R, and David P. Sims. 2010. “Estimating the Firm’s Labor Supply Curve in
  a “New Monopsony” Framework: Schoolteachers in Missouri.” Journal of Labor Economics,
  28(2): 331–355.

Rinz, Kevin. 2018. “Labor Market Concentration, Earnings Inequality, and Earnings Mobility.”
  Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau Working Paper 2018-10.

Song, Jae, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter. 2016. “Firm-
  ing Up Inequality.”

Staiger, Douglas O, Joanne Spetz, and Ciaran S Phibbs. 2010. “Is there monopsony in the
  labor market? Evidence from a natural experiment.” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2): 211–
  236.

Starr, Evan, J. J. Prescott, and Norman Bishara. 2017. “Noncompetes in the U.S. Labor Force.”
  Social Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2625714, Rochester, NY.

                                              27
Traiberman, Sharon. 2017. “Occupations and Import Competition: Evidence from Denmark.”

Yankow, Jeffrey J. 2006. “Why do cities pay more? An empirical examination of some compet-
  ing theories of the urban wage premium.” Journal of Urban Economics, 60(2): 139–161.




                                             28
Table 1. Summary statistics for labor market concentration, for the baseline and alternative market definitions.
This table shows summary statistics for labor market Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) under various market
definitions, for the year 2016 using data from Burning Glass Technologies (BGT). The baseline is calculated using
commuting zones for the geographic market definition, 6-digit SOC codes for the occupational market definition,
aggregating the data at the quarterly level (and then averaging over quarters for a given CZ×SOC). In the alter-
native definitions, the calculation is done by changing the baseline along one dimension (occupation, geography,
time horizon). Except for the HHI weighted by employment, concentration is calculated over the top occupations
(top 200 ranked based on the number of vacancies in the case of 6-digit SOC, representing 90% of vacancies; or
BGT occupation definitions, and top 60 in the case of 3-digit SOC (representing 98% of vacancies) or BGT broader
occupation group definitions) over the period 2016Q1–2016Q4.

                                                                                        Fraction       Fraction
                                 Mean    Min   Max      25th Pctile.   75th Pctile.    Moderately      Highly
                                                                                      Concentrated   Concentrated

 Baseline market definition:

 Number of Firms
                                  12.6   1.0   1983.8       1.5            8.3
  (Unweighted)
 HHI (Unweighted)                 4378    4    10000       1232           7279            0.11           0.60
 HHI (Weighted by
                                  1638    4    10000        187           1774            0.08           0.20
 BLS Employment)


 Alternative occupational definition:

 HHI (By Job Title)               5892   11    10000       2896          10000            0.08           0.78
 HHI (By BGT Occupation)          4384    4    10000       1230           7333            0.11           0.60
 HHI (By BGT Broader
                                  2943    6    10000        568           4744            0.12           0.40
  Occupation Group)
 HHI (By 3-digit SOC)             2956   10    10000        570           4774            0.12           0.40


 Alternative geographical definition:

 HHI (By County)                  6029    5    10000       2971          10000            0.08           0.78
 HHI (By State)                    859    2    10000        141           769             0.05           0.07


 Alternative time aggregation:

 HHI (Monthly)                    5926    9    10000       3043           8750            0.07           0.78
 HHI (Semesterly)                 3466    2    10000        788           5278            0.14           0.47
Table 2. Labor market concentration, product market concentration, & occupational wages in manufacturing.
Only manufacturing industries are included; all data is for year 2012. Product market HHI is from the Economic Census at the national NAICS-
4 level (based on the value of shipments). Using the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES), we calculate the national average hourly wage
for the highest employment occupation in each industry; call this occupation the “top occupation”. Using Burning Glass Technologies data,
we calculate the labor market HHI for the top occupation in each industry at the commuting zone (CZ) by quarter level; to calculate HHI, we
include vacancies in that occupation that are not in that industry, so that the HHI calculated here is calculated in exactly the same way as our
baseline HHI for 2016. We calculate the average national labor market HHI for the top occupation in each industry by averaging first over
quarters by CZ, and then over CZ weighing by OES employment in the top occupation and NAICS-4 in each CZ.


                                                                 Dependent Variable: Log Hourly Wage (OES)
                                                         (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)     (5)                          (6)

        Log Labor Market HHI                         -0.0920**      -0.105**                                 -0.101**       -0.125***
                                                      (0.0402)      (0.0432)                                 (0.0396)       (0.0469)
        Log Product Market HHI                                                    0.0481*        0.0104      0.0554**         0.0335
                                                                                  (0.0253)      (0.0378)     (0.0234)        (0.0323)
        Constant                                      3.505***      3.588***      2.497***      2.699***     3.267***        3.581***
                                                       (0.327)       (0.337)       (0.132)       (0.186)      (0.325)         (0.378)

        Weighted by national industry                                   X                           X                           X
        employment in top occupation.
        Observations                        86                         86            86           86            86             86
        R-squared                          0.064                      0.097         0.037        0.003         0.113          0.126
        Robust standard errors in parentheses
        *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                                            HHI Concentration Category
                                                                                               Very High (5000-10000)
                                                                                               High (2500-5000)
                                                                                               Moderate (1500-2500)
                                                                                               Low (0-1500)
                                                                                               No data



Figure 1. Average HHI by commuting zone, based on vacancy shares. This figure shows the average of the
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index by commuting zone code for the top 200 SOC-6 occupations (ranked based on the
number of vacancies) over the period 2016Q1–2016Q4 in the Burning Glass Technologies dataset. The categories
we use for HHI concentration levels are: "Low": HHI between 0 and 1500; "Moderate": HHI between 1500 and
2500; "High": HHI between 2500 and 5000; "Very High": HHI between 5000 and 10000. These categories cor-
respond to the DOJ/FTC guidelines, except that we add the additional distinction between high and very high
concentration levels around the 5,000 HHI threshold. Market shares are defined as the sum of vacancies by a given
firm in a given market (6-digit SOC by commuting zone) and year-quarter divided by total vacancies posted in
that market and year-quarter.
                                           HHI Concentration Category                                  HHI Concentration Category
                                              Very High (5000-10000)                                       Very High (5000-10000)
                                              High (2500-5000)                                             High (2500-5000)
                                              Moderate (1500-2500)                                         Moderate (1500-2500)
                                              Low (0-1500)                                                 Low (0-1500)
                                              No data                                                      No data




                  (A) 1st Quartile                                          (B) 2nd Quartile




                                              HHI Concentration Category                            HHI Concentration Category
                                                  Very High (5000-10000)                               Very High (5000-10000)
                                                  High (2500-5000)                                     High (2500-5000)
                                                  Moderate (1500-2500)                                 Moderate (1500-2500)
                                                  Low (0-1500)                                         Low (0-1500)
                                                  No data                                              No data




                   (C) 3rd Quartile                                        (D) 4th Quartile

Figure 2. Map of average HHI by commuting zone, by quartile of HHI. This figure shows averages by quartile
of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index by commuting zone for the top 200 SOC-6 occupations (ranked based on
the total number of national-level vacancies) over the period 2016Q1–2016Q4 in the Burning Glass Technologies
dataset. Within each commuting zone (CZ), we order the 200 occupations by concentration to form four quartiles.
The map for the first quartile represents the average concentration across 2016Q1–2016Q4 among first quartile
occupations for each CZ, and similarly for other quartiles. The categories we use for HHI concentration levels
are: "Low": HHI between 0 and 1500; "Moderate": HHI between 1500 and 2500; "High": HHI between 2500 and
5000; "Very High": HHI between 5000 and 10000. These categories correspond to the DOJ/FTC guidelines, except
that we add the additional distinction between high and very high concentration levels around the 5,000 HHI
threshold. Market shares are defined as the sum of vacancies by a given firm in a given market and year-quarter
divided by total vacancies posted in that market (6-digit SOC by commuting zone) and year-quarter.
     8000
     6000
    HHI
  4000
     2000
     0




            8                    10                  12                         14                     16
                                              Log(CZ Population)

Figure 3. Binned scatter of HHI and Population. This figure shows a binned scatter of the Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index by commuting zone for the top 200 SOC-6 occupations (ranked based on the number of vacancies) over the
period 2016Q1–2016Q4 in the Burning Glass Technologies dataset, and log of population in the corresponding
commuting zone in 2016 (based on Census data).
                                                                             Marketing Managers
                                                                            Management Analysts
                                                                      Computer Systems Analysts
                                                                                Financial Analysts
                                                                     Information Security Analysts
                                                                                 Web Developers
                                                                Software Developers, Applications
                                                               Computer User Support Specialists
                                                                        Accountants and Auditors
                                                                 Computer Occupations, All Other
                                                                              Financial Managers
                                                    Bookkeeping, Accounting, and Auditing Clerks
                                                               General and Operations Managers
                                                                                 Sales Managers
                                                                    Human Resources Specialists
                                                                          Food Service Managers
                                                                    Stock Clerks and Order Fillers
                            Combined Food Preparation and Serving Workers, Including Fast Food
                                                                               Nursing Assistants
                                          Laborers and Freight, Stock, and Material Movers, Hand
                   Secretaries and Administrative Assistants, Except Legal, Medical, and Executive
                                                       Maintenance and Repair Workers, General
                                                           Medical and Health Services Managers
                                                                              Managers, All Other
                                               Licensed Practical and Licensed Vocational Nurses
                                                                              Retail Salespersons
                                                    First-Line Supervisors of Retail Sales Workers
     Sales Representatives, Wholesale and Manufacturing, Except Technical and Scientific Products
                                                               Customer Service Representatives
                                                          Heavy and Tractor-Trailer Truck Drivers
                                                                               Registered Nurses




                                                                                                     0   1,000     2,000    3,000   4,000
                                                                                                                 Average HHI

Figure 4. Average HHI by occupation, based on vacancy shares, for the largest 30 occupations. This figure shows
the average of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index by 6-digit SOC occupation code for the 30 largest occupations as
measured by number of vacancies over the period 2016Q1–2016Q4 in the Burning Glass Technologies dataset.
Market shares are defined as the sum of vacancies posted by a given firm in a given market (6-digit SOC by
commuting zone) and year-quarter divided by total vacancies posted in the website in that market and year-
quarter.
             9.5
             9         8.5
  Log Labor Market HHI
      7   7.56.5
             6
             5.5 8




                                     Log Labor Market HHI =7.06+0.185 Log Product Market HHI
                             1   2        3        4       5        6        7       8                        9
                                                Log Product Market HHI

Figure 5. Scatter of Product Market and Labor Market HHIs for Manufacturing in 2012. Only manufacturing
industries are included; all data is for year 2012. Product market HHI is from the Economic Census at the national
NAICS-4 level (based on the value of shipments). Using the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES), we de-
termine the highest employment occupation in each industry; call this occupation the “top occupation”. The size
of the circles in the scatter is proportional to NAICS-4 employment in the top occupation. Using Burning Glass
Technologies data, we calculate the labor market HHI for the top occupation in each industry at the commuting
zone (CZ) by quarter level; to calculate HHI, we include vacancies in that occupation that are not in that industry,
so that the HHI calculated here is calculated in exactly the same way as our baseline HHI for 2016. We calculate
the average national labor market HHI for the top occupation in each industry by averaging first over quarters by
CZ, and then over CZ weighing by OES employment in the top occupation and NAICS-4 in each CZ. The fitted
line is from a regression weighing by OES national employment in the top occupation in the NAICS-4; the esti-
mated coefficients are displayed at the bottom of the figure, and the coefficient on product market concentration
is significant at the 5% level.
            4.5
            4
  Log Hourly Wage (OES)
       3    2.5
            2   3.5




                          6   6.5      7           7.5       8                  8.5            9            9.5
                                               Log Labor Market HHI

Figure 6. Scatter of Log Wages and Labor Market HHIs for Manufacturing in 2012. Only manufacturing in-
dustries are included; all data is for year 2012. Product market HHI is from the Economic Census at the national
NAICS-4 level (based on the value of shipments). Using the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES), we calcu-
late the national average hourly wage for the highest employment occupation in each industry; call this occupation
the “top occupation”. The size of the circles in the scatter is proportional to NAICS-4 employment in the top occu-
pation. Using Burning Glass Technologies data, we calculate the labor market HHI for the top occupation in each
industry at the commuting zone (CZ) by quarter level; to calculate HHI, we include vacancies in that occupation
that are not in that industry, so that the HHI calculated here is calculated in exactly the same way as our base-
line HHI for 2016. We calculate the average national labor market HHI for the top occupation in each industry
by averaging first over quarters by CZ, and then over CZ weighing by OES employment in the top occupation
and NAICS-4 in each CZ. The fitted line is from a regression weighing by OES national employment in the top
occupation in the NAICS-4.
