                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    QUALITY OF JUDICIAL INSTITUTIONS, CRIMES,
                        MISDEMEANORS, AND DISHONESTY

                                       Naci H. Mocan
                                      Samantha Bielen
                                       Wim Marneffe

                                     Working Paper 24396
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24396


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         March 2018, Revised November 2018




We thank Luiza Pogorelova for outstanding research assistance. Jonathan Klick, Marco Vannini,
Claudio Detotto, Brian McCannon and participants at LACEA-AL CAPONE Workshop on
Economics of Crime in Montevideo, Uruguay, CRENoS Workshop on Institutions, Individual
behavior and Economic Outcomes, and SEA Meetings in New Orleans, Louisiana provided
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Naci H. Mocan, Samantha Bielen, and Wim Marneffe. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Quality of Judicial Institutions, Crimes, Misdemeanors, and Dishonesty
Naci H. Mocan, Samantha Bielen, and Wim Marneffe
NBER Working Paper No. 24396
March 2018, Revised November 2018
JEL No. H0,J0,K4,K42,P48,Z1

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigate the extent to which the quality of judicial institutions has an impact on
individuals’ propensity for criminal and dishonest behavior and on their views regarding the
acceptability of dishonesty and law-breaking. We use micro data on residents of 25 European
countries and employ alternative measures of judicial quality. Acknowledging that the quality of
judicial institutions is endogenous, we employ as an instrument the procedures with which
prosecutors and judges are appointed to their posts in each country. The results reveal that an
increase in the quality of judicial institutions, such as an improvement in judicial independence or
the impartiality of the courts, has a deterrent effect on dishonest and criminal acts. A higher
quality judicial system makes individuals less likely to find acceptable a variety dishonest and
illicit behaviors, suggesting that institutions help shape the beliefs of the society.


Naci H. Mocan                                    Wim Marneffe
Department of Economics                          Hasselt University
Louisiana State University                       Agoralaan 30, Building D
2439 BEC                                         3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306                       wim.marneffe@uhasselt.be
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu

Samantha Bielen
Hasselt University
Agoralaan 30, Building D
3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
 samantha.bielen@uhasselt.be
       Quality of Judicial Institutions, Crimes, Misdemeanors, and Dishonesty


I. Introduction

        There are substantial differences between countries in the extent to which people

consider illegal or dishonest behavior acceptable. For example, to the question of “How

wrong is it to buy something you thought might be stolen?” only 3.8 percent of people in

Denmark respond to indicate that it is “Not wrong at all” or “A bit wrong.” The approval

rate of the act of buying a stolen good is 12.4 percent in the Netherlands, 18.1 percent in

Bulgaria, 22.4 percent in France, and 30.4 percent in Russia. While 13.2 percent of

Ukrainians find that bribery is “not wrong at all”, or “a bit wrong,” only less than one

percent of people in Iceland think that bribery is acceptable behavior. The approval rate of

bribery is 3.2 percent in Germany, 5.7 percent in Belgium, and 6.8 percent in Spain.1

        As there are significant differences between countries in the rate at which people

tolerate dishonesty, there is a similarly sizable between-country variation in crime rates,

corruption and other illegal activity. In 2011 there were 1,750 reported thefts per 100,000

inhabitants in Italy, but the rate was 931 in Portugal, and 605 in Poland.2 The murder rate

in that year was 0.88 in Denmark, 1.08 in Portugal, and 2.29 in Turkey in that same year.

While some of these differences in crime rates can be explained by variations in




1
 These statistics are calculated using the data employed in this paper. The details of the data are
provided in Section III.
2
  The crime statistics are obtained from Eurostat. Statistics are reported d for 2011 because that is
the last year which is covered in our analysis sample.


                                                  1
deterrence, labor market conditions and income levels between countries, a significant

amount of variation in illegal activity remains unexplained.3

        Motivated by these observations, and to provide new insights into the question of

“Why does illegal activity and its acceptability vary so much by country?” in this paper

we investigate the extent to which differences in the quality of judicial institutions between

countries help explain the differences in criminal and dishonest behavior, as well as the

acceptability of such behavior. Specifically, we analyze whether the quality of a country’s

legal institutions has an impact on individuals’ propensity to engage in illicit activity in

that country, ranging from falsifying official documents to buying stolen goods to

concealing the defects of a second-hand product when selling it. We also analyze whether

the quality of the judicial system has an impact on people’s beliefs regarding the

acceptability of dishonesty and law-breaking, ranging from tax evasion to bribery, from

exaggerating an insurance claim to acting dishonestly to make money.

        We use micro data on the residents of 25 European countries who are surveyed

between 2004 and 2011 to investigate whether indicators of judicial quality, such as the

independence of the country’s judiciary, the impartiality of the courts, or the protection of

property rights have an impact on citizens’ proclivity to break the law or to engage in

dishonest activity, and on the extent to which people believe that dishonest behavior is

acceptable.




3
 Some of these differences in crime rates may be attributed to dissimilarities in the classification of
crimes and in the reporting rates between counties (Soares 2004). Because murder is a crime
which is reported accurately in most countries, cross-country comparisons based on murder should
be more reliable.


                                                  2
        The paper makes contributions to two areas of investigation. First, it contributes to

the economics of crime literature by adding the quality of the judicial system to the

economic analysis of criminal decision-making. Research in economics has produced

significant amount of credible information regarding the causal impact of key determinants

of criminal activity (Drago et al. 2009, Mocan and Bali 2010, Corman and Mocan 2005,

Machin and Meghir 2004, Di Tella and Schargrodsky 2004, Raphael and Winter-Ebmer

2001, Corman and Mocan 2000). The variation in crime rates between countries, however,

cannot be fully explained by making use of the causal estimates of the determinants of

crime obtained from existing studies. Thus, judicial quality might help add to our

understanding of the variation in illicit activity between countries.

        Judicial system’s lack of independence and the absence of impartiality of the courts

may provide signals to the citizens about the ambiguity and unfairness of judicial

decisions. Houser, Vetter and Winter (2012) find in a laboratory experiment that people,

who believe that they were treated unfairly during an interaction with another person, are

more likely to cheat in an unrelated subsequent game.4 This suggests that if poor judicial

quality and biased court decisions alter people’s perceptions of the fairness of the judicial

system, this could impact their propensity of rule violation and law breaking.

         Relatedly, a decay in the quality of institutions is expected to reduce the perceived

certainty of punishment if deterioration in judicial quality leads to inefficiency and

uncertainty in the criminal justice system. This may, in turn, lead to increased propensity to

disregard the rule of law.5 Evidence on this point is presented by Dusek (2015) who finds


4
 Those who cheat in the lab are also likely to cheat outside of the lab (Potters and Stoop 2016).
5
 This is also similar to the relationship between uncertainty in legal labor market returns and its
impact on criminal propensity (Mocan et al. 2005).


                                                  3
that quick resolution of criminal cases leads to a decline in burglary and embezzlement.

Consistent with the arguments listed above, we find evidence that low judicial quality

makes people more likely to engage in illegal and dishonest acts.

        The second contribution of the paper is its demonstration that the quality of judicial

institutions has an impact on beliefs and attitudes. Gaehter and Schulz (2016) find that the

proportion of young people who cheat in a lab experiment is positively correlated with the

prevalence of rule violation in the country, which leads the authors to argue that

institutions and culture influence the prevalence of rule violation in the society, which in

turn impacts peoples’ intrinsic honesty. Of course it can also be argued that intrinsic

honesty, as a cultural trait, has an impact on the prevalence of rule violation. More

precisely, a cultural belief or attitude such as tolerance for dishonesty, will impact the

propensity for rule violation and unlawful behavior. At the same time, the extent of the

rule violation in the society will have an impact on the tolerance for and the acceptability

of rule violation.

        If most people in a society approve a certain behavior as appropriate and

acceptable, that particular behavior can be thought of as part of the culture of the society.

Cultural beliefs and values of a society, even those that are based on superstition, can be

persistent across many generations (Mocan and Yu 2017). Yet, beliefs are also malleable

and they react to the economic social environment.6 Giavazzi et al. (2014) formulate the

evolution of values and beliefs as being driven by vertical and horizontal transmissions.

Vertical transmission pertains to shaping the beliefs and values of children within the


6
 Even feelings that can be thought of as having been deeply engrained in the fabric of culture, or in
human psyche, respond to economic and social environment. For example, people’s racist,
xenophobic and anti-Semitic attitudes (Mocan and Rashke 2016) and even vengeful feelings
(Mocan 2013) are influenced by economic and social circumstances.
                                                 4
family so as to make it easier for the offspring to function better in the society. But,

individuals are also exposed to the environment outside of the family, and the sanctions

and incentives of the institutional and social environment shape beliefs and values as well,

constituting the horizontal transmission of values. The authors write that “Vertical

transmission, like genetic inheritance, tends to be relatively more conservative, giving rise

to slow evolution of culture; horizontal transmission, as in an epidemic, may result in a

rapid change in the number of people who adopt a new cultural characteristic particularly if

it is attractive to the receiver.” (Giavazzi et al. 2014, p.2). Investigating whether

immigrants’ beliefs and values remain unchanged across generations or whether they

change quickly to conform to the prevailing norm in the destination country, the authors

find that while some cultural beliefs and values (inherited from the country of origin) are

highly stable across generations, others converge quickly to the prevailing norms.

       Di Tella, Galiani and Schargrodsky (2007) find that following the passage of an

expropriation law which intended to grant private land to squatters, some squatter families

obtained property rights to the land they occupied, while others could not do so because

the original owners contested the law in court. The authors show that this differential

experience of being able to obtain the title of the land vs. being unable to do so altered the

beliefs of the squatters about the merits of the free market, and in favor of materialistic and

individualistic beliefs. That is, those who ended up with weak property rights and those

who obtained full property rights developed very different beliefs about free markets.

Along the same lines, people’s beliefs are influenced by the political regime in which they

live. Alesina and Fuchs-Schuendeln (2007) show that the difference in preferences




                                               5
between former East and West Germans is mostly because of the direct influence of

communism.

       Following this research, we investigate the extent to which people’s beliefs about

the appropriateness of dishonesty are impacted by the quality of the judicial institutions to

which they are exposed. For example, we investigate the extent to which people agree or

disagree with such statements as ”If you want to make money, you can’t always act

honestly,” “Citizens should not cheat on their taxes,” It is wrong to sell someone

something second-hand and conceal some or all of its faults,” “It is wrong to make an

exaggerated or false insurance claim.” The full list of the variables used in the analyses

and their definitions are provided in Table 1.

       As described in the empirical framework section in detail, we employ four different

measures of institutional quality, and we consider these quality measures as endogenous.

The endogeneity of institutional quality may arise for a number of reasons. For example,

institutional quality can emerge as an equilibrium outcome, and it can be influenced by

general attitudes towards dishonesty prevailing in the society. Alternatively, reverse

causality from dishonest behavior to institutional quality cannot be ruled out. This can

happen if more dishonest behavior and the ensuing overload of the criminal justice system

impact the quality of the judicial decisions. Thus, we estimate the models by instrumental

variables, utilizing the process through which judges and district attorneys are appointed to

their posts as an instrument. There is variation across countries in this process. Judges and

prosecutors can be appointed by the government with no prerequisites or no requirements

other than a law degree and some work experience, or they can be appointed based on an

exam in addition to the required work experience. In the former case, the government has


                                                 6
full control on who gets appointed as a judge or as a prosecutor, while in the latter case the

government has much less influence. The manner in which the actors in the judicial

system are appointed is expected to be related to the impartiality of the judiciary. If the

government has the authority to appoint judges and prosecutors at will, those judges and

prosecutors are more likely to be biased towards the government in comparison to the

judges and prosecutors who are appointed to their positions following a written exam. On

the other hand, the method of appointment is not expected to have a direct impact on

people’s propensity for dishonest behavior.

        We show that there is a strong first-stage relationship: this procedural variation

across countries, which is determined by law, or in some cases by the constitution of the

country, is strongly related to the judicial independence, to the impartiality of the courts, to

the protection of the property rights and well as to an index that combines these three

measures.

        We find that the quality of the judicial system has a significant impact on people’s

propensity to break the law in a number of domains such as making an exaggerated or false

insurance claim, offering a bribe to a public official, falsely claiming government benefits,

buying something knowing that might have been a stolen good, selling something second-

hand by concealing its faults. We also find that low quality of the judicial system makes it

more likely for people to consider a variety dishonest behavior as acceptable, suggesting

that institutions help shape the beliefs of the society.

        Section II presents the empirical framework. Section III describes the data set and

the variables. Section IV presents the results, and Section V is the conclusion.




                                                7
II. Empirical Framework

       Consider Equation (1) below.


   (1) Dict = β0 + β1 Jct + XiΦ + Cc Ω + δt + εict


   where Dict is an indicator of dishonest behavior of person i who is a resident of country

c, surveyed at time t. Alternatively, Dict stands for indicators that represent individuals’

dishonest attitudes, measured by their approval of dishonest behavior. The types of

dishonest behavior we analyze in the paper could be classified as felony (major) crimes, or

they could be misdemeanors (minor crimes), depending on the country in which the

individual resides. For example, one of dishonesty indicators we employ is the response to

the question “In the last five years have you sold something second-hand and concealed

some or all of its faults?” This particular act could be punishable by law in some

countries, but it may not be punishable in some others. Furthermore, depending on the

priorities and resources of the judicial system, the police and prosecutors may decide not to

press charges for this offense even if it is a criminal act in that country. Another indicator

of dishonest behavior is whether the individual falsely claimed government benefits, such

as social security payments. This act is a crime in most countries, although the severity of

punishment may differ across countries. In summary, the first group of dependent

variables include six dishonest and criminal behaviors which differ in their severity of

criminality, ranging from offering a bribe to buying a stolen good.

       The dependent variables in the second group gauge people’s attitudes towards

dishonesty. These variables measure individuals’ feelings about the acceptability of some

dishonest and illicit behaviors. For example, survey respondents are asked to evaluate


                                               8
“how wrong it is” to sell a second-hand good and conceal its defects or to make a false

insurance claim. They are also asked whether they agree or disagree with such statements

as “a public official asking for bribe is wrong,” “It is wrong for citizens to cheat on their

taxes,” and “if you want to make money you cannot always act honestly.” The 12

variables that make up the set of dependent variables (D) in Equation (1) and their

definitions are discussed in Section III.

       Equation (1) includes personal attributes of the respondents such as age, sex, years

of education, ethnic minority status, marital status, labor market activity, household

income, location of residence, religiosity, and home ownership. These control variables,

represented by vector X in Equation (1), are included to account for differences between

individuals regarding their propensity to commit crime, stemming from the relative returns

to crime and legal work (e.g. education, labor market activity, income). Other control

variables, such as sex and religiosity, intend to capture the impact of personal attributes

such as preferences and risk aversion.

       The model cannot include country fixed effects because the indicators of judicial

quality exhibits negligible within-country variation over the short time period analyzed.

To account for country differences that may impact criminal proclivity and the tolerance

for dishonesty, the model includes country attributes, represented by C. These variables

also help absorb some of the deep impacts on our key explanatory variable, judicial

quality, that may be driven by country attributes. For example, judicial quality may be

systematically different between countries based on legal origins, the extent of their ethno-

linguistic fragmentation, or the level of education. Thus, vector C includes such variables

as per capita GDP, average country education, the size of the population, ethno-linguistics


                                               9
fragmentation and individualism indexes of the country, legal origin of the country, and the

proportion of government spending in national income.

        The variable of interest, Jct, which represents the quality of the judicial institutions

in the country, is measured in different ways. This first measure, Judicial Independence,

ranges from 0 to 10. It captures the extent to which the judiciary is independent from the

influence of politics, the government, citizen or the firms. The second variable, Impartial

Courts, also ranges from 0 to 10. It measures whether the legal framework of the country

is not subject to manipulation and it is based on a clear and neutral process. Following

previous work (Acemoglu et al. 2001, Knack and Keefer 1995), we employ Protection of

Property Rights as the third measure of institutional quality. This variable provides a score

that rages from zero to 10 for each country to indicate the extent to which citizens’

property rights and assets are protected by law. Finally, we use principal component

analysis to create an index of institutional quality based on the three quality measures

described above.7 t represents fixed effects for survey years, and ict is a white noise error

term. Because cultural beliefs, preferences as well as attitudes towards crime and

dishonesty may be correlated within regions in a country, we cluster the standard errors by

country regions. Because we employ a number of different outcomes that aim to gauge




7
 Trial delays and the inefficiency of the courts in resolving cases can impact criminal propensity
because such inefficiency may alter marginal criminal’s perception of risk and deterrence (Dusek
2015, Pellegrina 2008). Such court delays, as an indicator of low judicial ineffectiveness,
constitute one dimension of low judicial quality. However, in this paper we focus on low judicial
quality as an institution, measured by such aspects as the lack of judicial independence, and lack of
impartiality of the courts.



                                                 10
dishonest behavior and dishonest attitudes, we adjust the standard errors for multiple

hypothesis testing (Newson 2010, Benjamini and Yekutieli 2001)

       Our main interest is the coefficient 1 in Equation (1). As described in Section 1,

Estimation of Equation (1), however, is complicated because institutional quality, J, may

be endogenous. For example, reverse causality from dishonest behavior to institutional

quality cannot be ruled out. This can happen if more dishonest behavior and the ensuing

overload of the criminal justice system impact the quality of the judicial decisions. To

account for this potential effect, we control for the effectiveness of the courts in keeping up

with the incoming caseload, measured by clearance rate for criminal cases in the country.

       Institutional quality arguably evolves slowly, but it may be a function of the

prevailing attitudes towards dishonesty. A tolerant cultural attitude in the country towards

dishonesty would generate a higher propensity for dishonest acts, and it can also lead to

poor institutional quality. Put differently, a “culture of dishonesty” can have an impact on

both institutional quality and individual criminal propensity. To get around this potential

confounding, we estimate Equation (1) with instrumental variables as shown in Equation

(2) below.



   (2) Jct = α0 + α1 Lc + XiΨ + Cc Γ + μt + ξict

   where the quality of the judicial institutions, J, is instrumented with the appointment

procedures of judges and prosecutors in the country, represented by L. Although most

countries require some prior experience as a legal professional before being appointed as a

judge or prosecutor, in some countries judges and prosecutors are appointed by the

government without taking a competitive exam. In other countries, judges or prosecutors


                                              11
qualify for their posts based on a formal written exam. This means that in some countries

the government has complete control over who gets appointed and who does not without

relying on exam scores, but in other countries the appointments to these positions are

arguably more objective and merit-based. As explained in the data section, we classify

countries into three groups based on procedural differences in how judges and prosecutors

are appointed. The country-specific guidelines and procedures of these appointments are

based on law, and in some countries they are written in the constitution. Assuming that the

procedures used to appoint judges and prosecutors have no direct influence on people’s

criminal proclivity or on their beliefs, appointment procedure of judges/prosecutors is a

valid instrument.



III. Data and Descriptive Statistics

        The data are obtained from a variety of sources. The main data source is Economic

Morality Module and the Justice Module of the European Social Survey in Rounds 2 and

5, conducted between 2004-2006, and 2010-2011. There are 25 countries surveyed.8

Depending on the outcome variable, sample sizes range from 25,314 to 54,034. Table 1

displays the definitions and the descriptive statistics of the dependent variables. The

variables in Panel A are dichotomous indicators that take the value of 1 if the survey

respondent indicated that he/she has engaged in the behavior listed during the last five

years (1-Misusing or altering a document, 2-Falsely claiming government benefits, 3-

Offering a bribe, 4-Conceiling the faults of a second-hand product when selling, 5-Buying



8
 The countries in the data set are: Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey.
                                               12
stolen goods, 6-Filing false or exaggerated insurance claims). Only 2.7 percent of the

individuals indicated that they misused or altered a card or a document to pretend to be

eligible for something they were not eligible. Similarly, only 1.6 percent indicated that

they falsely claimed government benefits such as social security, when they were not

entitled to. The highest rate pertains to buying something that might have been a stolen

good. Six-and-a half percent of the respondents indicated that they engaged in this

behavior. These relatively low rates, however, disguise a rather significant between-

country variation. Panel A of Table 2 displays country averages for dishonest behaviors in

selected countries. While the proportion of respondents who indicated that they misused or

altered a document is 0.7 percent in Hungary, the rates are 2.3 percent in Switzerland, 4.3

percent in Spain and 5.8 percent in Czech Republic and Austria. Similar variation exists

between countries regarding the intensity of other dishonest behavior. For example, the

proportion of individuals who offered a bribe is only 0.2 percent in Iceland, while it is 2.8

percent in Estonia, 5.3 percent in Poland, and 8.5 percent in Slovakia.

       The bottom part of Panel A in Table 2 presents the country averages of the

remaining three dishonest behavior in selected countries, and shows significant variation

between countries. For example, while only 1.1 percent of Hungarians conceal the defects

of the second-hand goods they sell, the rate is 4.6 percent in the Netherlands, and 5.3

percent in Finland. Only 1.5 percent of people in Lithuania indicate that they made a false

insurance claim, but the rate is 2.7 percent in Italy, and 7.2 percent in Austria.

       It is clear that some of these differences could be the result of country attributes,

such as the level of economic development. For example, individuals who live in

developed countries with mature financial and insurance markets have more opportunities


                                              13
to interact with insurers, which increases the possibility to file an insurance claim.

Similarly, for those who live in countries where the government is more engaged in the

economy, the frequency of interaction with a government agency and the opportunity to

claim a government benefit (accurately or falsely) is higher. To account for such country

differences, we control for a number of country attributes, as displayed in Table 3 below.

       To assess whether the responses reported by the individuals in our data are similar

to other available information, we compared country-specific bribery rates that can be

calculated using the individuals in our data to outside sources. There is a high degree of

consistency between the extent of bribery revealed by the respondents in our data (their

own bribery activity) and corruption perception indexes of other sources, such as

Transparency International (TI). For example, as shown in the top panel of Table 2, only

0.2 percent of Icelandic and Finnish people report having paid a bribe during the last five

years. The Corruption Perception index values assigned to these countries by

Transparency International (from 1 to 10; 10 signifying lowest corruption) are 8.5 and 9.2,

respectively. Based on our data, the rate of bribery in Norway is 0.7 percent, and 5.3

percent of the Polish people paid a bribe during the last five years. The Transparency

International corruption perception index for these countries is 8.6 for the former, and 5.3

for the latter. As Table 2 shows, the bribery rates are 9.3 percent in the Czech Republic

and 8.5 percent in Slovakia. Their TI index values are 4.6 and 4.3, respectively. More

generally, the correlation between the country-specific bribery-giving rates obtained from

our data and the corruption perception index of the TI is -0.65, indicating reasonably

strong correlation.




                                              14
           The lower panel of Table 1 presents the definitions and the descriptive statistics of

the variables that measure the attitudes toward dishonesty. For example, the variable

“Cannot always act honestly if you want to make money” takes the value of one if the

individual strongly agrees, agrees, or remains neutral when presented with the statement

that “If you want to make money, you can’t always act honestly.” Although Table 1 shows

that about 51 percent of the respondents agree with this statement, Panel B of Table 2

shows that there is significant variation between countries. For example, while about 32

percent of Portuguese believe that one cannot always act honestly if one wants to make

money, 49 percent of the French and almost 70 percent of Italians think that this statement

is true.

           The dichotomous variable “Cheating on taxes is not wrong” takes the value of one

if the respondent does not disagree or does not strongly disagree with the statement that

“Citizens should not cheat on their taxes,” and zero otherwise. More than 17 percent of the

sample thinks that cheating on taxes is acceptable. Table 2 shows that 6 percent of Turks

believe tax evasion is okay, while the rate is 12 percent in Poland, 18 percent in Denmark

and 25 percent in Germany.

           Table 1 displays that 3.5 percent of the sample believe that bribery is not wrong.

This variable takes the value of one if the respondents indicated that “a public official

asking someone for a favor or bribe in return for their services” is not wrong at all, or a bit

wrong. Other variables, that gauge the extent to which people find various other dishonest

behavior acceptable, are measured similarly. These variables indicate whether the

individual believes that “Concealing the faults of a second-hand product is not wrong,”

“Buying a possibly stolen good is not wrong,” and “Making a false insurance claim” is not


                                                 15
wrong. Table 2 shows that countries differ substantially in the propensity of their citizens’

agreement with these responses. For example, while less than 4 percent of the respondents

in Norway think that making a false or exaggerated insurance claim is acceptable behavior,

the rate is about 13 percent in Italy, 23 percent in France and 40 percent in Russia.

       The top panel of Table 3 displays the descriptive statistics of personal attributes of

the respondents and the middle panel presents the descriptive statistics of country

characteristics. The bottom section of Table 3 shows the definitions and the descriptive

statistics of the indicators of judicial quality. The sample mean of Judicial Independence is

about 7, but there is significant variation between countries. For example, the value of

Judicial Independence is 2.7 in Russia, 3.2 in Bulgaria, 4.7 in Italy, 5.5 in Turkey, 6.3 in

Portugal, 7.9 in Luxembourg and 9.0 in Denmark. The same variation exist in other

measures of judicial quality. For example, the value of Impartial Courts is 2.8 in Croatia,

2.9 in Russia, 3.3 in Italy, 4.4 in Hungary, 6.6 in France, 7.5 in Germany, 8.0 in Sweden,

and 8.6 in Austria.

       The bottom section of Table 3 also displays information about the instrument:

Judge and Prosecutor Appointment, which is an index that classifies countries into three

groups. The value of the index is 0 if the appointment procedure does not use a

combination of exam and experience to appoint either judges or prosecutors. This group

of countries include Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Rep., Denmark, Finland,

France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, and

Ukraine.

        The index takes the value of 1 if the appointment procedure uses a competitive

exam to appoint either judges or prosecutors, and the index is equal to 2 if the


                                              16
appointment procedure uses a competitive exam to appoint both judges and prosecutors.

Countries with index value of 1 are Estonia, Hungary, Norway, Russia, Slovak Republic

and Sweden. Countries with index value of 2 include Germany, Lithuania, the Netherlands,

Poland, Slovenia, and Turkey. In this last group of countries both judges and prosecutors

have to take an exam to qualify for their posts. The source of this information is the

European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ) 2014 Reports.



IV. Results

           Table 4 presents instrumental variable results for all 12 regressions. Panel A

contains the results of six regressions where the dependent variables represent various

dishonest and criminal behavior. In the regressions reported in this table the quality of

judicial institutions is measured by Judicial Independence. In the interest of space, we

only report the coefficients of the judicial quality measures.9 The table contains two sets of

p-values. Those that are in (parentheses) are based on clustering at the region (NUTS1 or

NUTS2) level. Because we use as outcomes multiple variables that gauge similar aspects

of dishonest behavior and attitudes, we adjusted the p-values for multiple hypothesis

testing (Newson 2010). The adjusted p-values are reported in [brackets].

           The results in Panel A of Table 4 reveal that an improvement in judicial

independence has no impact on the propensity to conceal the faults of a second-hand

product when selling it. On the other hand, an improvement in judicial independence

reduces the proclivity to misuse or alter a document. It also reduces the propensity to

falsely claim a government benefit, to offer a bribe, to buy stolen goods and to make an


9
    Full set of results are available upon request.


                                                      17
exaggerated or false insurance claim. The results imply that if judicial independence of the

courts improved by one unit (e.g. an improvement from the level of Lithuania to Poland

{an increase of the index from 4 to 5}, or from the level of Turkey to about the level of

France {from 5.5 to 6.7}) this would lower the propensity to engage in these acts by 2-to-3

three percentage points.

       Panel B of Table 4 displays the instrumental variables results related to dishonest

attitudes. The dependent variables in this group measure people’s beliefs in the approval

of dishonest behavior. For example, the outcome in cell (1) is an indicator that identifies if

the respondent indicated that “if you want to make money, you can’t always act honestly.”

Other outcomes in this group include the approval of such acts as cheating on taxes,

bribing a government official, concealing the faults of a product when selling, buying a

stolen good, and making a false insurance claim. Panel B shows that an increase in

institutional quality, measured by judicial independence, mitigates these attitudes. In other

words, an improvement in judicial independence makes individuals less likely to declare

that dishonest acts are acceptable. For example, an improvement in the judicial quality

from the level of Hungary to the level of France lowers the propensity to believe that “you

cannot always act honestly if you want to make money” by 10 percentage points, or by 20

percent from the baseline. The same improvement in judicial quality lowers the propensity

to declare that “cheating on taxes is not wrong” by 32 percent.

       Table 5 presents the results of the same regressions with one difference: judicial

quality is measured by the variable Impartial Courts. The inference is not altered. An

increase in the quality of judicial institutions, measured by the extent to which courts are

impartial and not subject to manipulation, lowers both propensity to engage in criminal


                                              18
acts (the top panel of Table 5), and it also lowers the propensity to find dishonesty

acceptable (the bottom panel of Table 5).

        We repeat the same analysis, but use the protection of property rights as the

measure of institutional quality. The results, reported in Appendix Table A1, are similar to

those reported in Tables 4 and 5. Using the three measures of institutional quality

employed in the regressions so far (Judicial independence, Impartial Courts, Protection of

Property Rights), we obtained their principal component, which is then employed as a

summary measure of institutional quality. The results of the instrumental variables

regressions that use the principal component, reported in Appendix Table A2), are

consistent with previous results.10    In summary, the results reveal that the quality of

judicial institutions has a deterrent effect on dishonest and criminal acts, and it also reduces

people’s propensity to have dishonest attitudes.

        Appendix Tables A3-A6 display the OLS counterparts of the instrumental variables

regressions reported in Tables 4, 5, A1 and A2. The signs and the statistical significance

of the coefficients are consistent between the OLS and IV specification with a couple of

exceptions. The magnitudes of the OLS estimates, however, are generally smaller than the

IV estimates.11




10
  The correlations between the four measures of institutional quality are very high, ranging from
0.93 to 0.98.
11
  Consistent with the IV results and the strong first stage, the reduced form results, displayed in
Appendix Table A7, show that the appointment procedure of judges and prosecutors are significant
determinants of the proclivity of illicit behavior and the propensity to approve of dishonest acts.
                                                19
V. Extensions

        Although we cannot identify the exact mechanism through which the quality of

judicial institutions influence the propensity for dishonest actions and the tendency to

approve of dishonest acts, an obvious pathway, as described in the introduction, could be

the relationship between perceived certainty of sanctions and the quality of judicial

institutions. More specifically, a decay in the quality of institutions is expected to reduce

the perceived certainty of punishment if a deterioration in judicial quality leads to

inefficiency and uncertainty in the criminal justice system.

        In the ESS data the survey respondents are asked “How successful do you think

police are at preventing crimes in your country?” Options given ranged from 0 (extremely

unsuccessful) to 10 (extremely successful). Calculating the proportion of individuals

(weighted by survey weights) in each country who answered these questions as “

Successful” (choosing a rating of 6 or higher) shows that people’s beliefs about crime

prevention is positively correlated with actual judicial quality of the country, as depicted

by Figures 1A and 1B.12

        Although we demonstrate that judicial quality of the country has an impact on

people’s propensity for dishonest behavior and on their dishonest attitudes, it can be

argued that the indicators of judicial quality may capture (or represent)

cultural/moral/ethical dimensions of the society. More specifically, cultural norms and

beliefs, which have an impact on individuals’ behaviors and attitudes, could also influence

the level of judicial quality in the country. Under this scenario, judicial quality would be


12
  The scatterplot of police effectiveness and other indicators of judicial quality used in the paper
(Protection of property rights and the principal component) exhibited the same pattern as shown in
Figures 1A and 1B.


                                                 20
related to society’s general attitudes towards such concepts as fairness, equal opportunity,

trust, income/wealth, and family values. To test this conjecture we chose questions from

the ESS that were posed to the respondents to gauge their attitudes towards wealth, their

beliefs in whether people try to take advantage of them (being suspicious of others),

attitudes towards equality, and the belief in family being the main priority in life.

Specifically, we used the question in which the survey respondents were asked: “How

much is the person in this description like you? It is important for him/her to be rich.

He/she wants to have a lot of money and expensive things” Possible responses range from

1 (very much like me) to 6 (not like me at all). We created a dummy variable that takes the

value of 1 if the responded chose a value of 1 to 4 for this question, and zero otherwise, to

represent the belief that it is important to be rich. Similarly, we used the question: “How

much is the person in this description like you? He/she thinks it is important that every

person in the world be treated equally. She/he believes everyone should have equal

opportunities in life” to create a dichotomous indictor to represent the survey respondent’s

belief in equal treatment of others.

        We also employed the question: “Do you think most people would try to take

advantage of you if they got the chance, or would they try to be fair?” to create a dummy

variable to indicate the belief that most people wouldn’t try to advantage of others.13

Finally, we used people’s responses to the statement: “A person’s family ought to be his or

her main priority in life,” and coded as 1 those responses that indicated agreement or

strong agreement with the statement.



13
   Possible answers ranged from 0 (most people would try to take advantage of me) to 10 (most
people would try to be fair). A dichotomous indicator is created which takes the value of 1 if the
respondent chose a value of 5 or higher to answer this question.
                                                 21
        Employing the same instrumental variables models used in the paper (Equations 1

and 2) and using these four dummy variables as outcomes, we found that indicators of

institutional quality have no statistically significant impact on these beliefs. The results,

displayed in Table 6 show that institutional quality, driven by the manner with which

judges and prosecutors are appointed, has no impact on these beliefs. These results

demonstrate that although judicial quality has an influence on the proclivity of illicit

behavior and that it impacts dishonest attitudes, judicial quality does not impact other

beliefs such as the importance of the family, believing in the fairness of people, believing

in fair treatment of others, and the importance of being rich.



VI. Summary and Conclusion

        Institutions have an impact on economic interactions between agents, and they are

strongly related to economic performance of countries (Acemoglu and Robinson 2001),

Knack and Keefer 1995, North 1991, 1981), and there exist a number of pathways through

which institutional quality can interact with government policy and impact economic

development (Acemoglu and Johnson 2005, Rodrik et al. 2004, Hall and Jones 1999).14

Judicial system is an important component of the body of institutions in a country, and

North (1990) underlines the importance of the judicial system in the enforcement of

contracts to facilitate transactions to foster economic activity.

        Institutions can also alter individual behavior to the extent that behavior responds

to the landscape of incentives, some of which are determined by institutions. For example,

judicial system’s lack of independence and courts’ lack of impartiality may provide a


14
  See Glaeser et al. (2004) on the difficulties in establishing a causal link from institutions to
economic development.
                                                   22
signal to the citizens about the ambiguity of judicial decisions. This may, in turn, lead to

an increased propensity to disregard the rule of law. Furthermore, increased and wide-

speared disregard of the rule of law and the ensuing illicit behavior may modify the social

norms in the society regarding the acceptability of unlawful and dishonest behavior.

       In this paper we use micro data on residents of 25 European countries and employ

alternative measure of judicial quality (e.g. judicial independence, or the impartiality of

the courts) to investigate the extent to which the quality of judicial institutions has an

impact on individuals’ propensity for criminal and dishonest behavior and on their views

regarding the acceptability of such behavior. Acknowledging that the quality of judicial

institutions is endogenous, we employ as an instrument the procedures used in each

country with which prosecutors and judges are appointed to their posts. The manner in

which judges and prosecutors are appointed is expected to be related to the impartiality of

the judiciary. If the government has the authority to appoint judges and prosecutors at will,

they are more likely to be biased towards the government and towards those whose

interests are aligned with the government in comparison to judges and prosecutors who are

appointed to their positions following a written exam. Using the variation between

countries in appointment procedures, we show that these procedures, that are determined

by law or by the constitution of country, are strongly related to judicial independence,

indicating a strong first-stage relationship. Yet, the method of appointment is not expected

to have a direct impact on people’s propensity for dishonest behavior or on their tendency

to find dishonesty acceptable.

       Empirical analyses show that the quality of the judicial institutions has a significant

impact on people’s propensity to break the law and on their propensity to declare dishonest


                                               23
behavior acceptable. An improvement in the quality of judicial institutions, related to the

variation in the manner judges and prosecutors are appointed to their posts, reduces

people’s propensity to falsely claim a government benefit, to offer a bribe, to buy stolen

goods, to misuse or alter a document, and to make an exaggerated or false insurance claim.

In addition, we find that judicial quality alters people’s beliefs about the acceptability of

dishonesty and illegal behavior. An improvement in judicial quality reduces people’s

tendency to agree with the statement that “You cannot always act honestly if you want to

make money.” It also makes it less likely to find acceptable such acts as buying stolen

goods, concealing the faults of a good when selling it, making an exaggerated insurance

claim, cheating on taxes, and bribery.

        Low judicial quality could be symptom of underlying cultural norms and beliefs.

In other words, judicial quality could be related to general attitudes in the society towards

concepts and beliefs such as fairness, equal opportunity, importance of income/wealth, and

so on. Using additional questions from the same survey, however, we find that judicial

quality does not impact other beliefs such as the importance of the family, believing in the

fairness of people, believing in fair treatment of others, and the importance of being rich.

        In summary, the results reveal that the quality of judicial institutions has a deterrent

effect on dishonest and criminal acts, and it also reduces the propensity to have dishonest

attitudes, indicating that institutions help shape the beliefs of the society.




                                               24
                                            Table 1
           Descriptive Statistics of Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest Attitudes
                                                                                                       Mean
Variable                Description
                                                                                                    (Std. Dev.)
                        Equals 1 if in the last 5 years the respondent misused or altered a card
Misused or altered a                                                                                  0.027
                        or document to pretend to be eligible for something he or she was not,
document                                                                                             (0.161)
                        0 otherwise
                        Equals 1 if in the last 5 years the respondent over-claimed or falsely
Falsely claimed                                                                                       0.016
                        claimed government benefits such as social security or other benefits,
government benefits                                                                                  (0.124)
                        0 otherwise

                        Equals 1 if in the last 5 years the respondent offered a favor or a bribe     0.019
Offered a bribe
                        to a public official in return for their services, 0 otherwise               (0.136)

                        Equals 1 if in the last 5 years the respondent sold something second-
Concealed faults of a                                                                                 0.034
                        hand and concealed some or all of its faults, 0 otherwise
second-hand product                                                                                  (0.182)

Bought possibly         Equals 1 if in the last 5 years the respondent bought something he or         0.065
stolen goods            she thought might be stolen, 0 otherwise                                     (0.246)

Exaggerated an          Equals 1 if in the last 5 years the respondent made an exaggerated or         0.027
insurance claim         false insurance claim, 0 otherwise                                           (0.163)
Cannot always act       Equals 1 if the respondent replied “Agree strongly”, “Agree” or
                                                                                                      0.508
honestly if you want    “Neither Agree nor Disagree” with the statement “If you want to make
                                                                                                     (0.500)
to make money           money, you can’t always act honestly.”, 0 otherwise
                        Equals 1 if the respondent replied “Disagree strongly”, “Disagree” or
Cheating on taxes is                                                                                  0.176
                        “Neither Agree nor Disagree” with the statement “Citizens should not
not wrong                                                                                            (0.381)
                        cheat on their taxes.”, 0 otherwise
                        Equals 1 if the respondent replied “Not wrong at all” or “A bit wrong”
                                                                                                      0.035
Bribery is not wrong    for the question “How wrong is a public official asking someone for
                                                                                                     (0.183)
                        a favor or bribe in return for their services?”, 0 otherwise
Concealing faults of    Equals 1 if the respondent replied “Not wrong at all” or “A bit wrong”
                                                                                                      0.062
a second-hand           for the question “How wrong is someone selling something second-
                                                                                                     (0.241)
product is not wrong    hand and concealing some or all of its faults?”, 0 otherwise
Buying possibly         Equals 1 if the respondent replied “Not wrong at all” or “A bit wrong”
                                                                                                      0.140
stolen goods is not     for the question “How wrong is it to buy something you thought might
                                                                                                     (0.348)
wrong                   be stolen?", 0 otherwise
Exaggerating an         Equals 1 if the respondent replied “Not wrong at all” or “A bit wrong”
                                                                                                      0.124
insurance claim is      for the question “How wrong is it to make an exaggerated or false
                                                                                                     (0.329)
not wrong               insurance claim?", 0 otherwise
                        Note: Number of observations ranges from 25,314 to 54,043




                                                     25
                                          Table 2
              Country Averages of Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest Attitudes
                                           A: Crimes and Misdemeanors
                                            Falsely claimed government
 Misused or altered a document                                                     Offered a bribe
                                            benefits
 Hungary                               0.7% Netherlands            0.1%            Iceland                     0.2%
 Sweden                                1.7% Hungary                0.1%            Finland                     0.2%
 Finland                               2.2% Turkey                 1.1%            Norway                      0.7%
 Switzerland                           2.3% Germany                1.5%            Hungary                     1.6%
 Estonia                               3.4% Norway                 1.8%            Estonia                     2.8%
 Spain                                 4.3% Iceland                2.6%            Poland                      5.3%
                                                                                   Czech
 Czech Republic                        5.8%    Austria                    3.3%                                 9.3%
                                                                                   Republic
                                               Czech
 Austria                               5.8%                               4.2%     Slovakia                    8.5%
                                               Republic
 Average                          2.7%         Average                    1.6%     Average                     2.4%
 Concealed faults of a second-hand
                                               Bought possibly stolen goods        Exaggerated an insurance claim
 product
 Hungary                          1.1%         Portugal                   1.8%     Turkey                      0.5%
 Portugal                         1.9%         Slovenia                   2.9%     Slovenia                    1.1%
 Luxemburg                        2.0%         Switzerland                3.6%     Lithuania                   1.5%
 Norway                           2.2%         Poland                     4.5%     Luxembourg                  2.5%
 Italy                            3.9%         Bulgaria                   4.7%     Italy                       2.7%
                                                                                   Czech
 Netherlands                           4.6%    Spain                      7.5%                                 5.2%
                                                                                   Republic
 Finland                               5.3%    Slovakia                  12.5%     Iceland                     6.0%
                                               Czech
 Estonia                               5.7%                              15.0%     Austria                     7.2%
                                               Republic
 Average                               3.3%    Average                    6.0%     Average                     2.4%

                                                B: Dishonest Attitudes
 Cannot always act honestly if you want        Cheating on taxes is not
                                                                                   Bribery is not wrong
 to make money                                 wrong
 Portugal                        31.7%         Turkey                   5.9%       Iceland                      0.9%
 Sweden                          42.4%         Estonia                  9.2%       Denmark                      1.8%
 France                          49.3%         Poland                 12.0%        Germany                      2.1%
 Czech Republic                  54.2%         Hungary                13.8%        Netherlands                  2.4%
 Turkey                          58.7%         Spain                  15.8%        Poland                       3.9%
 Estonia                         58.9%         Denmark                17.8%        Slovenia                     4.7%
 Hungary                         65.5%         Sweden                 21.7%        Austria                      4.8%
 Italy                           69.5%         Germany                25.2%        Spain                        6.4%
 Average                         54.1%         Average                19.7%        Average                      4.0%
 Concealing faults of a second-hand            Buying possibly stolen goods        Exaggerating an insurance claim is
 product is not wrong                          is not wrong                        not wrong
 Iceland                           1.1%        Denmark                  3.3%       Turkey                       1.6%
 Norway                            2.7%        Sweden                   5.4%       Norway                       3.8%
 Luxembourg                        3.4%        Netherlands            12.0%        Portugal                     7.7%
 Estonia                           5.7%        Croatia                15.4%        Italy                       12.6%
 Netherlands                       6.2%        Bulgaria               17.8%        Poland                      15.0%
 Germany                           7.0%        Slovakia               21.2%        Germany                     16.8%
 Spain                             8.5%        France                 22.3%        France                      22.8%
 Austria                         12.5%         Russia                 30.1%        Russia                      40.4%
 Average                           6.7%        Average                13.2%        Average                     11.7%
The entries are country averages that are obtained from the ESS surveys round 2 and round 5.

                                                          26
                                             Table 3
            Descriptive Statistics of Personal Attributes and Country Characteristics
                                                                                                      Mean
Variable                           Description
                                                                                                   (Std. Dev.)
Personal characteristics
                                                                                                     45.966
Age                                Age of the respondent
                                                                                                    (17.344)
                                                                                                      0.483
Male                               Equal to 1 if the respondent is male, 0 otherwise
                                                                                                     (0.500)
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent belongs to minority ethnic            0.042
Ethnic minority
                                   group in country, 0 otherwise                                     (0.201)
                                                                                                     11.789
Years of schooling                 Number of years of full-time education completed
                                                                                                     (4.033)
                                                                                                      0.530
Working                            Equal to 1 if the respondent is working, 0 otherwise
                                                                                                     (0.500)
                                                                                                      0.573
Married                            Equal to 1 if the respondent is married, 0 otherwise
                                                                                                     (0.495)
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent was born in the country, 0            0.921
Born in the country
                                   otherwise                                                         (0.269)
                                                                                                      0.201
City                               Equal to 1 if the respondent lives in a big city, 0 otherwise
                                                                                                     (0.400)
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent lives in a suburb or an outskirt      0.117
Suburb
                                   of a big city, 0 otherwise                                        (0.322)
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent is in the 1st quintile of
                                                                                                     0.127
1st Quintile of household income   country-specific household income distribution, 0
                                                                                                    (0.332)
                                   otherwise
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent is in the 2nd quintile of
2nd Quintile of household                                                                            0.182
                                   country-specific household income distribution, 0
income                                                                                              (0.386)
                                   otherwise
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent is in the 3nd quintile of
3nd Quintile of household                                                                            0. 136
                                   country-specific household income distribution, 0
income                                                                                              (0.343)
                                   otherwise
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent is in the 4nd quintile of
4nd Quintile of household                                                                            0.227
                                   country-specific household income distribution, 0
income                                                                                              (0.419)
                                   otherwise
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent is in the 5nd quintile of
5nd Quintile of household                                                                            0.329
                                   country-specific household income distribution, 0
income                                                                                              (0.470)
                                   otherwise
                                   Equal to 1 if the respondent reports his or her religiosity       0.352
Low religiosity
                                   below 4 on a scale from 0 to 10, 0 otherwise                     (0.478)
Medium religiosity                 Equal to 1 if the respondent reports his or her religiosity       0.342
                                   4, 5, or 6 on a scale from 0 to 10, 0 otherwise                  (0.474)
High religiosity                   Equal to 1 if the respondent reports his or her religiosity       0.306
                                   above 6 on a scale from 0 to 10, 0 otherwise                     (0.461)
                                   Equal to 1 if the dwelling is owned by any household              0.725
Own dwelling
                                   member, 0 otherwise                                              (0.447)
                                   Number of rooms the household has use of (not                     3.926
# Rooms
                                   kitchens/bathrooms/toilets)                                      (1.681)
Country characteristics
Clearance rate*                    The number of all resolved criminal cases divided by the           0.918
                                   number of incoming criminal cases in the country.                 (0.234)
GDP per capita+                                                                                      36,851
                                   PPP-adjusted GDP per capita in constant 2011 US$
                                                                                                    (15,246)
            #
Education                          Average educational attainment in the country for                 10.589
                                   population 15 and over.                                           (1.452)

                                                    27
                                          (Table 3 concluded)
                 ++
 Individualism                                                                                                  61.738
                                          Hofstede Individualism Index
                                                                                                               (13.848)
 Ethno-linguistic fragmentation⁋                                                                                 0.209
                                          Roeder's 1985 Index of Ethno-Linguistic Fragmentation
                                                                                                                (0.170)
                      ⁑
 Democratic years                                                                                               40.607
                                          Number of democratic years from 1930 to 1995
                                                                                                               (26.374)
 Population+                                                                                                    22.875
                                          Country population in millions
                                                                                                               (26.649)
 Government consumption†                                                                                         0.188
                                          Government share of real GDP per capita in current PPPs
                                                                                                                (0.051)
 French legal origin⁑                     Equal to 1 if the legal origin is French commercial code,              0.298
                                          0 otherwise                                                           (0.457)
 Socialist/communist legal
                                          Equal to 1 if the legal origin is socialist/communist, 0              0.251
 origin⁑
                                          otherwise                                                            (0.434)
 German legal origin⁑                     Equal to 1 if the legal origin is German commercial code,             0.182
                                          0 otherwise                                                          (0.386)
                                          Equal to 1 if the legal origin is Scandinavian commercial             0.269
 Scandinavian legal origin⁑
                                          code, 0 otherwise                                                    (0.443)
 Institutions
 Judicial independence℈                   Index on the scale of 0 to 10. “Is the judiciary in the
                                                                                                                6.990
                                          country independent from political influences of members
                                                                                                               (1.611)
                                          of government, citizens, or firms?”
                                          Index on the scale of 0 to 10. “Is the legal framework in
                                          the country for private businesses to settle disputes and
 Impartial courts℈                        challenge the legality of government actions and/or                   6.730
                                          regulations inefficient and subject to manipulation or is            (1.749)
                                          it efficient and follows a clear, neutral process?”

 Protection of property rights℈           Index on the scale of 0 to 10. “Property rights, including
                                          over financial assets, are poorly defined and not                     7.261
                                          protected by law (= 1) or are clearly defined and well               (1.484)
                                          protected by law (= 7).”
 Principal component                      The first principal component of the three measures of                1.639
                                          quality of judicial institutions.                                    (1.339)
 Judge & prosecutor appointment           Equal to 0 if there is no exam to appoint either the judges
 procedure*                               or the prosecutors. Equal to 1 if there is a competitive              0.787
                                          exam for either judges or prosecutors. Equal to 2 if there           (0.842)
                                          is a competitive exam for both judges or prosecutors.

*: The Council of Europe, Division of Human Rights and Rule of Law, the European Commission for the Efficiency of
Justice. https://www.coe.int/t/dghl/cooperation/cepej/evaluation/archives_en.asp
+: The World Bank, World Development Indicators data base. https://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-
indicators
#: Barro-Lee data set. www.Barrolee.com
⁋: Roeder’s 1985 index of the extent of ethnolinguistic fragmentation in the country. http://pages.ucsd.edu/~proeder/elf.htm
++: Hofstede, Cultural Dimensions. http://geert-hofstede.com/countties.html.
†: Penn World Tables.
⁑: Teorell, Jan, Nicholas Charron, Stefan Dahlberg, Sören Holmberg, Bo Rothstein, Petrus Sundin & Richard Svensson,
2013. “The Quality of Government Dataset” version qog_std_cs_20dec13 http://www.qog.pol.gu.se
℈: Cato Institute, "Economic Freedom of the World" based on Global Competitiveness Reports, World Economic Forum.
Reports.weforum.org.




                                                            28
                                        Table 4
 The Impact of Judicial Independence on Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest Attitudes
                                     (IV Results)
                     A: The Impact of Judicial Independence on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                                        (1)                              (2)                         (3)
                                         ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                             …Misused or altered a              …Falsely Claimed
                                                                                             …Offered a bribe
                                    document                   Government Benefits
 Judicial                           -0.025***                        -0.024***                   -0.028***
 independence                        (0.028)                           (0.006)                    (0.022)
                                     [0.031]                           [0.012]                    [0.026]
 N                                    25,770                           25,801                      25,825
 First stage (F-stat.)                 18.32                            18.74                      18.84
                                        (4)                              (5)                         (6)
                                         ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                           …Concealed faults when               …Bought possibly             …Exaggerated an
                         selling a second-hand product              stolen goods              insurance claim
 Judicial                             -0.000                         -0.020***                   -0.024***
 independence                        (0.994)                           (0.001)                    (0.000)
                                     [0.994]                           [0.002]                    [0.000]
 N                                    25,314                           26,623                      52,655
 First stage (F-stat.)                 18.26                            369.5                      55.85
                        B: The Impact of Judicial Independence on Dishonest Attitudes
                                        (1)                              (2)                         (3)
                         Cannot always act honestly if          Cheating on taxes is
                                                                                            Bribery is not wrong
                           you want to make money                    not wrong
 Judicial                           -0.071***                        -0.038***                   -0.034***
 independence                        (0.008)                           (0.013)                    (0.001)
                                     [0.012]                           [0.017]                    [0.002]
 N                                    27,165                           27,332                      27,365
 First stage (F-stat.)                 18.43                            18.15                      18.19
                                        (4)                              (5)                         (6)
                                                                                              Exaggerating an
                         Concealing faults of a second- Buying possibly stolen
                                                                                           insurance claim is not
                           hand product is not wrong            goods is not wrong
                                                                                                   wrong
 Judicial                           -0.030***                        -0.063***                   -0.060***
 independence                        (0.007)                           (0.000)                    (0.000)
                                     [0.012]                           [0.000]                    [0.000]
 N                                    27,417                           26,818                      54,043
 First stage (F-stat.)                 17.99                            367.5                      55.74
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The p-values are reported in (parentheses). The p-
values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are reported in [brackets]. *: significant at 10 percent level, **: significant
at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1 percent level.




                                                             29
                                          Table 5
      The Impact of Impartial Courts on Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest Attitudes
                                        (IV Results)
                         A: The Impact of Impartial Courts on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                                         (1)                              (2)                         (3)
                                          ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                              …Misused or altered a              …Falsely Claimed
                                                                                              …Offered a bribe
                                     document                   Government Benefits
                                     -0.020***                        -0.019***                   -0.023***
 Impartial courts
                                      (0.010)                           (0.001)                    (0.009)
                                      [0.109]                           [0.002]                    [0.108]
 N                                     25,770                           25,801                      25,825
 First stage (F-stat.)                  59.63                            60.42                      60.56
                                         (4)                              (5)                         (6)
                                          ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                            …Concealed faults when               …Bought possibly             …Exaggerated an
                          selling a second-hand product              stolen goods              insurance claim
                                       -0.000                         -0.030***                   -0.027***
 Impartial courts
                                      (0.994)                           (0.001)                    (0.000)
                                      [0.994]                           [0.002]                    [0.000]
 N                                     25,314                           26,623                      52,656
 First stage (F-stat.)                  59.36                            598.5                      125.0
                            B: The Impact of Impartial Courts on Dishonest Attitudes
                                         (1)                              (2)                         (3)
                          Cannot always act honestly if          Cheating on taxes is
                                                                                             Bribery is not wrong
                            you want to make money                    not wrong
                                     -0.058***                        -0.031***                   -0.028***
 Impartial courts
                                      (0.002)                           (0.006)                    (0.000)
                                      [0.003]                           [0.008]                    [0.000]
 N                                     27,165                           27,332                      27,365
 First stage (F-stat.)                  58.58                            57.62                      58.00
                                         (4)                              (5)                         (6)
                                                                                               Exaggerating an
                          Concealing faults of a second- Buying possibly stolen
                                                                                            insurance claim is not
                            hand product is not wrong            goods is not wrong
                                                                                                    wrong
                                     -0.024***                        -0.093***                   -0.069***
 Impartial courts
                                      (0.004)                           (0.000)                    (0.000)
                                      [0.006]                           [0.000]                    [0.000]
 N                                     27,417                           26,818                      54,043
 First stage (F-stat.)                  57.51                            589.4                      121.2
 Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The p-values are reported in (parentheses). The p-
values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are reported in [brackets]. *: significant at 10 percent level, **: significant
at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1 percent level.




                                                             30
                                    Figure 1
Country-Level Relationship between Judicial Independence and People’s Believes in
                    .6        Police Effectiveness
   % Believing in Police Effectiveness
     .3           .4.2        .5




        Judicial Independence: Country indicator. Range: 0 to 10. Least independent from political influence,
        government or firms = 0; Most independent = 10. % Believing in Police Effectiveness: The percentage
        of survey respondents in a country who indicated that the police are successful in preventing crime
        where violence is used or threatened in their country. Source: ESS




                                                        31
                                    Figure 2
Country-Level Relationship between Impartial Courts and People’s Believes in Police
                     .6           Effectiveness
    % Believing in Police Effectiveness
      .3           .4.2        .5




       Impartial Courts: Country indicator. Range: 0 to 10. Least efficient legal framework to settle disputes and
       challenge the legality of government actions and/or regulations = 0; Most efficient = 10. % Believing
       in Police Effectiveness: The percentage of survey respondents in a country who indicated that the police
       are successful in preventing crime where violence is used or threatened in their country. Source: ESS




                                                        32
                                       References

Acemoglu, D. and S. Johnson (2005). "Unbundling Institutions." Journal of Political
Economy 113(5): 949-995.
Acemoglu, D., et al. (2001). "The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An
Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review 91(5): 1369-1401.
Benjamini, Y. and D. Yekutieli (2001). "The Control of the False Discovery Rate in Multiple
Testing Under Dependency." Annals of Statistics: 1165-1188.
Cameron, A. C., et al. (2008). "Bootstrap-based Improvements for Inference with Clustered
Errors." The Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): 414-427.
Corman, H. and H. N. Mocan (2000). "A Time-series Analysis of Crime, Deterrence, and
Drug Abuse in New York City." American Economic Review 90(3): 584-604.
Corman, H. and N. Mocan (2005). "Carrots, Sticks, and Broken Windows." The Journal of
Law and Economics 48(1): 235-266.
Di Tella, R. and E. Schargrodsky (2004). "Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates Using the
Allocation of Police Forces After a Terrorist Attack." American economic review 94(1):
115-133.
Djankov, S., et al. (2003). "Courts." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2): 453-517.
Drago, F., et al. (2009). "The Deterrent Effects of Prison: Evidence From a Natural
Experiment." Journal of political Economy 117(2): 257-280.
Dušek, L. (2015). "Time to Punishment: The Effects of a Shorter Criminal Procedure on
Crime Rates." International Review of Law and Economics 43: 134-147.
Glaeser, E. L., et al. (2004). "Do Institutions Cause Growth?" Journal of Economic Growth
9(3): 271-303.
Guiso, L., et al. (2006). "Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?" Journal of Economic
Perspectives 20(2): 23-48.
Hall, R. E. and C. I. Jones (1999). "Why Do Some Countries Produce so Much More Output
per Worker than Others?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1): 83-116.
Knack, S. and P. Keefer (1995). "Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross‐country
Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures." Economics & Politics 7(3): 207-227.
Machin, S. and C. Meghir (2004). "Crime and Economic Incentives." Journal of Human
resources 39(4): 958-979.
Mocan, N. H. and H. Yu (2017). Can Superstition Create a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy? School
Outcomes of Dragon Children of China, National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                            33
Mocan, N. and C. Raschke (2016). "Economic Well-being and Anti-Semitic, Xenophobic,
and Racist Attitudes in Germany." European Journal of Law and Economics 41(1): 1-63.
Mocan, N. (2013). "Vengeance." Review of Economics and Statistics 95(3): 969-982.
Mocan, H. N. and T. G. Bali (2010). "Asymmetric Crime Cycles." The Review of Economics
and Statistics 92(4): 899-911.
Mocan, H. N., et al. (2005). "A Dynamic Model of Differential Human Capital and Criminal
Activity." Economica 72(288): 655-681.
North, Douglass C. (1991). “Institutions.” Journal of Economics Perspectives. 5(1): 97-112.
North, Douglass C. (1990). Institutions, institutional Change, and Economic Performance.
Cambrige: Cambrige University Press.
North, Douglass C. (1981). Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: W.W.
Norton & Co.
Newson, R. B. (2010). "Frequentist Q-values for Multiple-test Procedures." Stata Journal
10(4): 568.
Pellegrina, L. D. (2008). "Court Delays and Crime Deterrence." European Journal of Law &
Economics 26(3).
Potters, J. and J. Stoop (2016). "Do Cheaters in the Lab also Cheat in the Field?" European
Economic Review 87: 26-33.
Raphael, S. and R. Winter-Ebmer (2001). "Identifying the Effect of Unemployment on
Crime." The Journal of Law and Economics 44(1): 259-283.
Rodrik, D., et al. (2004). "Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and
Integration in Economic Development." Journal of Economic Growth 9(2): 131-165.
Soares, R. R. (2004). "Development, Crime and Punishment: Accounting for the
International Differences in Crime Rates." Journal of Development Economics 73(1): 155-
184.




                                             34
                                               APPENDIX

                                        Table A1
   The Impact of Protection of Property Rights on Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest
                                  Attitudes (IV Results)
             A: The Impact of Protection of Property Rights on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                                     (1)                            (2)                        (3)
                                     ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                         …Misused or altered a             …Falsely Claimed
                                                                                       …Offered a bribe
                                document                  Government Benefits
 Protection of                  -0.035***                       -0.033***                  -0.040***
 property rights                  (0.006)                         (0.000)                    (0.005)
                                  [0.007]                         [0.000]                   [0.007]
 N                                25,770                          25,801                     25,825
 First stage F                      79.33                          79.71                      80.77
                                     (4)                            (5)                        (6)
                                     ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                       …Concealed faults when
                                                           …Bought possibly            …Exaggerated an
                          selling a second-hand
                                                              stolen goods              insurance claim
                                  product
 Protection of                     -0.000                       -0.032***                  -0.041***
 property rights                  (0.994)                         (0.001)                    (0.000)
                                  [0.994]                         [0.002]                   [0.000]
 N                                25,314                          26,623                     52,656
 First stage F                      78.41                          389.2                      44.72
                 B: The Impact of Protection of Property Rights on Dishonest Attitudes
                                     (1)                            (2)                        (3)
                      Cannot always act honestly           Cheating on taxes is
                                                                                     Bribery is not wrong
                      if you want to make money                 not wrong
 Protection of                  -0.098***                       -0.053***                  -0.047***
 property rights                  (0.002)                         (0.007)                    (0.000)
                                  [0.003]                         [0.007]                   [0.000]
 N                                27,165                          27,332                     27,365
 First stage F                      78.44                          78.27                      79.60
                                     (4)                            (5)                        (6)
                         Concealing faults of a                                         Exaggerating an
                                                         Buying possibly stolen
                      second-hand product is not                                    insurance claim is not
                                                           goods is not wrong
                                   wrong                                                      wrong
 Protection of                  -0.041***                       -0.099***                  -0.106***
 property rights                  (0.006)                         (0.000)                    (0.000)
                                  [0.007]                         [0.000]                   [0.000]
 N                                27,417                          26,818                     54,043
 First stage F                      78.78                          387.5                      43.51
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The p-values are reported in (parentheses).
The p-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are reported in [brackets]. *: significant at 10 percent
level, **: significant at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1 percent level.




                                                     35
                                       Table A2
  The Impact of Principal Component on Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest Attitudes
                                     (IV Results)
                A: The Impact of Principal Component on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                                       (1)                          (2)                      (3)
                                    ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                           …Misused or altered a           …Falsely Claimed
                                                                                     …Offered a bribe
                                  document                Government Benefits
 Principal                        -0.030***                     -0.028***                -0.033***
 component                          (0.012)                       (0.001)                  (0.010)
                                    [0.013]                       [0.002]                 [0.012]
 N                                  25,770                        25,801                   25,825
 First stage F-stat.                  48.29                        48.99                    49.30
                                       (4)                          (5)                      (6)
                                    ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                          …Concealed faults when
                                                           …Bought possibly          …Exaggerated an
                            selling a second-hand
                                                               stolen goods           insurance claim
                                    product
 Principal                           -0.000                     -0.031***                -0.034***
 component                          (0.994)                       (0.001)                  (0.000)
                                    [0.994]                       [0.002]                 [0.000]
 N                                  25,314                        26,623                   52,656
 First stage F-stat.                  48.08                       1048.3                    108.4
                     B: The Impact of Principal Component on Dishonest Attitudes
                                       (1)                          (2)                      (3)
                        Cannot always act honestly         Cheating on taxes is
                                                                                   Bribery is not wrong
                        if you want to make money               not wrong
 Principal                        -0.083***                     -0.045***                -0.040***
 component                          (0.000)                       (0.001)                  (0.000)
                                    [0.005]                       [0.009]                 [0.000]
 N                                  27,165                        27,332                   27,365
 First stage F-stat.                  48.04                        47.27                    47.60
                                       (4)                          (5)                      (6)
                           Concealing faults of a           Buying possibly           Exaggerating an
                         second-hand product is not        stolen goods is not       insurance claim is
                                     wrong                         wrong                 not wrong
 Principal                        -0.035***                     -0.096***                -0.086***
 component                          (0.004)                       (0.000)                  (0.000)
                                    [0.006]                       [0.000]                 [0.000]
 N                                  27,417                        26,818                   54,043
 First stage F-stat.                  47.11                       1035.0                    105.5
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The p-values are reported in (parentheses).
The p-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are reported in [brackets]. *: significant at 10 percent
level, **: significant at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1 percent level.




                                                     36
                                       Table A3
 The Impact of Judicial Independence on Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest Attitudes
                                    (OLS Results)
             A: The Impact of Judicial Independence on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                              (1)                              (2)                        (3)
                               ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                   …Misused or altered a             …Falsely claimed
                                                                                 …Offered a bribe
                          document                  government benefits
 Judicial                    0.001                          -0.002*                   -0.005***
 independence               (0.002)                         (0.001)                     (0.002)
 N                          25,770                           25,801                     25,825
                              (4)                              (5)                        (6)
                               ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                  …Concealed faults when
                                                  …Bought possibly stolen        …Exaggerated an
                    selling a second-hand
                                                             goods                 insurance claim
                            product
 Judicial                  0.005***                       -0.021***                   -0.004***
 independence               (0.002)                         (0.005)                     (0.002)
 N                          25,314                           26,623                     52,656
                B: The Impact of Judicial Independence on Dishonest Attitudes
                              (1)                              (2)                        (3)
                      Cannot always act
                                                   Cheating on taxes is not
                   honestly if you want to                                      Bribery is not wrong
                                                             wrong
                         make money
 Judicial                 -0.016***                        -0.008**                   -0.007***
 independence               (0.007)                         (0.005)                     (0.002)
 N                          27,165                           27,332                     27,365
                              (4)                              (5)                        (6)
                   Concealing faults of a                                         Exaggerating an
                                                   Buying possibly stolen
                 second-hand product is not                                    insurance claim is not
                                                     goods is not wrong
                             wrong                                                       wrong
 Judicial                 -0.010***                       -0.051***                   -0.021***
 independence               (0.003)                         (0.006)                     (0.004)
 N                          27,417                           26,818                     54,043
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The standard errors are reported in
(parentheses). *: significant at 10 percent level, **: significant at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1
percent level.




                                                     37
                                        Table A4
   The Impact of Protection of Property Rights on Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest
                                 Attitudes (OLS Results)
          A: The Impact of Protection of Property Rights on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                  (1)                                (2)                      (3)
                                ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                      …Misused or altered a            …Falsely claimed
  A5                                                                             …Offered a bribe
                             document                 government benefits
 Protection of                -0.007**                      -0.010***                -0.021***
 property                      (0.004)                        (0.003)                  (0.004)
 rights
 N                             25,770                         25,801                   25,825
                                 (4)                            (5)                      (6)
                                ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                    …Concealed faults when
                                                       …Bought possibly          …Exaggerated an
                       selling a second-hand
                                                          stolen goods            insurance claim
                               product
 Protection of                 -0.003                        -0.017**                  -0.004
 property                      (0.005)                        (0.007)                  (0.002)
 rights
 N                             25,314                         26,623                   52,656
              B: The Impact of Protection of Property Rights on Dishonest Attitudes
                                 (1)                            (2)                      (3)
                   Cannot always act honestly         Cheating on taxes is
                                                                                Bribery is not wrong
                   if you want to make money                not wrong
 Protection of                 -0.005                         -0.005                  -0.010**
 property                      (0.010)                        (0.008)                  (0.004)
 rights
 N                             27,165                         27,332                   27,365
                                 (4)                            (5)                      (6)
                      Concealing faults of a            Buying possibly           Exaggerating an
                   second-hand product is not          stolen goods is not     insurance claim is not
                                wrong                          wrong                    wrong
 Protection of                -0.011**                      -0.063***                 -0.014**
 property                      (0.005)                        (0.011)                  (0.006)
 rights
 N                             27,417                         26,818                   54,043
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The standard errors are reported in
(parentheses). *: significant at 10 percent level, **: significant at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1
percent level.




                                                     38
                                         Table A5
    The Impact of Protection of Property Rights on Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest
                                          Attitudes
                                       (OLS Results)
                 A: The Impact of Impartial Courts on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                                (1)                           (2)                       (3)
                               ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                    …Misused or altered a            …Falsely claimed
                                                                                …Offered a bribe
                           document                 government benefits
 Impartial                    0.001                      -0.004***                  -0.010***
 courts                      (0.002)                       (0.002)                   (0.002)
 N                           25,770                        25,801                     25,825
                                (4)                           (5)                       (6)
                               ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                  …Concealed faults when
                                                     …Bought possibly           …Exaggerated an
                     selling a second-hand
                                                        stolen goods             insurance claim
                             product
 Impartial                   0.006**                     -0.027***                   -0.004*
 courts                      (0.003)                       (0.008)                    (0.002)
 N                           25,314                        26,623                     52,656
                     B: The Impact of Impartial Courts on Dishonest Attitudes
                                (1)                           (2)                       (3)
                 Cannot always act honestly         Cheating on taxes is
                                                                               Bribery is not wrong
                 if you want to make money               not wrong
 Impartial                  -0.021**                        -0.006                  -0.012***
 courts                      (0.008)                       (0.005)                   (0.002)
 N                           27,165                        27,332                     27,365
                                (4)                           (5)                       (6)
                    Concealing faults of a                                       Exaggerating an
                                                   Buying possibly stolen
                 second-hand product is not                                   insurance claim is not
                                                     goods is not wrong
                              wrong                                                    wrong
 Impartial                  -0.008**                     -0.064***                  -0.019***
 courts                      (0.003)                       (0.010)                   (0.005)
 N                           27,417                        26,818                     54,043
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The standard errors are reported in
(parentheses). *: significant at 10 percent level, **: significant at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1
percent level.




                                                     39
                                      Table A6
  The Impact of Principal Component on Crimes, Misdemeanors and Dishonest Attitudes
                                    (OLS Results)
               A: The Impact of Principal Component on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                                 (1)                            (2)                       (3)
                                 ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                     …Misused or altered a             …Falsely claimed
                                                                                  …Offered a bribe
                            document                  government benefits
 Principal                     -0.001                       -0.006**                  -0.014***
 component                    (0.003)                        (0.002)                    (0.003)
 N                            25,770                         25,801                     25,825
                                 (4)                            (5)                       (6)
                                 ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                   …Concealed faults when
                                                       …Bought possibly           …Exaggerated an
                      selling a second-hand
                                                          stolen goods             insurance claim
                              product
 Principal                      0.005                      -0.034***                   -0.006**
 component                    (0.004)                        (0.009)                    (0.003)
 N                            25,314                         26,623                     52,656
                   B: The Impact of Principal Component on Dishonest Attitudes
                                 (1)                            (2)                       (3)
                  Cannot always act honestly          Cheating on taxes is
                                                                                 Bribery is not wrong
                  if you want to make money                not wrong
 Principal                   -0.023**                         -0.009                  -0.013***
 component                    (0.010)                        (0.007)                    (0.003)
 N                            27,165                         27,332                     27,365
                                 (4)                            (5)                       (6)
                     Concealing faults of a                                        Exaggerating an
                                                     Buying possibly stolen
                  second-hand product is not                                    insurance claim is not
                                                       goods is not wrong
                               wrong                                                     wrong
 Principal                  -0.014***                      -0.086***                  -0.028***
 component                    (0.004)                        (0.010)                    (0.006)
 N                            27,417                         26,818                     54,043
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The standard errors are reported in
(parentheses). *: significant at 10 percent level, **: significant at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1
percent level.




                                                     40
                                      Table A7
The Impact of Judge & Prosecutor Appointment Procedure on Crimes, Misdemeanors and
                     Dishonest Attitudes (Reduced Form Results)
   A: The Impact of Judge & Prosecutor Appointment Procedure on Crimes and Misdemeanors
                               (1)                             (2)                        (3)
                               ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                    …Misused or altered a              …Falsely claimed
                                                                                  …Offered a bribe
                           document                  government benefits
                           -0.009***                       -0.008***                  -0.010***
 Instrument
                            (0.003)                          (0.002)                    (0.004)
 N                           25,770                          25,801                     25,825
                               (4)                             (5)                        (6)
                               ==1 if in the last 5 years the respondent at least once…
                  …Concealed faults when              …Bought possibly            …Exaggerated an
                selling a second-hand product             stolen goods             insurance claim
                             -0.000                        -0.018***                  -0.010***
 Instrument
                            (0.003)                          (0.005)                    (0.002)
 N                           25,314                          26,623                     52,656
       B: The Impact of Judge & Prosecutor Appointment Procedure on Dishonest Attitudes
                               (1)                             (2)                        (3)
                Cannot always act honestly if         Cheating on taxes is
                                                                                Bribery is not wrong
                  you want to make money                   not wrong
                           -0.024***                       -0.013***                  -0.012***
 Instrument
                            (0.008)                          (0.005)                    (0.003)
 N                           27,165                          27,332                     27,365
                               (4)                             (5)                        (6)
                    Concealing faults of a                                         Exaggerating an
                                                    Buying possibly stolen
                 second-hand product is not                                    insurance claim is not
                                                      goods is not wrong
                             wrong                                                       wrong
                           -0.010***                       -0.056***                  -0.026***
 Instrument
                            (0.004)                          (0.006)                    (0.004)
 N                           27,417                          26,818                     54,043
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The standard errors are reported in
(parentheses). *: significant at 10 percent level, **: significant at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1
percent level.




                                                     41
                                         Table A8
   The Impact of Judicial Quality on Beliefs Regarding the Importance of Family, Being
                   Rich, Fairness and Equal Treatment (IV Estimates)
                                 A: The Impact of Judicial Independence
                              (1)               (2)                     (3)                             (4)
                                           ==1 if the respondent believes…
                                             …Most                                                …Family is
                      …It is important                      …It is important people
                                            people try                                           priority in life
                      to have money                            are treated equally
                                            to be fair
 Judicial                  -0.020              0.020                   0.001                          0.015
 independence             (0.425)             (0.301)                (0.912)                         (0.566)
 N                        26,195              26,041                  25,924                         24,769
                             B: The Impact of Protection of Property Rights
                             (1)                (2)                     (3)
                                           ==1 if the respondent believes…
                                             …Most                                                …Family is
                      …It is important                      …It is important people
                                            people try                                           priority in life
                      to have money                            are treated equally
                                            to be fair
 Protection of             -0.029              0.029                   0.001                          0.020
 property                 (0.388)             (0.348)                (0.911)                         (0.563)
 rights
 N                          26,195             26,041                25,924                           24,769
                                   C: The Impact of Impartial Courts
                             (1)                 (2)                   (3)
                                            ==1 if the respondent believes…
                                              …Most                                               …Family is
                      …It is important                      …It is important people
                                             people try                                          priority in life
                      to have money                           are treated equally
                                             to be fair
 Impartial                 -0.017               0.017                 0.001                           0.014
 courts                   (0.404)              (0.327)              (0.911)                          (0.562)
 N                        26,195               26,041                25,924                          24,769
                                 D: The Impact of Principal Component
                             (1)                 (2)                   (3)
                                   ==1 if the respondent believes…
                                              …Most                                               …Family is
                      …It is important                      …It is important people
                                             people try                                          priority in life
                      to have money                           are treated equally
                                             to be fair
 Principal                 -0.024               0.024                 0.001                           0.019
 component                (0.406)              (0.323)              (0.911)                          (0.563)
 N                        26,195               26,041                25,924                          24,769
Standard errors are clustered at the region level (NUTS1 or NUTS2).The p-values are reported in
(parentheses). *: significant at 10 percent level, **: significant at 5 percent level and ***: significant at 1
percent level.




                                                        42
