                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           INCOME VOLATILITY AND THE PSID:
                           PAST RESEARCH AND NEW RESULTS

                                        Robert A. Moffitt
                                          Sisi Zhang

                                      Working Paper 24390
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24390


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2018




The authors would like to thank Peter Gottschalk for involvement, advice, and assistance at every
step of the project. We thank Yujian Chen and Shuting Zhang for excellent research assistance.
We also thank Michael Carr, Emily Wiemers, and James Ziliak for comments. This research
received no financial support from any outside agency or organization. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Robert A. Moffitt and Sisi Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Income Volatility and the PSID: Past Research and New Results
Robert A. Moffitt and Sisi Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 24390
March 2018
JEL No. C23,J3


                                           ABSTRACT


The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) has made more contributions to the study of
income volatility than any other data set in the U.S. Its record of research is truly seminal. In this
paper we first present the reasons that the PSID has made such major contributions to research on
the topic. Then we review the major papers that have used the PSID to study income volatility
and we compare their results to those using other data sets. Lastly, we present new results for
male earnings volatility through 2014. We find that both gross volatility and the component
consisting of only the variance of transitory shocks have experienced a large increase during the
Great Recession after following similar trends to those previously established showing upward
trends from the 1970s to the 1980s followed by a stable period until the Recession.


Robert A. Moffitt
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and IZA
and also NBER
moffitt@jhu.edu

Sisi Zhang
Institute for Economic and Social Research
Jinan University
601 Huangpu Ave West
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510632,
China
sisi.zhang@gmail.com
                               Income Volatility and the PSID:
                              Past Research and New Results
                                  By Robert Moffitt and Sisi Zhang


The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) has made more contributions to the study of
income volatility than any other data set in the U.S. Its record of research is truly seminal. In this
paper we accomplish three tasks. First, we present the reasons that the PSID has made such
major contributions to research on the topic. Second, we review the major papers that have used
the PSID to study income volatility and we compare their results to those using other data sets.
Third, we present new results for male earnings volatility through 2014.

           I. Why the PSID Has Been So Valuable for Studying Income Volatility

The reason the PSID was used for the study of income volatility so heavily in the 1970s and
1980s is simply that it was just about the only major panel data set available to study the topic.
Today, there are many others, so the reason the PSID has continued to be used lies elsewhere.
One reason is its extraordinary length, stretching from 1967 to the present. A second is its
following rules, which follow children of the original sample families through adulthood,
allowing the data to stay representative of the U.S. population aside from immigration. A third is
the comprehensiveness of its variable collection on individual and family social and economic
characteristics ((including hours of work). Fourth, the PSID does have local area identifiers
which allow it be used for area-specific analyses and spatial questions.
       The data set is not without its weaknesses. Possible response error and attrition may
affect the PSID as it might for any survey data set. However, PSID has maintained its cross-
sectional validity (Fitzgerald et al., 1998) and even its measures of changes in earnings appear to
be little affected by response error (Bound et al., 1994). A significant weakness of the PSID is
its sample size, which often does not permit much subgroup analysis or distributional analyses
(e.g., by detailed quantile), especially in comparison to administrative data sets. But most
administrative data sets also have weaknesses, particularly the lack of other variables that the
PSID has, and because administrative data sets also miss many types of earnings and workers
that survey data sets have (Abowd and Stinson, 2013).




                                                  1
                      II. A Review of PSID Research on Income Volatility

While our review is focused on PSID research on income volatility, we wish to emphasize the
enormous literature using the PSID to study other forms of economic volatility, including job
mobility, migration, employment turnover, and related topics. It has also been used to study
mobility, both intragenerational and intergenerational, between quantiles of income and
occupational distributions, another area we will not cover. The PSID was used for all these
topics in the early years of its existence, and an important collection of those studies published in
1984 (Duncan et al., 1984) was the first to reveal a startling high level of dynamism, mobility,
but also instability and turbulence, among American families.
       Its contributions to the specific study of income volatility, primarily that of individual
earnings rather than family income, have been major. In the Online Appendix, we provide tables
of the major studies that have been conducted and we present the findings of each. We first
review studies using error components models to decompose income variances into permanent
and transitory components. The most well-known early study in this line was that of Lillard and
Willis (1978), who used newly developed methods for random effects panel data models to
estimate a simple permanent-transitory model. The literature subsequent to that time has grown
in volume and sophistication, with ever more refinements in the specification of the dynamic
processes generating both permanent and transitory components of earnings. This literature has
made major methodological contributions as well, developing methods which have been adopted
for us in many other panel data sets.
       Next we review studies using the PSID to study calendar time trends in volatility, a
literature initiated by Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994).        Those authors studied trends in the
transitory variance of white men’s earnings and found that it rose from the 1970s to the 1980s,
and that its rise constituted about half the increase in cross sectional inequality over that period.
About a dozen PSID studies followed that article, using different methods and extending the
analysis further. Three of these studies examined only trends in “gross” volatility, defined as
some measure of the dispersion of yi,t-1-yt, where yit is earnings for individual i at time t. Trends
in the dispersion of gross volatility combine trends in the dispersion of both permanent and
transitory volatility and hence are not the same as the latter.
       These PSID show male earnings volatility to have three phases: a rise in volatility from
the 1970s to the mid-1980s, a middle phase from the 1980s to 2000 or the mid-2000s where


                                                   2
volatility was either flat or slightly increasing or declining, and a third phase showing a rise in
volatility, possibly associated with the Great Recession but sometimes appearing to begin before
it. Two studies examined trends in female earnings volatility and found it to decline over the
entire period since 1970 and three examined household income volatility, finding it to rise over
time.
        A number of studies have estimated models—usually only of trends in gross volatility—
with the Current Population Survey (CPS), Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP),
Unemployment Insurance (UI) earnings data, and Social Security (SS) earnings data.             Our
review shows that matched CPS data reveal the same three-phase trend in male earnings
volatility as shown in the PSID. The one SIPP study showed declining volatility from 1984 to
2006, and with magnitudes which seem to exceed those found by PSID studies of the middle
period finding slight declines. The one study using UI records found stable male volatility from
1992 to 2008, consistent with PSID studies of the middle period. Among studies using SS data,
two only showed volatility combining men and women and are noncomparable to other work.
One published study of male gross volatility alone showed a flat trend from 1987 to 2009
although also showing signs of an uptick at the end, from 2006 to 2009, while another showed
declines over a longer period.
        While many of the studies using data sets other than the PSID find trends consistent in a
rough sense with the PSID, there are many differences as well, particularly for the studies using
administrative data sets. Differences in composition, such as the inclusion of non-heads in the
administrative data sets and their exclusion in the PSID studies, make comparisons difficult.
More work resolving the differences is warranted.

                                     III. Some New Results

We provide new PSID results on trends in male earnings gross volatility and transitory variances
up through 2014, and using for the latter a new, more flexible model than used in past work. Our
data set consists of male heads from 1970 to 2014 30-59 years old who were not full-time
students, had positive weeks worked and wage and salary earnings and which excludes
nonsample men and all in PSID oversamples. The unbalanced panel has 3,508 men and 36,403
person-year observations. We group the data into age categories 30-39, 40-49, and 50-59 to
construct the autocovariance matrix of the data, with typical element equal to the covariance



                                                 3
between earnings regression residuals for individuals in age group a in year t and the residuals
for those individuals when they were age a’ in year t-(a-a’) and with a 1% top and bottom trim.


                                              0.30                                                                                         12
              Variance of 2-year difference
                                              0.25                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                Unemployment Rate
                                              0.20                                                                                         8

                                              0.15                                                                                         6

                                              0.10                                                                                         4

                                              0.05                                                                                         2

                                              0.00                                                                                         0




                                                         Variance of 2-year Difference, Log Earnings Residuals         Unemployment Rate




                                              FIGURE 1: Variance of 2-Year Difference in Log Earnings Residuals
Figure 1 shows the trend in gross volatility (defined as the variance of the two-year change in log
earnings regression residuals) to have followed the same three-phase pattern found in past work,
rising from the 1970s to the mid-1980s, exhibiting a stable trend around significant fluctuations
from the mid-1980s to the mid-2000s, and rising thereafter. The unemployment rate is also
shown in the graph and shows volatility countercyclical with a slight lag, on average, but this
pattern does not hold for all periods.
       Error components models have been criticized for being excessively parametric. Our
model maintains many of the restrictions in past work but innovates in two respects: it makes a
clear identifying assumption for separating permanent from transitory components, and it is
nonparametric on the dynamic evolution of the two components, albeit within a traditional linear
framework. Our model is:


                                                                            𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡 𝜈𝜈𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖                                                    (1)
                                                                            𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖0 + ∑𝑎𝑎𝑠𝑠=1 𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖                                                         (2)
                                                               𝜈𝜈𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 + ∑𝑎𝑎−1
                                                                                  𝑠𝑠=1 𝜓𝜓𝑎𝑎,𝑎𝑎−𝑠𝑠 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖           for a≥2                                          (3)


and with 𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖1 = 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖1 . The model retains the linear framework, restricts the permanent and
transitory calendar year shifters (αt and βt) to be invariant w.r.t. age (but this could be easily



                                                                                         4
relaxed), and we assume, as in past models, that the permanent shocks ωia, the transitory shocks
εia, and the initial permanent component μi0 to be independently distributed with each other and
over time. But we define a permanent shock, in accordance with the dictionary definition of the
word, to be a shock that has a long-lasting effect which does not go away, even partially,
implying ∂μia/∂ωia=1. The unit root process in (2) is the only function that satisfies this condition.
Transitory shocks are identified as those which affect age-specific earnings with a coefficient
different than 1. Finally, we allow the variances of ωia and εia to be nonparametric in age and the
transitory shock coefficients ψa,a-s to be nonparametric in age and lag length (s). Allowing ωia to
be nonparametric in age nests the heterogeneous growth rate model in the specification. ARMA
specifications for the transitory component are clearly nested as well.
       The online Appendix gives identification conditions for estimation of the model
parameters and the second moments of the unobservables as well as the nonparametric
estimation method, which consists of series estimation with a basis function expansion. A
generalized cross-validation statistic with a penalty for the number of parameters is used to
choose the order of the series. Traditional minimum distance is used for estimation, fitting the
second moments implied by the model to the 1,417 unique elements of the age-year
autocovariance matrix of the data. The Appendix shows the estimates of all parameters.
       Figure 2 shows the estimation results for αt and βt, both normalized to 1 in the initial year.
Both rose from the 1970s to the 1980s, with the transitory peaking in the mid-1980s and the
permanent peaking in the late 1980s. Both fluctuated until the mid-2000s, after which they
began to rise, with the trend line emerging close to the Great Recession. By 2014, both had risen
by 80 percent, implying equal contributions to long term inequality since 1970.




                                                  5
           2

      1.8

      1.6

      1.4

      1.2

           1

      0.8

      0.6

      0.4

      0.2

           0
               1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

                                                                 Alpha           Beta


                                                FIGURE 2: Estimates of Alpha and Beta
Figure 3 shows the predicted values of the total variance of male earnings residuals as well as
that of the permanent and transitory components for men 40-49 (other ages have different levels
but the same trend patterns). The three-phase trend appears here as well. The transitory variance
is about two-thirds of the total and has risen much more during the Great Recession than has the
permanent variance.
           Using the model estimates to decompose the trends in gross volatility shown in Figure 1
into trends in permanent and transitory components shows that those two-year volatility
measures are almost entirely the result of changes in the transitory variance, which is not
surprising since the permanent variance does not change much over a two-year period.

     0.8

     0.7

     0.6

     0.5
                        Total

     0.4
                                                                                                                   Transitory
     0.3

     0.2

     0.1
                                                                                                       Permanent

     0.0
               1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014


  FIGURE 3: Fitted Permanent, Transitory, and Total Variance of Log Earnings Residuals, Age 40-49.




                                                                             6
                                       III. Summary

The PSID has made major contributions to the study of income volatility in the U.S. Most PSID
studies show growing volatility from the 1970s to the mid-1980s, and a flat or declining trend
after that, followed by a resumption of increasing volatility around the time of the Great
Recession. New estimates using a more flexible model than used in past work confirms these
general results. However, differences remain with findings from other data sets which deserve
future attention.

                                       REFERENCES

Abowd, John and Martha Stinson. 2013. “Estimating Measurement Error in Annual Job
   Earnings: A Comparison of Survey and Administrative Data.” Review of Economics and
   Statistics 95(5): 441-45.

Bound, John, Charles Brown, Greg J. Duncan, and William L. Rogers. 1994. “Evidence on
   the Validity of Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Labor Market Data.” Journal of Labor
   Economics 12(3): 345-68.

Duncan, Greg J., Richard Coe, Mary Corcoran, Martha S. Hill, Saul Hoffman, and James
   N. Morgan. 1984. Years of Poverty, Years of Plenty. Institute for Social Research,
   University of Michigan.

Fitzgerald, John, Peter Gottschalk, and Robert Moffitt. 1998. “An Analysis of Sample
     Attrition in Panel Data: The PSID.” Journal of Human Resources 33(2): 251-99.

Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt. 1994. “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U. S.
    Labor Market.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1994 (2):217–72.

Lillard, Lee A. and Robert J. Willis. 1978. “Dynamic Aspects of Earnings Mobility.”
     Econometrica 46(5): 985-101.




                                              7
          Appendix to

“Income Volatility and the PSID:

Past Research and New Results”
     This is an Appendix to “Income Volatility and the PSID: Past Research and New Results”.

It expands on all three sections of the paper: the discussion of the usefulness of the PSID for the

study of income volatility, the review of research using the PSID to study income volatility and a

comparison with findings from other data sets, and the presentation of a new model of male

earnings volatility with new results using PSID data through 2014.

    The Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), as its name implies, was intended

from its origins to study the dynamics of income. The study of income volatility with the PSID

began very quickly after its initiation in 1968, after only a few waves were available, and has

continued since. Defining volatility generally as the degree of change in a variable from one

time period to a later one, the PSID has permitted studies of a wide variety of other forms of

economic volatility as well as family income, including studies of individual or family earnings,

of job mobility and labor market turnover, and of turnover in welfare participation, for example.

The studies in these areas have made major contributions to research and policy over the years.

In addition, the studies have in many cases provided the initial impetus for research on volatility

by researchers using other panel data sets in the U.S. and using panel data in other countries, and

its influence consequently goes beyond those studies using the PSID itself.

       As we noted in the first paragraph above, this Appendix expands on the three goals of the

paper. First, we provide an expanded discussion of the reasons that the PSID has been so

valuable for research on economic volatility, and we provide some comparisons with other data

sets to emphasize the ways in which the PSID has a comparative advantage. However, over the

past two decades other panel data sets have come into use for the study of U.S. economic

volatility that were not available in the early years of the PSID, and some of those data sets have




                                                 1
advantages in certain dimensions over the PSID. We discuss those disadvantages as well.

Second, we expanded on our review of the research on income volatility using the PSID,

providing a brief overview of the voluminous literature and then a detailed review of the

literature specifically on models of individual earnings and family income volatility. We also

compare findings using the PSID specifically on the question of trends in U.S. volatility to

findings on trends using other data sets. Third, we expand on our estimates of male earnings

volatility, updating prior estimates through 2014. To our knowledge, updates through this year

have not appeared in the literature.



I.     The Usefulness of the PSID in the Study of Income and Economic Volatility

The structure of the PSID is well known. It began with a sample of approximately 5,000

households in 1968, combining an oversample of low income households from a previous survey

combined with a fresh random sample drawn from the U.S. population at that time. Households

were interviewed annually thereafter, initially in person and later by telephone, asking a

comprehensive set of socioeconomic questions. The low-income oversample was mostly

dropped in 1997 and biennial interviewing began in 1998. An important feature of the PSID is

its rules for following household members, which require that individuals who leave original

PSID households and form new households (“splitoffs”) are retained in the sample and asked

approximately the same comprehensive set of socioeconomic questions as the initial households,

thereby allowing the PSID to stay broadly representative of the U.S. population, aside from

immigration.

       While there were few alternative panel data sets in 1968, many more have developed

since that time. Survey data have been collected as part of the National Longitudinal Surveys




                                                 2
(NLS), which consist of a series of birth cohorts of individuals who are interviewed annually for

several years; the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), a survey of older individuals in the U.S.;

and the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), a set of short panels of no longer

than 3 or 4 years whose respondents are interviewed every 4 months and a comprehensive set of

socioeconomic data are obtained. 1 While the Current Population Survey (CPS) is primarily a

cross-sectional survey, it can be used to construct a set of two year panels by matching families

who appear in two surveys a year apart.

            In addition to these surveys, the development of panel data from administrative records

has increased substantially over the last two decades. Earnings data from the Social Security

Administration, panel data on tax records from the Internal Revenue Service, and earnings data

from state-level Unemployment Insurance (UI) records have all been used to study earnings

volatility. These data are typically restricted in use and require application and licensing

procedures for their analysis. In a few special cases, administrative data have been matched to

one of the surveys mentioned in the previous paragraph (e.g., HRS, SIPP), but this is still the

exception rather than the rule. 2

            Strengths of the PSID. While the panel nature of the PSID per se was its chief advantage

relative to the available alternatives in its early years, its relative strength today does not rely on

its panel nature per se given the existence of several alternatives. Instead, its strengths lie in the

nature of the survey. First and foremost is its long length, with data from 1968 through the

current time, covering almost a 50-year age span. Sample members who were working adults in

1968 were either dead or retired 50 years later. For those born into PSID families after 1968, a

similarly long age span is available. The 50-year period also allows a long period with which to


  1
      The SIPP has now moved to an annual interviewing frame.
  2
      This has become fairly common in Europe.




                                                                3
examine business cycles, long term trends, and related calendar-time events. Aside from Social

Security administrative earnings data, no other panel has this breadth in life cycle period covered

or calendar years covered. The comprehensiveness of the life cycle coverage also makes it

advantageous relative to panels like the HRS, which only cover part of the life span (but in much

greater detail than the PSID for that part). The long period makes it advantageous for life cycle

research relative to short panels like SIPP (although SIPP has advantages, too, as noted below).

       The following rules of the PSID also make it advantageous relative to cohort panels like

the NLS which are cohort-based. Cohort-based panels necessarily support research only on the

cohorts selected for enrollment, and they also make it difficult to separate life cycle effects from

calendar time effects. The PSID decision not merely to follow the families in the initial 1968

sample, but also the splitoff families, makes it superior for this purpose.

       An important strength of the PSID relative to most administrative data sets is its

comprehensive set of questions on variables related to earnings and employment, as well as its

collection of information on other family members. Most administrative data sets used for

earnings do not have information on hours of work and only sometimes on weeks or quarters of

work, making it difficult to separate volatility in the amount of labor supplied and volatility in

the earnings per unit of labor, an important distinction. While many administrative data sets

have information on industry of work, few have information on occupation, while the PSID has

both. Administrative data also rarely have information on job search and unemployment (UI

data are a partial exception), which are often needed to estimate models of volatility that involve

movements in and out of the labor force as well as in and out of employment.

       The family context is also important, for it has been a long-standing finding of research

on labor force and employment decisions that those decisions are closely intertwined within the




                                                  4
family. Spousal decisions on whether and how much to work, and at what level of potential

earnings, are affected by the other spouse’s decisions and outcomes. A common hypothesis, for

example, is that the volatilities of spouses are negatively correlated, with one of them increasing

his or her earnings when the earnings of the other spouse declines. This implies that family

earnings may be less volatile than the earnings of either spouse taken individually. Social

Security and UI earnings data, because they are not easily linked within families, are not as well

suited for these questions. Tax data do have some family information, although there are

coverage differences with survey data. The PSID also has information on total earnings of others

in the family who are not the head or spouse, even if not for those individuals individually.

       Information on family composition permits controls for the presence and numbers of

children, which many administrative data sets cannot do. Data collected on children in the PSID

also allow the study of the effect of volatility on child outcomes, a research topic pursued more

in sociology and child development than in economics (see Hill et al., 2013 for a review). The

presence, number, and ages of children may also be determinants of volatility, especially for

parents who are their caregivers. The availability of information on the presence or absence of a

spouse or cohabiting partner permits the PSID to be used to study volatility among single

mothers, a large and typically disadvantaged subgroup in the U.S. which is known to have high

economic volatility.

       Finally, the availability of state and county identifiers for PSID families permits

geographic-level research. While the county level data are restricted use and sample sizes for

individual areas are usually small, models that pool areas and use covariates measuring area-

level characteristics can be estimated with the PSID. Many administrative and survey data sets




                                                 5
do not have geographic level data beyond the state level. If they do have geographic data it is not

as detailed as the PSID restricted use data.

       Weaknesses of the PSID for economic volatility research. While the PSID has the major

strengths just noted, it has some weaknesses and is not as strong as some other data sets in

certain dimensions. One issue often noted in comparing any survey like the PSID to

administrative data is that response error and attrition may affect PSID estimates relative to those

in administrative data. In principle, this issue can be examined by comparing the PSID to

administrative data and, if the latter are taken as truth, determining whether volatility patterns in

the PSID match up to those in administrative data. This exercise is not completely

straightforward because most administrative data sets also have error, and most exact matches

between survey and administrative data sets find differences in both directions—that is, survey

reports often have jobs and earnings reports that are missing from the administrative data as well

as the other way around. In many cases, this seems to be because the administrative data are in

error and do not, for a variety of reasons, pick up jobs and earnings that survey respondents

report (Juhn and McCue, 2010; Abraham et al., 2013; Abowd and Stinson 2013; see also Abowd

et al. (2018) for a discussion of fraudulent Social Security numbers). Relatedly, many

administrative data sets (e.g., those from tax records) miss large fractions of the population (e.g.,

those who do not file taxes). Nevertheless, in the next section, we will review whether volatility

as reported in the PSID appears to be the same or similar as in administrative data sets.

       There have been a number of studies comparing cross-sectional distributions of earnings

in the PSID to those in the CPS (Becketti et al., 1988; Fitzgerald, Gottschalk and Moffitt, 1998;

Gouskova, Andreski and Schoeni, 2010). As a general rule, earnings data in the PSID line up

reasonably well with the CPS, at least for all percentiles except those in the tails, where small




                                                  6
sample sizes do not allow detailed comparisons. In addition, the PSID appears to have higher

mean levels of earnings reports than the CPS. However, for the purpose of volatility,

comparisons cannot be easily made with the CPS because it is primarily a cross-sectional data set.

       Comparisons of the PSID volatility with other surveys also does not reveal which is the

truth. One study which attempted to do so compared presumably accurate payroll records from a

private company in two successive years to earnings reports in a PSID-worded survey given to

the same workers (Bound et al., 1994). The study found a reliability ratio—the ratio of the

variance of the true change in earnings in the payroll records to the variance of the change in

earnings from the survey—was .75, a relatively high number. Pischke (1995) also showed that

measurement error in the PSID has little effect on earnings covariances, and Gottschalk and

Huynh (2010) show that this is a result of the non-classical structure of measurement error in

earnings found in many surveys. 3 However, Fitzgerald et al. (1998) found that attrition rates

seemed to be positively correlated with past income volatility, which might result in PSID

having families who are more stable than the population at large.

           A variety of other aspects of the PSID make it somewhat weaker than other data sets for

the study of volatility. One is that the PSID went to biennial interviewing after 1996 which

prevents the study of volatility at the annual level, which most other data sets have. Some, like

the SIPP, have historically permitted the study at the subannual level. While most surveys,

including the PSID, attempt some retrospective reporting, most analysts do not believe that such

reporting has a high degree of accuracy for earnings. Another aspect of the PSID which puts it at

a disadvantage relative to some other panels is its lack of detailed earnings information for


   3
    In fact, Gottschalk and Huynh find that the cross-sectional variance of true earnings is greater, rather than smaller, than that variance in
survey data, contrary to expectations (this is because measurement error is negatively correlated with true earnings—high earners underreport and
low earners overreport). Nevertheless, we do expect some measurement error in the PSID data and expect this to affect our estimates. However,
since our focus is on how the various variance estimates have changed over time, this should be a problem for our work only if PSID
measurement error has changed.




                                                                       7
individuals in the household other than the head or spouse. Some other surveys obtain more

detail on those types of individuals, and most administrative data sets (UI wage records, Social

Security earnings data) have information on all working individuals, regardless of position

within the family, although those data sets also have the disadvantage mentioned above that they

usually cannot identify headship or spouse relations and hence cannot separately identify

individuals who are not heads or spouses. This also makes comparisons of volatility between the

PSID and those data sets more difficult (see below). A third weakness of the PSID is its relative

lack of coverage of those who have immigrated to the U.S. since 1968, which constitutes more

than 10 percent of the U.S. population. While attempts to incorporate that population into the

PSID have been attempted, it is fair to say that these attempts have not been successful. Finally,

the PSID has smaller sample sizes in general than many other data sets. To take one example,

examining of earnings volatility broken out by gender and by education level for prime-age

workers runs into small samples if education has more than two categories. The sample size is

also limiting for the study of volatility if percentile points of volatility are used, since percentile

points in the tails typically have insufficient sizes for reliable calculation. Administrative data

sets generally have the strength of much larger sample sizes and permit greater disaggregation as

well, at least using the variables they have available. Data sets like the SIPP generally have

somewhat larger sample sizes, and NLSY cohorts and the HRS have larger samples for the

specific age and cohort groups they examine.



II. A Review of PSID Research on Income Volatility

As noted in the Introduction, economic volatility is, at the most general level, the measurement

of the degree of change in an economic variability from one-time period to the next. We will use




                                                    8
very specific definitions of volatility below when we review the literature in earnings and income

volatility, but we begin by mentioning briefly some PSID studies of volatility in a broader sense.

For example, the PSID was used for the study of economic mobility--most commonly studied by

examining transition rates from one quantile of a distribution to other quantiles of the distribution

between two time periods—in the early year of the Panel, with Smith and Morgan (1970)

possibly representing the earliest. Smith and Morgan used the first two waves of the PSID,

1967-1968 to study family income mobility across deciles of the distribution. Their early study

showed that, while remaining within the same decile was the most common transition rate,

moving to a different decile was also very common. They found that the most important

determinant of mobility was changes in male earnings within the family. They also found that,

despite considerable mobility across deciles, very few of the movements moved families over the

poverty line or on or off welfare, so that poverty and welfare transitions were much less common.

These findings, familiar from many studies since that time, illustrate the contribution of the PSID

from the early days of the literature. The PSID has been used heavily in the succeeding years for

the study of mobility. 4

          A landmark 1984 volume edited by Duncan (1984) compiled a broad range of findings

related to economic dynamics over the approximately first ten years of the PSID by a number of

authors, changing the conclusions from some of the early analyses. 5 For example, the volume

found a high degree of economic mobility, with less than half of families staying in the same

relative position from one year to the next, combined with many large movements up and down.

Another dramatic finding from this volume was that much of the dynamics of family income



  4
     The literature here is obviously massive. For a recent review, see Jäntti and Jenkins (2013). An important study which we also do not
review here, although it focused mostly (but not exclusively) on mobility trends, is Kopczuk et al. (2010).
   5
     The volume drew heavily from a sequence of 10 unpublished volumes analyzing the early years of data from the PSID.




                                                                    9
mobility was actually associated with changes in family composition. The findings on poverty

mobility also changed, with the longer-term data showing that only one half of those in poverty

in one year were also in poverty the next year, implying a very high level of poverty mobility.

Mobility on and off welfare was also found to be very high many years later by Bane and

Ellwood (1996) who, using even more years of PSID data, pointed out that, while the majority of

families had only short periods of time on welfare, a small fraction had very long durations and

spent many years on welfare, and that these two patterns were not inconsistent with one another.

The Duncan volume also examined the dynamics of labor market status, hours of work, and

differences in various aspects of dynamics by race and gender. Taken together, the findings

from the PSID reported in the Duncan volume revealed a startling high level of dynamism and

mobility, but also instability and turbulence, in the lives of American families. 6 This was a

completely new picture of American society which was made possible only because of the

PSID. 7

           Studies of Earnings and Income Volatility. One of the many literatures on economic

dynamics to which the PSID has made particularly strong contributions has been the literature on

earnings volatility in the U.S. and how it has changed over time. This literature, primarily

located within the discipline of economics, began in the discipline in the late 1950s, 1960s, and

early 1970s with the development of econometric methods for the analysis of panel data. Much

of the econometric work at that time developed so-called “error components” models, the

simplest version of which assumed that each cross-sectional unit had an unobserved, time-

invariant component in the error term along with a random term that varied independently across

   6
      We attach no normative values to these different concepts because their implications for well-being depend upon whether they are
permanent or transitory as well as how well they can be smoothed.
   7
     There is not space here to also discuss the methodological contributions of these studies to the study of dynamics and mobility of all kinds,
as researchers began to confront the challenges posed by dealing with long panels like the PSID. Some illustrations of methodological advances
with the PSID specifically on the earnings dynamics will be given below.




                                                                       10
individuals and over time. This model was attractive because it corresponded to the theoretical

model of permanent and transitory effects developed in the late 1940s and early 1950s in

macroeconomics by Milton Friedman (for example, Friedman, 1957). In this structure, the

variance of the transitory component is the measure of volatility.

            Table 1 lists several of the leading papers in this literature using the PSID, running from

papers in 1972 to papers in 2017. 8 An early paper by Benus and Morgan (1972), using the first

four waves of the PSID, was the first to decompose earnings of the family head into several

components in a simple version of an error components model. The first component was just

average earnings over the four years, called the “permanent” component; the second was the

trend in earnings over the years; and the third was the instability, or volatility, of earnings

experienced by individuals around their trend. The authors found a pattern that has held up ever

since. Heads with higher permanent earnings have both higher trends and lower instability.

Benus (1974) and Mirer (1974) followed up with work that more formally calculated earnings

instability as the variance of regression residuals around individual-specific means or trends, and

analyzed the correlates of that instability.

            The literature took a more technical and econometric turn in 1978 with a well-known

paper by Lillard and Willis (1978), which applied the more formal methods and models that had

then recently emerged from the econometrics literature on the estimation of error components

models with panel data. The authors used PSID male earnings data from 1967 through 1973 to

estimate log earnings as a function of observed covariates and an error term which had a time

invariant permanent component and an AR(1) transitory component. About 73 percent of the

residual earnings variance was a result of the permanent component and the AR(1) correlation



  8
      In this Table and in Tables 2 and 3, we list only papers that have appeared in published journals or books.




                                                                         11
coefficient was high. They used their estimates to analyze the dynamics of movements into and

out of poverty, finding a high degree of mobility and that the probability of still being in poverty

in 1973 conditional on having been in poverty in 1967 was quite low. Several important papers

followed, including an analysis by MaCurdy (1982), using 1967-1976 PSID data on male

earnings, but with a richer specification of the serial correlation of the transitory component.

MaCurdy found that a MA specification fit better than an AR specification for the dynamics,

implying much shorter lags than found by Lillard and Willis, with consequent lower dynamics

and turnover. Hall and Mishkin (1982) argued more strongly for the presence of a unit root in

the permanent component, implying an increasing variance of earnings over the life cycle, a

feature subject to much reanalysis in the later literature. Abowd and Card (1989) and Carroll

(1992) also found evidence for a unit root in male earnings and for a low-order transitory process.

Carroll also emphasized the relative importance of permanent and transitory components, finding

them to be approximately equal in variance.

       The literature has since progressed significantly in various directions. Baker (1997),

following an earlier suggestion by Hause (1980), argued in favor of what is called a

heterogeneous growth component in earnings, which implies that different individuals not only

have different average earnings over their lifetimes but also different trends (the early work by

Benus and Morgan noted above found something similar). Geweke and Keane (2000) focused

instead on the relative contributions of the permanent and transitory components to the

distribution of lifetime earnings as opposed to annual earnings, finding that the transitory

component was a greater contributor to the latter but the permanent component was the main

contributor to the former. Meghir and Pistaferri (2004) proposed a different model of the

transitory variance, allowing that variance to shift randomly over time, while Guvenen (2009)




                                                 12
returned to the heterogeneous growth model of Baker, providing new evidence for its support.

Bonhomme and Robin (2010) developed new methods for estimating the entire distribution of

permanent and transitory components, finding them to be non-normal and to have fat tails, while

Browning et al. (2010) focused on expanding the number of heterogeneous components in the

error components model.

           Low et al. (2010) attempted to incorporate job mobility into a model of earnings mobility,

an important issue because most of the prior literature had examined only individuals with

positive annual earnings, thereby ignoring mobility into and out of annual employment; and the

literature mostly had not attempted to decompose annual earnings instability into within-year

instability in job mobility and instability in wage rates on the job. 9 Among many other findings,

the authors find that the variance of the permanent shock is lower when job mobility is ignored. 10

In another paper, Hryshko (2012) argues that the unit root process in earnings does, in fact, fit

the data better than the heterogeneous growth process analyzed by earlier authors. Arellano et al.

(2017) allow a more flexible specification of the persistence of shocks to earnings, allowing

those shocks to have a different level of persistence for workers at different points in the earnings

distribution. They find strong persistence of shocks both among high-earnings individuals who

experience positive shocks and low-earnings individuals who experience negative shocks.

           Calendar Time Trends. The sampling design and long length of the PSID has also

permitted a large number of studies of whether the structure of earnings volatility has changed

over time in the U.S. The majority of these studies have followed the lead of the literature just



   9
     There is an enormous literature on job mobility that is connected, but somewhat separate, from the earnings volatility literature we review
here. But the PSID has been a major contributor to that literature as well. See the volume by Neumark (2000) which contains several studies
using the PSID, Stevens (2001) for another example, the recent paper by Altonji et al. (2013) for an econometric treatment of job mobility with
the PSID.
   10
       See also Liu (forthcoming), who finds that individuals can partly insure themselves against firm-specific shocks by moving to a different
firm, implying that the variance of shocks is larger than what is seen in realized earnings after mobility.




                                                                      13
discussed by estimating separate permanent and transitory components of earnings and

determining whether either or both have shifted over time. The studies are listed in Table 2.

           The first paper in this literature was that of Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994), who noted that

the increase in U.S. cross-sectional inequality which had recently appeared had to be

accompanied by an increase in the permanent variance, the transitory variance, or both. They

used the PSID to ask this question of white male heads from 1969 to 1987 and found that both

the permanent and transitory variance had grown over the period and that they had experienced

about equal growth. Therefore, half of the increase in cross-sectional inequality could be

attributed to an increase in volatility. A 1995 paper by the same authors (Moffitt and Gottschalk,

1995), using a more formal error components model yielded the same result, a finding reported

again by Gittleman and Joyce (1999). The literature evolved by adding additional years to the

PSID and estimating different models for the decomposition into permanent and transitory

effects.

           Haider (2001) used a slightly different model that also showed increases in the variances

of both components but a slowdown in transitory growth after 1982, while Hyslop (2001)

estimated a simpler error components model of husband and wife earnings and found that both

husband and wife transitory variances rose from 1979 to 1985. Moffitt and Gottschalk (2002)

extended the data frame through 1996 and also found a slowdown in the growth of volatility but

beginning at a later date than Haider had found. Keys (2008), using data through 2000, also

found a slowdown in male transitory variance growth beginning around 1990. Keys was also the

first to examine female earnings and total family income, finding much smaller increases in

volatility for women but much larger increases in total family volatility, compared to that for

men. Gottschalk and Moffitt (2009) used data through 2004 and also found that transitory




                                                    14
variance growth had ceased in the late 1980s but detected a possible reemergence of growth in

the late 1990s. Heathcote et al. (2010) found general increases in both permanent and transitory

variances but pooled over men and women, making the results difficult to compare to other

studies in the literature. Moffitt and Gottschalk (2012), using formal error components model

methods on data through 2004, found once again that the transitory variance earnings for men

had stopped growing after the late 1980s, and that their earlier suggestion of a reemergence of

growth in the late 1990s had turned out to be only a business cycle effect.

        Jensen and Shore (2015) were the first to attempt to identify and estimate heterogeneity

across individuals in the growth of male earnings volatility, finding that different men have

different levels of volatility and that almost all of the growth in volatility had occurred among

men who had high long-run levels of volatility in the first place.

       Other studies related to time trends in earnings volatility A small number of studies have

not attempted to decompose earnings changes into permanent and transitory components. Instead,

they simply estimate the variance or other measures of dispersion of the change in earnings from

one period to the next. The results of these studies are noncomparable to those just reviewed

because the variance of changes in earnings can arise from either a change in permanent earnings

dispersion or transitory earnings dispersion. These studies are therefore labeled as studying

“gross” volatility in Table 2 and must be interpreted as estimating a sum of changes in permanent

and transitory variances.

       In this category are studies by Dynarski and Gruber (1997), Shin and Solon (2011), and

Dynan et al. (2012). Dynarski and Gruber examined the variances of residuals in a first-

differenced male earnings regression and found those variances to have risen steadily from 1970

to 1991, although with a strong cyclical component visible as well. Shin and Solon found the




                                                 15
variance of 2-year changes in male earnings to have risen from 1970 through the mid-1980s, to

have declined after that until about 1997, and to have risen from 1997 to 2004. Dynan et al.

found the variance of male earnings changes also to have risen through 1985, but to have

fluctuated after that around a slowly rising trend through 2008. 11 Dynan et al. also examined

female earnings gross volatility through 2008, finding it to have actually declined over the period,

especially in the earlier years. The authors found that combined head and spouse earnings gross

volatility rose on net, but at a slower rate than for male head earnings alone. Finally, the study

examined gross volatility trends for household income, finding a significant upward trend over

the entire 1970-2008 period but rising at different rates in different periods.

           Earnings volatility in data sets other than the PSID. Earnings volatility has also been

estimated in a number of other data sets, some also household surveys but some instead drawn

from administrative records. Table 3 lists the major studies that focused on calendar time trends

in volatility. 12 Interestingly, most of the studies using data sets other than the PSID have focused

on trends in gross volatility rather than making an attempt to do a decomposition into permanent

and transitory components. This may be partly because an important initial question is whether

even trends in gross volatility in other data sets match those in the PSID. For this reason, the

studies examining gross volatility are listed first in the Table 3.

           Two studies examined trends in gross volatility in the SIPP (Bania and Leete, 2009; Celik

et al., 2012). Bania-Leete is somewhat noncomparable to other work because the authors

calculated short-term monthly volatility within a calendar year, which may follow a different

pattern than year-to-year volatility. In any case, the authors found that gross volatility of

   11
      Dynan et al. included observations with zero earnings at one of the two periods of the 2-year change. Shin and Solon (2011) argue that
Dynan et al.’s turning points were affected by the inclusion of labor income and farm income in addition to wage and salary income.
   12
      As noted previously, only studies that have been published in journal or book form are listed. Also, almost all of this literature has focused
on calendar time trends, so we omit the few studies that did not focus on that issue. We also only review U.S. studies, since our goal is to
compare trends to those in the PSID.




                                                                        16
household income by this measure rose over the 1990s. This is consistent with the one PSID

study that examined gross volatility of household income (Dynan et al., 2012). Celik et al.

examine the more conventional year-to-year volatility of male earnings with the SIPP starting in

1984, finding that it declined from that year through 2006, although experiencing strong business

cycle variation around the trend. This finding is inconsistent with the PSID study of Dynarski

and Gruber (1997) and somewhat inconsistent with the PSID study of Dynan et al. (2012) who

found that, after the mid-1980s, male volatility of biannual earnings rose slowly, around periods

of decline, through 2008. But it is a bit more consistent with the PSID study of Shin and Solon

(2011), who found that male gross volatility fell after the mid-1980s, at least through 1997. 13

           Three studies examined matched year-to-year CPS records to obtain a measure of one-

year-apart gross volatility, which are not strictly comparable to the PSID measures of gross

volatility two years apart. Matched CPS files face a well-known problem that the CPS returns to

housing units, not families or individuals, and hence only some families can be matched, which

is likely to lead to an understatement of volatility. Ziliak et al. (2011) found that male earnings

gross volatility rose sharply from the early 1970s to the mid-1980s, followed by a decline and a

rise which left it at its mid-1980s level by the last year of the analysis, 2009, not inconsistent

with the PSID. The authors also examined female earnings volatility and found it to decline over

the entire period from the 1970s to 2009. This is consistent with the PSID study of Dynan et al.

(2012). Celik et al. (2012) who also examined the CPS and found male earnings gross volatility

to have risen strongly from the 1970s through the early 1980s, followed by a slow decline

through 2006, followed by a rise through 2009. While the first period is consistent with the SIPP,

the PSID, and the Ziliak et al. CPS findings, this finding of Celik et al. for the later periods is not

   13
      This may be the place to note again that attrition bias in the PSID could affect its findings and explain some of the differences here.
However, the main concern with PSID attrition is that those individuals with high levels of volatility are more likely to attrite (Fitzgerald et al.,
2008). This would tend to bias the time trend of volatility in the PSID downwards.




                                                                         17
consistent with the CPS findings of Ziliak et al. nor with the studies of Dynarski-Gruber or, to an

extent, Dynan et al. for the PSID, all of whom found a stable or rising trend after the 1980s.

Finally, Hardy and Ziliak (2014) focused on gross volatility in household income using the CPS,

finding it to have risen strongly from 1980 to 2009.

           Three studies of gross volatility used Social Security earnings data, and of these

DeBacker et al. ( 2013) used data matched with IRS 1040 returns and hence only for the

taxpaying population. DeBacker et al. saw no long-term trend in gross male earnings volatility

from 1987 to 2009, although there were significant short-term trends up and down and an upturn

at the end of their data, from 2006 to 2009. Sabelhaus and Song (2010) find that gross earnings

volatility fell steadily from 1980 to 2005 but the authors combined men with women. Given the

survey evidence of a decline in volatility among the latter, it is difficult to compare these authors’

results to those from the surveys examining only men. Indeed, Dynan et al. found that when men

and women were combined, the net trend in the PSID gross volatility is negative. Also, as noted

in the previous section, Social Security earnings data include non-heads, who are explicitly

excluded from the PSID studies and from many of the SIPP and CPS studies. If trends in

volatility among non-heads differ from those of heads, Social Security earnings data will not

necessarily show the same trends as the survey data sets. Dahl et al. (2011) also pooled men and

women, using Social Security earnings data from 1984 to 2005, finding a decline in gross

volatility over the period (albeit at different rates), consistent with Sabelhaus and Song who also

combined men and women 14



   14
        In unpublished work, however, Dahl et al. (2008) found that male gross volatility in SSA data declined after 1984 but was essentially flat
from 1984-2005 period when the sample was restricted to men employed at both periods. We also note that Guvenen et al. (2014), in a study
focused on cyclical effects on volatility rather than trends, found a small trend decline in SSA male gross earnings volatility (Figure 5). Carr and
Weimers (2018), using Social Security earnings data matched to the SIPP, found a rise in male gross volatility from 1978 to 1983, a decline from
1983 to either the late 1990s or mid-2000s (depending on a judgement of what is cycle and what is trend), and a rise in volatility thereafter. Thus,
the various studies of male gross earnings volatility using Social Security data, including these three and those of DeBacker and that of Hryshko
et al. noted below, are not consistent with one another.




                                                                        18
            Celik et al. (2012), alone among the studies, also examined male gross earnings volatility

with UI wage records in the LEHD data set. The authors only had 12 states with complete data

over the 1992-2008 period, and found no trend in volatility over the time frame. This also is not

inconsistent with the several survey data sets that also found that the rise in male earnings

volatility either stopped completely or grew or declined slowly in the middle period of the three

periods demarcated above. 15

            Three non-PSID studies have attempted a decomposition of volatility into permanent and

transitory components. Sabelhaus and Song (2010) used an approximate method for

decomposition based on the work of Carroll (1992) listed in Table 1. 16 The authors found that

the decline in gross volatility was shared by both permanent and transitory component declines.

DeBacker et al. (2013) used W-2 data on male earnings matched to IRS 1040 records from 1987

to 2009, finding that the variance of the transitory component was stable over this period, which

is consistent with several of the survey data set findings for the middle period. While it is

inconsistent with the trends found for the two Social Security earnings studies just referenced,

the fact that those two studies combined men and women and included non-heads make the

results noncomparable. 17 DeBacker et al. also estimated the transitory variance of household

income, finding it to have risen slightly. Finally, Hryshko et al. (2017) used Social Security

earnings data matched to SIPP records with a focus on the differences in transitory variance

levels and trends for husbands and wives, and for their joint earnings. The authors find that the

male transitory variance fell from 1980 to 2000 but rose thereafter and that the variance for the



   15
        However, see Abowd et al. (2018) for a discussion of possible errors in the low-wage UI data.
   16
        See also Carroll and Samwick (1997).
   17
       Another issue with the DeBacker et al. study is that the authors did not estimate a permanent-transitory model but rather a persistent-
transitory model, allowing an autoregressive process to be located in the permanent rather than the transitory component. This is likely to yield
different results than a model which restricts the permanent component to have a unit root and puts all autoregressive processes into the transitory
component.




                                                                        19
couples’ combined earnings fell over the entire period. The former finding is consistent with

much of the rest of the literature, albeit less often for the period after 2000. Volatility among

couples’ combined earnings has been little examined in the literature. Dynan et al. (2012) also

examined this earnings concept with the PSID, albeit only for gross volatility, and also found a

decline after the late 1980s.

       Summing up, the PSID studies of trends in male earnings volatility are consistent with a

three-phase trend. In the first phase, virtually all show an increase, whether in gross volatility or

in the transitory variance, from the 1970s to the mid-1980s, although the exact year of the

turning point differs somewhat across studies. However, the PSID studies differ for periods in a

second phase after the mid-1980s, with some finding a slowly rising trend, others showing a flat

trend, and others showing a declining trend. But the trends in either direction are not large in

magnitude, and it would not be surprising if differences in samples and volatility measures

accounted for these differences. In a third phase, most PSID studies also show some increase in

male earnings volatility in later years but with, again, differences in the turning points, with some

showing the rise to have begun in the late 1990s while others show it to have begun later,

sometimes close to the Great Recession.

       Comparing these findings to those using other data sets, the PSID is consistent with

trends in the CPS, where studies using gross volatility measures for men also show the three-

phase trend of rises from the 1970s to the 1980s, followed by a flat or declining trend through

sometime in the 2000s, and with one study showing an increase starting in 2006. The SIPP,

however, shows an increase in the 1990s to 2000s in intrayear volatility but a decline in year-to-

year volatility from 1984 to 2006. Published studies using SSA male earnings data which focus

on long-term trends are sometimes consistent with the survey findings and sometimes not. Most




                                                  20
consistent is the work of DeBacker et al., who find no trend in gross volatility for men from

1987-2009 but a small rise from 2006 to 2008, consistent with the PSID and the CPS. One study

using SSA earnings data on married men found declines then increases in the transitory variance

from 1980 to 2000, but ending in that final year slightly above what it was in 1980 (Hryshko et

al., 2017). 18 The decline in the early 1980s is inconsistent with the PSID-CPS trend, but the

small net increase from the mid-1980s to 2000 is consistent with them.

           The volatility of female earnings has only been examined with the PSID and the CPS,

both finding it to have declined over the periods examined, starting as early as 1967 and running

through as late as 2009. 19 Household income volatility has been examined in only a few studies,

mostly using the PSID or the CPS, where volatility has been found to exhibit a much smaller rise.

Other data sets sometimes show a rise as well, but smaller in magnitude.



III. Some New Results on Trends in Male Earnings Volatility

           The work examining trends in earnings volatility with the PSID reported in the previous

section only used data through 2009. Data through 2014 are now available, so we provide new

results through that year. The 2009-2014 period is particularly interesting because it

encompasses the Great Recession. For our new results, we focus solely on male earnings, which

has been the focus of the majority of the literature to date and which can be analyzed without

special attention to selectivity of employment. We provide measures both of gross volatility and

estimates of an error components model which allows us to decompose trends in gross volatility

into trends in permanent and transitory volatility.



   18
      That study only included married men. In addition, it found an uptick in volatility toward the end of the period, just before 2009, consistent
with the study by Debacker et al. (2013).
   19
      Hyslop (2001) is an exception.




                                                                        21
           We use the data from interview year 1971 through interview year 2015. 20 Earnings are

collected for the previous year, so our data cover the calendar years 1970 to 2014. The PSID

skipped interviews every other year starting in interview year 1998, so our last observations are

for earnings years 1996, 1998, and so on, every other year through 2014. The sample is restricted

to male heads of households. Only heads are included because the PSID earnings questions we

use are only asked of heads of household. We take any year in which these male heads were

between the ages of 30 and 59, not a student, and had positive annual wage and salary income

and positive annual weeks of work. We include men in every year in which they appear in the

data and satisfy these requirements. We therefore work with an unbalanced sample because a

balanced sample would be greatly reduced in size because of aging into and out of the sample in

different years, attrition, and movements in and out of employment. Fitzgerald et al. (1998) have

found that attrition in the PSID has had little effect on its cross-sectional representativeness,

although less is known about the effect of attrition on autocovariances. We exclude men in all

PSID oversamples (SEO, Latino) and we exclude nonsample men. All earnings are put into 1996

CPI-U-RS dollars. The resulting data set has 3,508 men and 36,403 person-year observations, for

an average of 10.4 year-observations per person. Means of the key variables are shown in

Appendix Table 1.

           As is common in the literature, we work with residuals from regressions of log earnings

on education, a polynomial in age, and interactions between age and education variables, all

estimated separately by calendar year (however, we will show gross volatility trends for log

earnings itself as well). We use these residuals to form a variance-autocovariance matrix

indexed by year, age, and lag length. A typical element of the matrix consists of the covariance


    20
       We do not use earnings reported in 1969 or 1970 since wage and salary earnings, which is what we use, are reported only in bracketed form
in those years.




                                                                      22
between residual log earnings of men at ages a and a' between years t and t'. Because of sample

size limitations, however, we cannot construct such covariances by single years of age. Instead,

we group the observations into three age groups--30-39, 40-49, and 50-59--and then construct

the variances for each age group in each year, as well as the autocovariances for each group at all

possible lags back to 1970 or age 20, whichever comes first. We then compute the covariance

between the residual log earnings of the group in the given year and each lagged year, using the

individuals who are in common in the two years (when constructing these covariances, we trim

the top and bottom one percent of the residuals within age group-year cells to eliminate outliers

and top-coded observations 21). The resulting autocovariance matrix represents every individual

variance and covariance between every pair of years only once, and stratifies by age so that life

cycle changes in the variances of permanent and transitory earnings can be estimated. The

matrix has 1,417 unique elements.

           Figure 1 shows the variance of 2-year differences in the residuals from the log earnings

regression, the usual measure of gross volatility. Gross volatility rose from the 1970s to the mid-

1980s and then exhibited no trend (albeit around significant instability) until around 2000, when

it resumed its rise. Our results through 2014 show that gross volatility rose sharply during the

Great Recession. As shown by the unemployment rate (also in the figure), volatility is correlated

with the unemployment rate but with a slight lag. Our findings are consistent with Dynarski and

Gruber (1997), who found rising (on average) gross volatility from 1970 to 1991, and with Shin

and Solon (2011)’s results through 2005, although those authors found more of a decline in the

middle period than a stable and flat trend. Our results for the early and late periods are similar to

those of Dynan et al. (2012) although those authors found a slow rise in the middle period. The

   21
      If top-coding were the only motivation for trimming, a preferable procedure would be to top-trim the earnings variable directly rather than
the residuals. However, our motivation is more general, to avoid distortion of log variances from outliers. In prior work (Moffitt and Gottschalk,
2002), we tested trimming on the residuals versus trimming on earnings itself, and found no qualitative difference in the results.




                                                                       23
large number of extreme fluctuations in the middle period in our data may be responsible for

these other authors’ finding of a slight decline or rise.

        Figure 2 shows trends in the percentile points of the distribution of the 2-year change,

showing that the increasing volatility reflects a widening out at all percentile points but with the

largest widening occurring at the top and bottom of the change distribution. Figure 3 shows the

variance of 2-year changes of log earnings itself, not of residuals from a regression. The trend

pattern and, in particular, the existence of three approximate periods of rise, then flat trend, then

rise, is the same as for the residuals.

        To decompose gross volatility into its permanent and transitory components, we adopt an

error components model similar to those used in the past literature but with some of the more

restrictive features of those models eliminated. Error components models have been criticized

for being excessively parametric, so, while we maintain many of the restrictions in past work, we

also reduce some of their parametric restrictions in two ways. First, we make a clear, non-

arbitrary identification assumption to separate permanent from transitory components and,

second, we are nonparametric for the evolution of their variances. Letting 𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 be the log

earnings residual for individual i at age a in year t, our model is

                                          𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡 𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖                       (1)

where 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is the permanent component for individual i at age a, 𝜈𝜈𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎 is the transitory component

for individual i at age a, and 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 and 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡 are calendar time shifters for the two components. We

shall maintain the usual assumption in these models that the permanent and transitory

components are additive and independently distributed, an assumption that can be partially

relaxed. We also adopt the common specification that calendar effects do not vary with age,




                                                            24
although this could be relaxed by allowing the calendar time shifts to vary with age (but we will

not do that here).

           The first question is how permanent and transitory components can be separately

identified if both are allowed to be a function of age. We assume the dictionary definition of a

permanent component, which is a component which has a literally permanent, lasting, and

indefinite effect and does not fade away even partially. The transitory component can then be

identified as consisting of any residual component whose impact on 𝑦𝑦 does change over time. To

make this definition operational, we will assume that the permanent component at the start of the

life cycle is 𝜇𝜇0 and that an individual experiences independently distributed permanent shocks

𝜔𝜔1, 𝜔𝜔2 ,…,𝜔𝜔 𝑇𝑇 through the end of life at time T. We let the permanent component at age a be

some function of these shocks: 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝑓𝑓(𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖1 , 𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖2 , … , 𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , 𝜇𝜇0 ). We define a permanent shock 𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

to be one for which 𝜕𝜕𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ⁄𝜕𝜕𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 1 and we assert that the only function f which satisfies this

condition is the unit root process

                                                               𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖0 + ∑𝑎𝑎𝑠𝑠=1 𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖                                               (2)

If we similarly define the transitory component to be a linear function of a series of

independently distributed transitory shocks 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖1 , 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖2 , …, 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 but we put no restrictions on the

impact of each of these shocks on 𝜈𝜈𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , then, as noted previously, the impact of transitory shocks

can be identified as all shocks which do not have an impact coefficient of 1 on 𝑦𝑦.

           Beyond this assumption, we attempt to make as few restrictive assumptions as possible.

We let the distributions of the permanent and transitory shocks, 𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 and 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , respectively, be

nonparametric functions of a. 22 We do assume that the transitory component is linear in the


   22
      This assumption makes the unit root and heterogeneous growth models equivalent and both embedded in the model. The typical
heterogeneous growth model assumes that the permanent component to have a subcomponent equal to age times a heterogeneous growth factor.
That model is identified only because of the restrictive assumption that individual growth heterogeneity is linear in age. If the growth factor is
allowed to be nonparametric in age, the model is not identified from a unit root model with shocks whose distribution varies freely with age.




                                                                       25
transitory shocks (this could be relaxed) but we do not impose any ARMA form on the

coefficients. Instead, we specify the transitory component to be

                                                           𝜈𝜈𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 + ∑𝑎𝑎−1
                                                                              𝑠𝑠=1 𝜓𝜓𝑎𝑎,𝑎𝑎−𝑠𝑠 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−𝑠𝑠                                 (3)

and we allow the impact coefficients of transitory shocks, the T(T+1)/2 – T parameters 𝜓𝜓𝑎𝑎,𝑎𝑎−𝑠𝑠 to

be unconstrained. 23 This model nests the linear models used in the literature but does not nest

those which are nonlinear in the shocks and those which have heterogeneous transitory shock

impacts (e.g., which allow the 𝜓𝜓 parameters or the distributions of the shocks to be individual-

specific). 24 We name our model the Extended Semiparametric (ESP) Model because it is a major

extension of the semiparametric model proposed by Moffitt and Gottschalk (2012).

             Following the majority of the literature, we restrict our attention to the explaining the

second moments of 𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 by second moments of the permanent and transitory shocks. We

therefore seek to estimate the variances of the permanent and transitory shocks, allowing them to

be nonparametric in age. In the Appendix, we show conditions for identification of the

parameters. We estimate the parameters with conventional minimum distance. The exact

specification of the model and the estimates of the parameters and their standard errors are

shown in the Appendix Table 2.

             Figures 4 and 5 show the trends in α and β, respectively, which are the calendar time

factors in the model. The results show that both permanent and transitory variances trended

upward over time and both roughly followed the pattern exhibited by gross volatility, with an

initial rise, followed by a middle period when the rise had stopped, and ending with a rising trend.

The turning points—with a necessary caution as to the difficulty of detecting them visually in the


   23
        The coefficient on the contemporary shock, 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is not identified and must be set equal to 1.
   24
      We also make no attempt to identify measurement error in the model. It can be identified only by untestable parametric assumptions which
make such error evolve in a different functional form than the other shocks. For present purposes, which is mainly to identify calendar time
trends, measurement error should have no effect unless it has been changing over time.




                                                                            26
facing of considerable instability—are slightly different, however. The transitory variance

appears to have stopped rising in the early 1980s whereas the permanent variance continued to

rise through the late 1980s. The transitory variance exhibits a slight decline in the middle period

whereas the permanent variance is mostly flat. However, both variances turned up toward the

end of the period. One reading of the results is that neither variance substantially departed from

a process with fluctuations around a stable trend until 2008, when its increase truly started to

emerge. This would be consistent with an effect of the Great Recession. The variances also

show signs in the last two years of starting to decline from their Recession peaks.

           The implications of these trends for the variances of the permanent and transitory

components themselves are shown in Figure 6 for those age 40-49 (variances differ by age, with

older individuals having higher variances, but the trend is the same at all ages given the model

specification). The now-familiar three-phase trend is still apparent. The transitory variance is

about two-thirds of the total variance and has risen more than the permanent variance from

beginning to end. Thus we find that a larger fraction of the increase in cross-sectional male

earnings inequality is accounted for by increases in the transitory component. 25

           We use our estimates to decompose the trend in the variance of 2-year changes of log

earnings residuals (see Figure 1) into trends in the 2-year changes in permanent and transitory

variances. The variance of 2-year changes involves both the level of the variance at each of the

two time points as well as the covariance between them. The results can be found in Appendix

Table 4 and show that both the level of the variances and the covariances have trended upward

over time, for both the permanent and transitory components. But, on net, the variance of the

total change is almost entirely the result of increases in the transitory variance. The permanent



  25
       The exact numbers for these variables can be found in the Appendix Table 3.




                                                                      27
variance does not have the same volatility as the transitory variance and changes at a slower rate,

and the permanent variance is also smaller in magnitude than the transitory variance.



IV. Sensitivity Tests: Imputation and Window Averaging

We conduct two sensitivity tests to our findings. The first estimates the sensitivity of our results

to the inclusion of imputed earnings values in the PSID. The second presents estimates of time

trends in the transitory variance using the Window Averaging (WA) method, which is a

particularly intuitive method of estimating transitory variances that is used in many studies.

       Like all survey data sets, a certain fraction of earnings values are imputed in the PSID

because of don’t know responses and refusals to answer, from implausible values indicating

response error, and other reasons. The PSID has conducted imputations for all of these reasons

and the exact method of using them has varied somewhat over time, generally with growing

sophisticated and complexity. Current imputation procedures for income use a variety of

imputation methods, depending on the type of income being imputed and using a different set of

variables for each (Duffy, 2011). In our sample of male heads from 1970 to 2014, the percent of

wage and salary income observations that are imputed ranges from a low of 0.30 to a high of 4.6,

with the high value occurring in 1992, a period when the PSID changed its methodology and

interviewing method.

       The traditional primary issue with imputation is whether it is ignorable, i.e., whether

those observations which are imputed have unobservable differences in earnings from those

which are not, and whether the imputation process can adjust for any such differences. The

common method of testing for non-ignorability and the accuracy of the process is simply to

estimate models with and without imputed observations even though, if non-ignorability holds,




                                                 28
both estimates are biased. Figure 7 shows the trend in gross volatility in our sample including

and excluding the imputed observations. There is very little difference in the trends in either

case, suggesting that the observations being imputed are ignorable or that the imputation process

adequately corrects for any non-ignorability.

       Moffitt and Gottschalk (2012) dubbed any method of estimating transitory variances

based on taking an interval of annual observations and computing transitory components as the

deviations from some (possibly trend-adjusted) mean as a Window Averaging (WA) method.

This method has been used primarily in the literature on calendar time trends in volatility and

was used by the initial paper in that literature, Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994) but has been used in

modified form in several subsequent papers (see Table 2 and 3). A traditional ANOVA

definition of the transitory variance within a window of T observations is
                                             1
                                                   ∑𝑁𝑁    𝑇𝑇
                                                                        �𝑖𝑖 )2
                                                    𝑖𝑖=1 ∑𝑡𝑡=1(𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝑦𝑦                                 (4)
                                        𝑁𝑁(𝑇𝑇−1)

                                         1
       However, because 𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝑦𝑦�𝑖𝑖 = 𝑇𝑇 ∑𝑇𝑇𝜏𝜏≠𝑡𝑡(𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ), the WA method is based on the variance

of pairwise differences between each 𝑦𝑦 and the others within the window. Hence it is closer to

an extended version of gross volatility than a true measure of the transitory variance, combining

changes in permanent and transitory variances. In addition, if any model like that in equation (1)

above holds, the WA method produces some time average of 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 and 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡 , weighted by the

variances of the pairwise differences.

       Figure 8 shows estimates of equation (4) using a 9-year window for our male head data

set 1970-2014, plotted against the year in the center of the window. The levels of the estimated

variances is quite a bit below those of the transitory variance in Figure 6 (exact numbers in

Appendix Table 3) which is to be expected since the WA method averages over years and hences

damps down the year-to-year variances from the ESP model. But the three-phase pattern



                                                        29
revealed previously for both gross volatility and the transitory variance continues to hold here,

although the turning points are considerably more indistinct than in the ESP model because of

the smoothing inherent in the use of a 9-year average.




                                                 30
                         Appendix
          The Extended Semiparametric (ESP) Model



   Letting yiat be the earnings residual for individual i at age a in year t, the model is:


                                         yiat = αt µia + βt υia                                 (1)

                                                           a
                                                           X
                                         µia = µi0 +             ωis                            (2)
                                                           s=1

                                            a−1
                                            X
                              υia = εia +         ψa,a−s εi,a−s for a ≥ 2                       (3)
                                            s=1

                                         vi1 = εi1 for a = 1                                    (4)

for a = 1, ..., A and t = 1, ..., T and where the shocks ωia and εia are independently distributed
from each other and over time. The autocovariances implied by this model, which will be
fit to the autocovariances in the data, are:


                              V ar(yiat ) = αt2 V ar(µia ) + βt2 V ar(υia )                     (5)

                                                              a
                                                              X
                              V ar(µia ) = V ar(µi0 ) +                V ar(ωis )               (6)
                                                                 s=1

                                                a−1
                                                X
                                                         2
                    V ar(υia ) = V ar(εia ) +           ψa,a−s V ar(εi,a−s ), for a ≥ 2         (7)
                                                  s=1

                                  V ar(υi1 ) = V ar(εi1 ), for a = 1                            (8)

            Cov(yiat , yi,a−τ,t−τ ) = αt αt−τ Cov(µia , µi,a−τ ) + βt βt−τ Cov(υia , υi,a−τ )   (9)

                                                    32
                           Cov(µia , µi,a−τ ) = V ar(µi,a−τ )
                                                                   a−τ
                                                                   X                                      (10)
                                                  = V ar(µi0 ) +         V ar(ωis )
                                                                   s=1



               Cov(υia , υi,a−τ ) = ψa,a−τ V ar(εi,a−τ )
                                        a−τ
                                         X  −1                                                            (11)
                                    +            ψa,a−τ −s ψa−τ,a−τ −s V ar(εi,a−τ −s ), for a ≥ 3
                                         s=1


                           Cov(υia , υi,a−τ ) = ψa,a−τ V ar(εi,a−τ )
                                                                                                          (12)
                                                 = ψ21 V ar(εi1 ), for a = 2, τ = 1

We allow the variances of the permanent and transitory shocks to be nonparametric functions
of age and we allow the ψ parameters to be nonparametric functions of age and lag length
(τ or τ + s).

       Identification. Considering first the identification of the parameters of the age-earnings
process under the stationary model αt = βt = 1, we note that a data set of age length
a = 1, ..., A has an autocovariance matrix of the yia with A(A + 1)/2 elements.                           The
unknown parameters in the model are σµ2 0 , the A parameters σωa
                                                              2
                                                                 (a = 1, ..., A), the A(A−1)/2
                                                            2
parameters ψa,a−r (r = 1, .., a − 1), and the A parameters σεa (a = 1, ...A), for a total of
[A(A + 1)/2] + A + 1 parameters. The stationary model is therefore nonparametrically not
identified without A + 1 restrictions.1 We allow restrictions by imposing smoothness on the
nonparametric functions σω2 ,ψ, and σε2 as described below. Our estimation shows that the
number of parameters needed to fit the data allow the model to be heavily overidentified.2
The αt and βt parameters are identified, subject to a normalization and conditional on
the identification of the parameters of the age-earnings process, from the change in the
   1
      Because the equations of the model are nonlinear in the parameters, we also require that the solutions
for the parameters exist and are unique if the number of elements of the autocovariance matrix equals the
number of unknowns.
    2
      We note that the model is identified for a data set of length A ≥ 4 under homoskedasticity of the
                                                                2
permanent and transitory shocks, defined as the model with σωa     = σω2 , σεa
                                                                             2
                                                                               = σε2 for a = 2, , , A, and with
  2
σε1 left as a free parameter for initial conditions purposes. We test for, and reject, homoskedasticity of the
transitory variances.



                                                        33
autocovariance matrix elements at the same age and lag position but at different points in
calendar time, which therefore requires multiple cohorts.                Since αt and βt constitute two
parameters, any two elements of the matrix observed at two calendar time points is sufficient
for identification. For example, using the variances at ages a and a0 observed at times t and
t + 1, we have
                                    V ar(yiat ) = αt2 σµa
                                                       2
                                                          + βt2 συa
                                                                 2
                                                                                                   (13)

                                   V ar(yia0 t ) = αt2 σµa
                                                        2       2 2
                                                           0 + βt συa0                             (14)

                                V ar(yia,t+1 ) = αt2 rα2 σµa
                                                          2
                                                             + βt2 rβ2 συa
                                                                        2
                                                                                                   (15)

                               V ar(yia0 ,t+1 ) = αt2 rα2 σµa
                                                           2      2 2 2
                                                             0 + βt rβ συa0                        (16)

where rα = αt+1 /αt and rβ = βt+1 /βt .      We normalize the calendar shifts at t = 1 by setting
α1 = β1 = 1.     Equations (13)-(16) can be solved for αt and βt for t = 2, ..., T .
                                                        2     2
   Nonparametric Estimation. To estimate the functions σωa , σεa , and ψ, we specify the
functions as series expansions in basis functions and use a generalized cross-validation (GCV)
statistic, which has a penalty for the number of parameters, to choose the degree of the
expansion.     Our specific functional forms are:


                                                                   j
                                       V ar(ωir ) = eΣδj (r−25)                                    (17)


                                                           j
                                 V ar(εir ) = eΣγj (r−25) , for r ≥ 2                              (18)

                                                               j
                                V ar(εi1 ) = keΣγj (1−25) , for r = 1                              (19)

                      ψA,A−b = [1 − π(A − 25)][Σwj e−λj b ] + Σηj D(b = j)                         (20)

The variances use exponential functions of polynomial expansions in age minus 25 (the
approximate minimum age), with the initial transitory variance allowed to differ by factor
k for an initial conditions adjustment.           The ψ parameters are allowed to expand in a


                                                   34
weighted sum of exponentials, which force the parameters to asymptote to 0 as the lag
length goes to infinity, and with a linear age-function factor in front of that weighted sum.
Deviations from the smooth exponential expansions are allowed at each lag length. The
unknown parameters in the model are V ar(µi0 ), δj , γj , k, π, λj , wj ,and the ηj as well as the
αt and βt . The parameters are fit to the second-moment matrix of the data using minimum
distance.

      Appendix Table A-2, column 1, reports the results of the estimation.            As is often the
case using the PSID, only a small number of basis functions in the expansion improve the
parameter-adjusted fit.     The initial variance of the permanent component is significant but
the variances of the permanent shocks do not vary with age.3 The transitory variance is also
weakly positive in a linear function of age. The initial transitory variance is over twice the
size as subsequent transitory shocks (as expected) but the transitory autocovariance curve
is only weakly (and negatively) correlated with age and with only a single exponential. The
λ parameter confirms that autocovariances decline with lag length and the η parameters
indicate that the most recent three lags have a different impact on the current transitory
component than the age-adjusted smooth exponential curve indicates. The estimates of the
α and β parameters are also shown; the figures in the text are plots of these estimates. The
second column in the Table shows the estimates of the parameters if a model stationary in
calendar time is estimated (i.e., constraining αt = βt = 1). The parameter estimates are
quite different than those estimated when calendar time shifts are allowed.

      The parameter estimates are inserted into equations (6)-(8) to compute the implied vari-
ances of the permanent and transitory components without calendar time effects, and then
those estimated components are used in equation (5) to compute the total variance and the
two components on the right-hand-side of that equation. The text reports plots of these
three variances for those aged 40-49, and Appendix Table 3 reports the exact figures for all
three age groups.
  3
   The two δ parameters are insignificant but adding the second one lowered the GCV, so we retain both.
The total transitory variance is positive and highly significant.

                                                  35
   The text reports the implications of the fitted model for the sources of the variance of
2-year changes in y. The 2-year change is


                 yiat − yi,a−2,t−2 = (αt µia + βt υia ) − (αt−2 µi,a−2 + βt−2 υi,a−2 )
                                                                                            (21)
                                     = αt µia − αt−2 µi,a−2 + βt υia − βt−2 υi,a−2


and its variance is


                   V ar(yiat − yi,a−2,t−2 )

                 = αt2 V ar(µia ) + αt−2
                                     2
                                         V ar(µi,a−2 ) − 2αt αt−2 Cov(µia , µi,a−2 )        (22)

                      + βt2 V ar(υia ) + βt−2
                                          2
                                              V ar(υi,a−2 ) − 2βt βt−2 Cov(υia , υi,a−2 )


which contains variances and covariances which have been fitted by the model. Appendix
Table 4 shows the exact components by year.




                                                    36
References

Abraham, Katherine G., John C. Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James Spletzer. 2013.
    Exploring differences in employment between household and establishment data. Journal of
    Labor Economics 31 (S1): 129-72.

Abowd, John M. and David Card. 1989. On the covariance structure of earnings and hours
   changes. Econometrica 57 (2): 411-445.

Abowd, John M., and Martha H. Stinson. 2013. Estimating measurement error in annual job
   earnings: A comparison of survey and administrative data. Review of Economics and
   Statistics 95 (5):1451–67.

Abowd, John M., Kevin L. McKinney, and Nellie L. Zhao. 2018. Earnings inequality and
   mobility trends in the United States: Nationally representative estimates from longitudinally
   Linked employer-employee data. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1): S183-S300.

Arellano, Manuel, Richard Blundell, and Stéphane Bonhomme. 2017. Earnings and consumption
     dynamics: A nonlinear panel data framework. Econometrica 85 (3): 693–734.

Baker, Michael. 1997. Growth-rate heterogeneity and the covariance structure of life-cycle
    earnings. Journal of Labor Economics 15 (2): 338–75.

Bania, Neil, and Laura Leete. 2009. Monthly household income volatility in the U.S., 1991/92 vs.
    2002/03. Economics Bulletin 29 (3): 2100–12.

Bane, Mary Jo and David Ellwood. 1996. Welfare Realities: From rhetoric to reform.
    Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Becketti, Sean, William Gould, Lee Lillard, and Finis Welch. 1988. The panel study of income
    dynamics after fourteen years: An evaluation. Journal of Labor Economics 6 (4), 472-92.

Benus, Jacob. 1974. Income instability. In Five thousand American families: Patterns of
    economic progress, eds. James N. Morgan, Katherine Dickinson, Jonathan Dickinson, Jacob
    Benus, and Greg Duncan. Institute for social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Benus, Jacob, and James Morgan. 1972. Income Instability as a Dimension on Welfare.
    Proceedings of the American Statistical Association, 102–6. Institute for social Research,
    University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Bonhomme, Stéphane, and Jean Marc Robin. 2010. Generalized non-parametric deconvolution
    with an application to earnings dynamics. Review of Economic Studies 77 (2): 491–533.




                                               37
Bound, John, Charles Brown, Grey J. Duncan, and William L. Rodgers. 1994. Evidence on the
    validity of cross-sectional and longitudinal labor market data. Journal of Labor Economics,
    12 (3): 345-68.

Browning, Martin, Mette Ejrnæs, and Javier Alvarez. 2010. Modelling income processes with
    lots of heterogeneity. Review of Economic Studies 77 (4): 1353–81.

Carr, Michael D. and Emily E. Wiemers. Forthcoming. New evidence on earnings volatility in
     survey and administrative data. American Economic Review.

Carroll, Christopher D. 1992. The buffer-stock theory of saving: Some macroeconomic evidence.
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 23 (2): 61–156.

Carroll, Christopher and Andrew Samwick. 1997. The nature of precautionary wealth. Journal of
    Monetary Economics 40 (1): 41-71.

Celik, Sule, Chinhui Juhn, Kristin McCue, and Jesse Thompson. 2012. Recent trends in earnings
     volatility: Evidence from survey and administrative data. B.E. Journal of Economic
     Analysis and Policy 12 (2).

Dahl, Molly, Thomas DeLeire, and Jonathan Schwabish. 2008. Year-to-year variability in
    workers earnings and in household incomes: Estimates from administrative data. Working
    Paper. Washington: Congressional Budget Office.

Dahl, Molly, Thomas DeLeire, and Jonathan A. Schwabish. 2011. Estimates of year-to-year
    volatility in earnings and in household incomes from administrative, survey, and matched
    data. Journal of Human Resources 46 (4): 750–74.

DeBacker, Jason Matthew, Bradley T. Heim, Ivan Vidangos, and Vasia Panousi. 2013. Rising
   inequality: transitory or permanent? New evidence from a U.S. panel of household income
   1987-2006. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2013 (4): 67-142.

Duffy, Denise. 2011. 2007 PSID income and wage imputation methodology. Technical Series
    Paper #11-03. Ann Arbor, Michigan. Available from
    https://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/Publications/Papers/ (Accessed 1/22/18).

Duncan, Greg J., Richard Coe, Mary Corcoran, Martha S. Hill, Saul Hoffman, and James N.
    Morgan. 1984. Years of poverty, years of plenty - The changing economic fortunes of
    American workers and families. Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann
    Arbor.

Dynan, Karen, Douglas Elmendorf, and Daniel Sichel. 2012. The evolution of household income
    volatility. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 12 (2): 1-42.



                                               38
Dynarski, Susan and Jonathan Gruber. 1997. Can families smooth variable earnings? Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 1997 (1):229–303.

Fitzgerald, J., Peter Gottschalk, and Robert A. Moffitt. 1998. An analysis of sample attrition in
     panel data: The Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Journal of Human Resources
     33 (2): 251-99.

Friedman, Milton. 1957. The permanent income hypothesis. In A theory of the consumption
     function, 20-37. Elizabeth: Princeton University Press.

Geweke, J, and M Keane. 2000. An empirical analysis of male income dynamics in the PSID.
   Journal of Econometrics. 96 (2): 293–356.

Gittleman, Maury, and Mary Joyce. 1999. Have family income mobility patterns changed?
     Demography 36 (3): 299–314.

Gottschalk, Peter and Minh Huynh. 2010. Are earnings inequality and mobility overstated? The
     impact of nonclassical measurement error. Review of Economics and Statistics 92(2): 302-
     15.

Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt. 1994. The growth of earnings instability in the U. S. Labor
     Market. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1994 (2): 217–72.

Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt. 2009. The rising instability of U.S. earnings. Journal of
     Economic Perspectives 23 (4): 3–24.

Gouskova, Elena, Patricia Andreski, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2010. Comparing estimates of
    family income in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the March Current Population
    Survey, 1968-2007. Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research, University of
    Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Guvenen, Fatih. 2009. An empirical investigation of labor income processes. Review of
    Economic Dynamics 12(1): 58-79.

Guvene, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2014. The Nature of Countercyclical Income Risk.
    Journal of Political Economy 122(3): 621-60.

Haider, Steven J. 2001. Earnings instability and earnings inequality of males in the United States:
    1967–1991. Journal of Labor Economics 19 (4): 799–836.

Hause, John. 1980. The fine structure of earnings and the on-the-Job training hypothesis.
    Econometrica 48(4): 1013-29.




                                                39
Hall, Robert E, and Frederic S Mishkin. 1982. The sensitivity of consumption to transitory
     income: Estimates from panel data on households. Econometrica 50 (2): 461–81.

Hardy, Bradley, and James P. Ziliak. 2014. Decomposing trends in income volatility: The ‘wild
    ride’ at the top and bottom. Economic Inquiry 52 (1): 459–76.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. The macroeconomic
    implications of rising wage inequality in the United States. Journal of Political Economy
    118 (4): 681–722.

Hill, Heather D., Pamela Morris, Lisa A. Gennetian, Sharon Wolf, and Carly Tubbs. 2013. The
      consequences of income instability for children's well-being. Child Development
      Perspectives 7(2): 85-90.

Hryshko, Dmytro. 2012. Labor income profiles are not heterogeneous: Evidence from income
    growth rates. Quantitative Economics 3 (2): 177–209.

Hryshko, Dmytro, Chinhui Juhn, and Kristin McCue. 2017. Trends in earnings inequality and
    earnings instability among U.S. couples: How important is assortative matching? Labour
    Economics 48 (August). Elsevier B.V.:168–82.

Hyslop, Dean R. 2001. Rising U.S. Earnings inequality and family labor supply: The covariance
    structure of intrafamily earnings. American Economic Review 91 (4): 755–77.

Jäntti, Markus and Stephen Jenkins. 2013. “Income mobility.” Handbook of income distribution,
     eds. A.B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon, forthcoming.

Jensen, Shane T, and Stephen H Shore. 2015. Changes in the distribution of earnings volatility.
     Journal of Human Resources 50 (3): 811–36.

Juhn, Chinhui and Kristin McCue. 2010. Comparing measures of earnings instability based on
    survey and administrative reports. US Bureau Census for Economics Studies Paper CES-
    WP-10-15.

Keys, B. 2008. Trends in income and consumption volatility, 1970-2000. In income volatility and
    food assistance in the United States.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, Emmanuel Saez, and Jae Song. 2010. Earnings inequality and mobility in
    the United States: Evidence from Social Security Data Since 1937. Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 125(1): 91-128.

Lillard, Lee A, and Robert J. Willis. 1978. Dynamic aspects of earning mobility. Econometrica
     46 (5): 985–1012.




                                               40
Liu, Kai. Forthcoming. Wage risk and the value of job mobility in early employment careers.
     Journal of Labor Economics.

Low, Hamish, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2010. Wage risk and employment over the
    life cycle. American Economic Review 100 (4): 1432–67.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. 1982. The use of time series process to model the error structure of
   earnings in a longitudinal data analysis. Journal of Econometrics 18 (1): 83–114.

Meghir, Costas, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2004. Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity.
   Econometrica 72 (1): 1–32.

Mirer, Thad. 1974. Aspects of the variability of family income. In Five Thousand families:
    patterns of economic progress, Vol. II, eds. James N. Morgan. Institute for social research,
    University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Moffitt, Robert A., and Peter Gottschalk. 1995. Trends in the Autocovariance Structure of
    Earnings in the United States: 1969-1987. Johns Hopkins University Working Paper 355.
    Published in Rediscovered Classics Series. Journal of Economic Inequality 2011 9(3): 439-
    59.

Moffitt, Robert A, and Peter Gottschalk. 2002. Trends in the transitory variance of earnings in
    the United States. Economic Journal 112 (478): C68–73.

Moffitt, Robert A, and Peter Gottschalk. 2012. Trends in the transitory variance of male earnings:
    methods and evidence. Journal of Human Resources 47(1): 204-36.

Neumark, David, ed. 2000. On the job: Is long-term employment a thing of the past? New York:
   Russell Sage Foundation.

Pischke, Jörn-Steffen. 1995. Measurement error and earnings dynamics: Some estimates from
     the PSID validation study. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 13 (3): 305-14.

Sabelhaus, John, and Jae Song. 2010. The great moderation in micro labor earnings. Journal of
    Monetary Economics 57 (4): 391–403.

Shin, Donggyun, and Gary Solon. 2011. Trends in men’s earnings volatility: What does the
     Panel Study of Income Dynamics show? Journal of Public Economics 95 (7–8). Elsevier
     B.V.:973–82.

Stevens, Ann Huff. 2001. Changes in earnings instability and job loss. Industrial and Labor
     Relations Review 55(1): 60-78.




                                                41
Smith, James D. and James N. Morgan. 1970. Variability of economic well-being and its
    determinants. American Economic Review 60 (2): 286-95

Ziliak, James P., Bradley Hardy, and Christopher Bollinger. 2011. Earnings volatility in America:
     Evidence from matched CPS. Labour Economics 18 (6): 742–54.




                                               42
                                                                Table 1
                       PSID Studies of Permanent-Transitory Volatility with No Calendar Time Trends
Study         Sample                      Method                                 Findings
Benus and     Families in first four      Decomposition of head labor income Higher average income is correlated with higher
Morgan        PSID waves, 1968-1971       into average, trend, and instability   trend and lower instability
(1972)        with same family head
              who works in all years
Benus         Families in first five PSID Instability in head labor earnings and Instability higher for those with low permanent
(1974)        waves, 1968-1972 with       total family income measured as        income, farmers and the self-employed,
              same family head who        variance of deviation of trend from    younger heads, and those in areas of high
              works in all years          regression residuals                   unemployment; instability of total family
                                                                                 income largely driven by head labor income,
                                                                                 little offset from other income sources except
                                                                                 transfers
Mirer         Families in 1967-1969       Instability of total family income     Instability negative related to expected income,
(1974)                                    measured as standard deviation of      instability largely driven by head labor income
                                          residuals from a regression with a     with spouse labor income playing little role
                                          year trend
Lillard and   Prime-age working male      Error components model for earnings Permanent component explains 73 percent of
Willis        heads, 1967-1973            with random permanent effect and       residual variable. Significant AR(1) component
(1978)                                    AR(1) transitory effect                and high degree of mobility
Hall and      Families 1969-1975          Error components model of total        Significant variances of unit root and transitory
Mishkin                                   after-tax family income decomposed     components with evidence for MA components
(1982)                                    into deterministic portion, unit root, of latter
                                          and stationary transitory component
MaCurdy       Prime-age white married     Error components model for earnings Low-order ARMA fits the data
(1982)        working male heads,         with random permanent effect and
              1967-1976                   ARMA transitory effect
Abowd and     Prime-age working male      Error components model for earnings Nonstationary unit root and MA(2) model fits
Card (1989)   heads, 1969-1979            with unit root permanent effect and    the data best
                                          MA(2) in transitory effect changes




                                                                 43
                                                          Table 1
                  PSID Studies of Permanent-Transitory Volatility with No Calendar Time Trends (Continued)

Study             Sample                    Method                                          Findings
Carroll (1992)    Families with prime-age   Error components model for labor income         Variances of permanent and transitory
                  heads, 1968-1985          with a unit root and a transitory error         shocks approximately equal
Baker (1997)      Prime-age working male    Error components model of earnings with         Rejects random walk in favor of
                  heads, 1967-1986          tests for random growth versus random walk      random growth
Geweke and        Prime-age working male    Error components model with non-Gaussian        Most cross-sectional earnings
Keane (2000)      heads, 1968-1989          shocks for earnings with random permanent       differences are explained by transitory
                                            effect and autoregressive transitory effect     shocks but lifetime differences
                                                                                            explained but individual heterogeneity
Meghir and        Prime-age working male    Error components model for earnings             Strong evidence for ARCH effects
Pistaferri        heads, 1968-1993          allowing ARCH effects in permanent and
(2004)                                      transitory shocks
Guvenen           Prime-age working male    Error components model for earnings with        Finds support for heterogeneous
(2009)            heads, 1968-1993          focus on testing for heterogeneous income       income profiles
                                            profiles model
Bonhomme          Working male heads,       Nonparametric estimates of the density of       Densities are non-Gaussian, with
and Robin         19787-1987                permanent and transitory earnings in an error   higher modes and fatter tails
(2010)                                      components model
Browning et       Prime-age white male      Error components model for earnings with        Data show more heterogeneity than
al. (2010)        working high school       features to incorporate additional types of     that using simpler models
                  heads, 1968-1993          heterogeneity
Hryshko           Prime-age working male    Error components model for earnings with        New tests provide support for the unit
(2012)            heads, 1968-1997          new tests for unit root process versus          root process
                                            heterogeneous profile process
Arellano et al.   All families 1999-2009    Allows nonparametric first-order Markov         Finds strongest persistence among
(2017)                                      process for persistent component of total       high-earnings households experiencing
                                            family earnings                                 large positive shocks and among low-
                                                                                            earnings households experiencing large
                                                                                            negative shocks.




                                                                 44
                                                           Table 2
                               PSID Studies of Volatility with Focus on Calendar Time Trends

Study            Sample            Method                                        Findings
Permanent-Transitory Decomposition
Gottschalk and      White male heads, WA method applied to earnings*             Equally large increases in the permanent and
Moffitt (1994)      1970-1987                                                    transitory variance from 1970-1978 to 1979-1987
Moffitt and         White male heads, Error components model of individual       Same as 1994 paper
Gottschalk (1995)   1970-1987         earnings with unit root permanent effect
                                      and ARMA transitory effect
Gittleman and       Families, 1968-   WA method applied to total family          Both permanent and transitory components grew
Joyce (1999)        1991              income                                     (former slightly greater than latter), from 1967-1979
                                                                                 to 1980-1991
Haider (2001)       White male heads, Error components model with                Equal split of growth of permanent and transitory
                    1967-1991         heterogeneous growth component             effects but transitory did not grow after 1982
Hyslop (2001)       Married couples,  Error components model allowing            Permanent and transitory variances of men rose
                    1979-1985         husband and wife permanent and             equally over the period while permanent variances of
                                      transitory components to be correlated     women did not rise but transitory variances did
Moffitt and         Male heads, 1969- Same error components model as             Permanent variance rose over the whole period but
Gottschalk (2002)   1996              Moffitt and Gottschalk (1995)              transitory variance declined in the 1990s


Keys (2008)         Male and female     WA method applied to head earnings       Permanent and transitory variances of male earnings
                    heads and           and family income                        rose from 1970 to 1990 but usually flattened out in the
                    families, 1970-                                              2000s. Permanent variances for female heads fell and
                    2000                                                         their transitory variances rose a small amount.
                                                                                 Permanent and transitory variances of family income
                                                                                 rose.
Gottschalk and      Individual          WA method for male earnings and          Male transitory variance rose from the 1970s to the
Moffitt (2009)      earnings and        family income, percentile point method   late 1980s, flattened out and rose starting in the late
                    family income,      for women,                               1990s. No clear trend in variance for women. Strong
                    1970-2004                                                    upward trend for transitory variance of family income.




                                                               45
                                                                 Table 2
                              PSID Studies of Volatility with Focus on Calendar Time Trends (Continued)

Study                  Sample                  Method                                            Findings
Heathcote et al.       Heads and               Error components model of earnings                Upward trends in permanent and transitory variances,
(2010)                 spouses, 1967-          with unit root in permanent component             differ somewhat by estimation method
                       2006
Moffitt and            Male heads, 1970-       Error components model of earnings                Transitory variance increased from the 1970s to the
Gottschalk (2012)      2005                    together with WA and nonparametric                mid-1980s, then remained at this level through 2005.
                                               method
Jensen and Shore       Male heads,1968-        Error components model of earnings                Variances have not risen for most of the population
(2015)                 2009                    with evolving permanent effect and                but have risen strongly for those with high past
                                               correlated transitory effect that captures        volatility levels
                                               heterogeneity in permanent and
                                               transitory variances
Gross Volatility
Dynarski and           Male heads, 1970- Variance of residuals from a first-                     Variance rises over time, punctuated by business
Gruber (1997)          1991              difference regression of earnings                       cycles
Shin and Solon         Male heads 1969-        Standard deviation of 2-year change in            Variance rose in the 1970s, peaked in 1983, declined
(2011)                 2006                    earnings residuals                                through approximately 1997, rose thereafter
Dynan et al.           1967-2008               Standard deviation of 2-year arc percent
(2012)                                         change
                       Male heads              Labor earnings                                    Strong increase from 1970 to 1985, followed by
                                                                                                 slower trend upward punctuated by periods of decline
                       Female heads and        Labor earnings                                    Sharp decline through early 1990s, slower rate of
                       spouses                                                                   decline thereafter
                       Household               Combined Head and Spouse Labor                    Steady upward trend interrupted by decline in late
                                               Earnings and Income                               1980s and early 1990s (combined head and spouse
                                                                                                 labor earnings) and slow trend upward except for a
                                                                                                 large jump upward in the early 1990s (household
                                                                                                 income)
Note: WA method = Window Averaging Method. Within a fixed interval of years, the variance of the permanent component is calculated as the variance of
average earnings and the variance of the transitory component is calculated as the variance of the deviations of actual earnings from average earnings




                                                                            46
                                                             Table 3
                             Non-PSID Studies of U.S. Volatility with Focus on Calendar Time Trends

Study                  Sample                         Method                                Findings
Gross Volatility
Bania and Leete        SIPP Households from 1991-  Calculates coefficient of variation      Volatility rose over time mostly for low income
(2009)                 1992 and 2001 panels        of monthly household income over         households
                                                   12-month periods
Sabelhaus and          Social Security individual  Gross volatility calculated as the       Volatility fell over the period.
Song (2010)            earnings data, 1980-2005    variance of changes in log earnings
Dahl et al. (2011)*    Social Security individual  Volatility measured as dispersion of     Volatility declined in late 1980s and then more
                       earnings data, 1984-2005    arc earnings changes greater than 50     gradually through 2005
                                                   percent between years
Ziliak et al. (2011)   Matched CPS data, 1973-2009 Volatility measured as standard          Male volatility rose from the early 1970s to the
                                                   deviation of arc earnings change         mid 1980s, was at same level by 2009. Female
                                                                                            volatility declined over the entire period.
DeBacker et al.        Tax returns merged with male   Standard deviation of percent         Fluctuations in several year intervals around a
(2013)                 primary or secondary earner    change in earnings for men            stable trend
                       W-2 data, 1987-2009
Celik et al. (2012)    LEHD (UI earnings records)     Standard deviation of change in log   LEHD shows little or no change in volatility, 1992-
                       in 12 states,1992-2008,        earnings residuals                    2008. PSID and CPS show rising volatility from
                       compared to CPS, SIPP, and                                           1970s to early 1980s, subsequent declines, and
                       PSID. Men only.                                                      then resumption of increase starting in early 2000s
                                                                                            (PSID) and 2006 (CPS). SIPP shows declines,
                                                                                            1984-2006.
Hardy and Ziliak       Matched CPS data, 1980-2009 Variance of arc percent change of        Volatility doubled over the time period, most
(2014)                                             household income                         pronounced among top incomes




                                                                 47
                                                            Table 3
                     Non-PSID Studies of U.S. Volatility with Focus on Calendar Time Trends (Continued)

Study                       Sample                              Method                         Findings
Permanent-Transitory Decomposition
Sabelhaus and Song (2010)   Social Security individual         Permanent variance identified Both permanent and transitory variances fell
                            earnings data, 1980-2005           change in variance of change over the period.
                                                               in log earnings by lag length.
DeBacker et al. (2013)          Male primary or secondary      Two WA methods plus error      Permanent variance of male earnings rose but
                                earner W-2 data merged with components model applied to transitory was stable around fluctuations.
                                IRS tax return data, 1987-     earnings and household         Transitory variance of household income rose
                                2009                           income                         by a modest degree.
Hryshko et al. (2017)           Married couples in matched     WA method for estimating       Husband volatility fell 1980-2000 then rose,
                                SSA-SIPP data, 1980-2009       transitory variance of         small net positive. Couple earnings volatility
                                                               earnings                       fell more, net decline.
*The authors also conducted an analysis of household income volatility using matched SIPP-SSA data from 1985 to 2005, finding
stability over that period.




                                                                48
                                   0.30                                                                              12

                                   0.25                                                                              10
   Variance of 2-year difference




                                                                                                                           Unemployment Rate
                                   0.20                                                                              8

                                   0.15                                                                              6

                                   0.10                                                                              4

                                   0.05                                                                              2

                                   0.00                                                                              0



                                          Variance of 2-year Difference, Log Earnings Residuals        Unemployment Rate

Figure 1
Variance of 2-Year Difference in Male Log Earnings Residuals
 0.8


 0.6


 0.4


 0.2


 0.0


 -0.2


 -0.4


 -0.6
                                                    90th Percentile         75th Percentile       50th Percentile
                                                    25th Percentile         10th Percentile

Figure 2
Percentiles of 2-Year Difference in Male Log Earnings Residuals




                                                                                     49
                                       0.35                                                                   12

                                       0.30                                                                   10
       Variance of 2-year difference




                                       0.25




                                                                                                                    Unemployment Rate
                                                                                                              8
                                       0.20
                                                                                                              6
                                       0.15
                                                                                                              4
                                       0.10

                                       0.05                                                                   2


                                       0.00                                                                   0




                                              Variance of 2-year Difference, Raw Log Earnings   Unemployment Rate

Figure 3
Variance of 2-Year Difference in Raw Male Log Earnings

  2

 1.8

 1.6

 1.4

 1.2

  1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

  0



Figure 4
Extended Semiparametric (ESP) Model Estimates of Alpha




                                                                                    50
      2

 1.8

 1.6

 1.4

 1.2

      1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

      0



Figure 5
Extended Semiparametric (ESP) Model Estimates of Beta

0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3                                                                       Transitory
                  Total
0.2


0.1
                                                                      Permanent

0.0



Figure 6
Fitted Permanent, Transitory, and Total Variance of Log Earnings Residuals, Age 40-49,
ESP Model



                                           51
  0.3


 0.25


  0.2


 0.15


  0.1


 0.05


   0



                  Exclude Imputed Earnings             Include Imputed Earnings (Main Sample)

Figure 7
Variance of 2-Year Difference of Log Earnings Residuals, Including and Excluding
Imputed Observations
 0.25




 0.20




 0.15




 0.10




 0.05




 0.00
        1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

Figure 8
Window Averaging (WA) Estimate of Transitory Variance, 9-year Window




                                                        52
                                       Appendix Table 1
                                Summary Statistics of Key Variables

Variable              No. of      Mean            Standard      Minimum         Maximum
                      Obs                         Deviation
Person ID             36,403      1,524,646       826,882       1001            2,930,001
Age                   36,403      42.9            8.4           30              59
Income Year           36,403      1989.4          12.4          1970            2014
Log Earnings          36,403      0.020           0.589         -4.716          2.271
Residual

                                          Appendix Table 2
                               Estimates of the ESP Model Parameters

       Parameter               With Calendar Time Trends      Without Calendar Time Trends
        Var(𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖0 )                        .054                            .104
                                         (.010)                          (.006)
 𝛿𝛿0                                      -12.2                            1.41
                                         (11.7)                          (.268)
 𝛿𝛿1                                       .681                           -.842
                                         (1.25)                          (.104)
 𝛾𝛾0                                      -4.45                           -6.06
                                         (0.30)                          (1.36)
 𝛾𝛾1                                      0.011                            .115
                                         (.010)                          (.101)
 k                                         2.21                            .004
                                          (.38)                          (.024)
 𝜋𝜋                                      -0.010                            3.97
                                        (0.007)                          (1.74)
 𝜆𝜆1                                       .094                            .070
                                         (.021)                          (.024)
 𝜂𝜂1                                       2.03                           -4.97
                                         (0.41)                          (.752)
 𝜂𝜂2                                      -.639                            .010
                                         (.089)                          (.006)
 𝜂𝜂3                                       .208                            .711
                                         (.049)                          (.195)
 𝛼𝛼1971                                    .916                              --
                                         (.096)
 𝛼𝛼1972                                    1.03                            --
                                         (.103)
 𝛼𝛼1973                                    1.08                            --
                                         (.101)
 𝛼𝛼1974                                    1.00                            --
                                         (.106)



                                                 53
                             Appendix Table 2
            Estimates of the ESP Model Parameters (continued)
Parameter              With Calendar Time Trends    Without Calendar Time Trends
𝛼𝛼1975                             1.10                          --
                                  (.125)
𝛼𝛼1976                             1.20                          --
                                  (.138)
𝛼𝛼1977                             1.06                          --
                                  (.125)
𝛼𝛼1978                             .961                          --
                                  (.110)
𝛼𝛼1979                             1.09                          --
                                  (.135)
𝛼𝛼1980                             1.15                          --
                                  (.138)
𝛼𝛼1981                             1.21                          --
                                  (.143)
𝛼𝛼1982                             1.37                          --
                                  (.167)
𝛼𝛼1983                             1.28                          --
                                  (.161)
𝛼𝛼1984                             1.35                          --
                                  (.167)
𝛼𝛼1985                             1.14                          --
                                  (.173)
𝛼𝛼1986                             1.15                          --
                                  (.183)
𝛼𝛼1987                             1.43                          --
                                  (.171)
𝛼𝛼1988                             1.51                          --
                                  (.176)
𝛼𝛼1989                             1.53                          --
                                  (.176)
𝛼𝛼1990                             1.48                          --
                                  (.174)
𝛼𝛼1991                             1.36                          --
                                  (.168)
𝛼𝛼1992                             1.48                          --
                                  (.176)
𝛼𝛼1993                             1.56                          --
                                  (.181)
𝛼𝛼1994                             1.52                          --
                                  (.177)
𝛼𝛼1995                             1.55                          --
                                  (.182)




                                   54
                             Appendix Table 2
            Estimates of the ESP Model Parameters (continued)
                      With Calendar Time Trends    Without Calendar Time
Parameter
                                                   Trends
𝛼𝛼1996                            1.46                          --
                                 (.169)
𝛼𝛼1998                            1.55                          --
                                 (.180)
𝛼𝛼2000                            1.58                          --
                                 (.192)
𝛼𝛼2002                            1.41                          --
                                 (.196)
𝛼𝛼2004                            1.57                          --
                                 (.197)
𝛼𝛼2006                            1.64                          --
                                 (.200)
𝛼𝛼2008                            1.76                          --
                                 (.202)
𝛼𝛼2010                            1.85                          --
                                 (.221)
𝛼𝛼2012                            1.87                          --
                                 (.246)
𝛼𝛼2014                            1.66                          --
                                 (.214)
𝛽𝛽1971                            1.07                          --
                                 (.086)
𝛽𝛽1972                            .832                          --
                                 (.071)
𝛽𝛽1973                            .835                          --
                                 (.074)
𝛽𝛽1974                            .934                          --
                                 (.075)
𝛽𝛽1975                            .943                          --
                                 (.084)
𝛽𝛽1976                            1.08                          --
                                 (.092)
𝛽𝛽1977                            1.11                          --
                                 (.091)
𝛽𝛽1978                            1.13                          --
                                 (.090)
𝛽𝛽1979                            1.05                          --
                                 (.092)
𝛽𝛽1980                            .933                          --
                                 (.092)
𝛽𝛽1981                            1.12                          --
                                 (.104)



                                   55
                             Appendix Table 2
            Estimates of the ESP Model Parameters (continued)

Parameter             With Calendar Time Trends     Without Calendar Time Trends
𝛽𝛽1982                            1.22                           --
                                 (.120)
𝛽𝛽1983                            1.38                           --
                                 (.123)
𝛽𝛽1984                            1.26                           --
                                 (.120)
𝛽𝛽1985                            1.49                           --
                                 (.132)
𝛽𝛽1986                            1.31                           --
                                 (.126)
𝛽𝛽1987                            1.10                           --
                                 (.108)
𝛽𝛽1988                            1.21                           --
                                 (.112)
𝛽𝛽1989                            1.27                           --
                                 (.117)
𝛽𝛽1990                            1.22                           --
                                 (.112)
𝛽𝛽1991                            1.41                           --
                                 (.131)
𝛽𝛽1992                            1.38                           --
                                 (.124)
𝛽𝛽1993                            1.12                           --
                                 (.110)
𝛽𝛽1994                            1.25                           --
                                 (.117)
𝛽𝛽1995                            1.28                           --
                                 (.120)
𝛽𝛽1996                            1.12                           --
                                 (.098)
𝛽𝛽1998                            1.07                           --
                                 (.101)
𝛽𝛽2000                            1.23                           --
                                 (.113)
𝛽𝛽2002                            .143                           --
                                 (.126)
𝛽𝛽2004                            1.43                           --
                                 (.119)
𝛽𝛽2006                            1.32                           --
                                 (.113)




                                   56
                                     Appendix Table 2
                    Estimates of the ESP Model Parameters (continued)

Parameter                       With Calendar Time Trends   Without Calendar Time Trends
𝛽𝛽2008                                      1.38                         --
                                           (.119)
𝛽𝛽2010                                      1.62                         --
                                           (.143)
𝛽𝛽2012                                      1.89                         --
                                           (.173)
𝛽𝛽2014                                      1.63                         --
                                           (1.43)
Notes:
Standard errors in parentheses.
Parameters α and β normalized to 1 in 1970.




                                              57
Appendix Table 3
Estimated Permanent Variance, Transitory Variance, and Total Variance by Age Group, ESP Model
                                       Age 30-39                             Age 40-49               Age 50-59
              Permanent   Transitory       Total   Permanent    Transitory       Total   Permanent     Transitory      Total
               Variance    Variance     Variance    Variance     Variance     Variance    Variance      Variance    Variance
      1970        0.054       0.122        0.176       0.054        0.150        0.205       0.082         0.183       0.266
      1971        0.046       0.139        0.185       0.046        0.172        0.217       0.069         0.209       0.278
      1972        0.058       0.084        0.142       0.058        0.104        0.162       0.087         0.127       0.214
      1973        0.063       0.085        0.148       0.063        0.105        0.168       0.096         0.128       0.223
      1974        0.054       0.106        0.161       0.054        0.131        0.186       0.082         0.160       0.242
      1975        0.065       0.108        0.173       0.065        0.134        0.199       0.099         0.163       0.262
      1976        0.078       0.142        0.220       0.078        0.175        0.253       0.118         0.214       0.332
      1977        0.061       0.150        0.211       0.061        0.186        0.246       0.092         0.226       0.318
      1978        0.050       0.156        0.206       0.050        0.192        0.243       0.076         0.235       0.311
      1979        0.064       0.133        0.197       0.064        0.164        0.228       0.097         0.200       0.297
      1980        0.072       0.106        0.178       0.072        0.131        0.203       0.109         0.160       0.269
      1981        0.079       0.152        0.231       0.079        0.188        0.267       0.119         0.229       0.348
      1982        0.101       0.181        0.282       0.101        0.223        0.324       0.153         0.272       0.425
      1983        0.089       0.232        0.320       0.089        0.286        0.375       0.134         0.349       0.483
      1984        0.099       0.194        0.293       0.099        0.240        0.339       0.150         0.292       0.443
      1985        0.112       0.270        0.382       0.112        0.333        0.445       0.169         0.407       0.576
      1986        0.122       0.211        0.333       0.122        0.260        0.382       0.185         0.317       0.502
      1987        0.111       0.147        0.258       0.111        0.181        0.292       0.168         0.221       0.389
      1988        0.124       0.179        0.303       0.124        0.221        0.345       0.187         0.270       0.457
      1989        0.127       0.198        0.325       0.128        0.244        0.371       0.193         0.297       0.490
      1990        0.120       0.180        0.300       0.120        0.223        0.342       0.181         0.272       0.453
      1991        0.100       0.243        0.344       0.100        0.300        0.401       0.152         0.366       0.518
      1992        0.118       0.234        0.352       0.118        0.288        0.407       0.179         0.352       0.531
      1993        0.132       0.153        0.285       0.132        0.188        0.321       0.200         0.230       0.430
      1994        0.125       0.189        0.314       0.125        0.233        0.358       0.189         0.285       0.474
      1995        0.130       0.200        0.330       0.130        0.247        0.377       0.196         0.301       0.497




                                                           58
Appendix Table 3
Estimated Permanent Variance, Transitory Variance, and Total Variance by Age Group, ESP Model (continued)
                           Age 30-39                              Age 40-49                             Age 50-59
             Permanent    Transitory   Total        Permanent    Transitory     Total      Permanent   Transitory   Total
             Variance     Variance     Variance     Variance     Variance       Variance   Variance    Variance     Variance
1996         0.115        0.125        0.267        0.115        0.187          0.303      0.174       0.228        0.403
1997         0.123        0.146        0.269        0.123        0.180          0.303      0.185       0.220        0.406
1998         0.130        0.141        0.270        0.130        0.174          0.303      0.196       0.212        0.408
1999         0.132        0.163        0.295        0.132        0.201          0.333      0.200       0.245        0.445
2000         0.134        0.185        0.319        0.134        0.228          0.362      0.203       0.278        0.481
2001         0.121        0.218        0.339        0.121        0.269          0.390      0.183       0.328        0.511
2002         0.108        0.251        0.359        0.108        0.310          0.417      0.163       0.378        0.541
2003         0.121        0.250        0.371        0.121        0.309          0.430      0.183       0.376        0.560
2004         0.134        0.249        0.384        0.134        0.308          0.442      0.203       0.375        0.579
2005         0.140        0.231        0.371        0.140        0.286          0.426      0.212       0.348        0.560
2006         0.145        0.214        0.359        0.146        0.264          0.409      0.220       0.322        0.542
2007         0.157        0.223        0.380        0.157        0.276          0.433      0.237       0.336        0.574
2008         0.168        0.233        0.401        0.168        0.288          0.456      0.254       0.351        0.605
2009         0.176        0.276        0.453        0.177        0.341          0.518      0.267       0.416        0.683
2010         0.185        0.319        0.504        0.185        0.394          0.579      0.280       0.481        0.761
2011         0.187        0.377        0.563        0.187        0.465          0.652      0.283       0.567        0.850
2012         0.189        0.434        0.622        0.189        0.535          0.724      0.286       0.653        0.939
2013         0.169        0.378        0.547        0.169        0.466          0.636      0.256       0.569        0.825
Note: After income year 1996, we interpolate the variances between two years.




                                                                59
Appendix Table 4
Decomposition of the Variance of Two-year Changes in Log Earnings Residuals, Age 40-49, ESP Model
          Variance of   Variance of
                                       Variance
 Second   Change in      Change in                                                                            −2𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡−2 ∗                                                                   −2𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡−2 ∗
                                      of Change     𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡2 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 )     2
                                                                            𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡−2 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−2 )                                 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡2 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 )      2
                                                                                                                                                              𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡−2 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−2 )
  Year    Permanent      Transitory                                                                     𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−2 )                                                       𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , 𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−2 )
                                         in Total
          Component     Component
   1972        0.000         0.142         0.142                0.058                        0.054                       -0.112                    0.104                        0.144                   -0.107
   1973        0.001         0.155         0.157                0.063                        0.046                       -0.107                    0.105                        0.165                   -0.114
   1974        0.000         0.131         0.131                0.054                        0.058                       -0.112                    0.131                        0.100                   -0.100
   1975        0.000         0.133         0.133                0.065                        0.063                       -0.128                    0.134                        0.101                   -0.101
   1976        0.002         0.172         0.174                0.078                        0.054                       -0.130                    0.175                        0.126                   -0.130
   1977        0.000         0.179         0.180                0.061                        0.065                       -0.126                    0.186                        0.128                   -0.135
   1978        0.003         0.204         0.207                0.050                        0.078                       -0.125                    0.192                        0.168                   -0.157
   1979        0.000         0.193         0.193                0.064                        0.061                       -0.125                    0.164                        0.178                   -0.149
   1980        0.002         0.180         0.182                0.072                        0.050                       -0.120                    0.131                        0.185                   -0.136
   1981        0.001         0.196         0.196                0.079                        0.064                       -0.142                    0.188                        0.158                   -0.150
   1982        0.002         0.203         0.205                0.101                        0.072                       -0.171                    0.223                        0.126                   -0.146
   1983        0.000         0.268         0.269                0.089                        0.079                       -0.167                    0.286                        0.180                   -0.198
   1984        0.000         0.256         0.256                0.099                        0.101                       -0.201                    0.240                        0.214                   -0.197
   1985        0.001         0.344         0.346                0.112                        0.089                       -0.199                    0.333                        0.275                   -0.264
   1986        0.001         0.277         0.278                0.122                        0.099                       -0.220                    0.260                        0.230                   -0.213
   1987        0.000         0.292         0.292                0.111                        0.112                       -0.223                    0.181                        0.320                   -0.210
   1988        0.000         0.266         0.266                0.124                        0.122                       -0.246                    0.221                        0.250                   -0.205
   1989        0.001         0.238         0.239                0.128                        0.111                       -0.238                    0.244                        0.174                   -0.180
   1990        0.000         0.246         0.246                0.120                        0.124                       -0.243                    0.223                        0.212                   -0.190
   1991        0.002         0.303         0.305                0.100                        0.127                       -0.226                    0.300                        0.234                   -0.231
   1992        0.000         0.286         0.286                0.118                        0.120                       -0.238                    0.288                        0.214                   -0.216
   1993        0.002         0.274         0.276                0.132                        0.100                       -0.230                    0.188                        0.288                   -0.203
   1994        0.000         0.289         0.289                0.125                        0.118                       -0.243                    0.233                        0.277                   -0.222
   1995        0.000         0.244         0.244                0.130                        0.132                       -0.262                    0.247                        0.181                   -0.184
   1996        0.000         0.233         0.233                0.115                        0.125                       -0.240                    0.187                        0.224                   -0.179
   1997        0.000         0.216         0.217                0.123                        0.120                       -0.242                    0.180                        0.202                   -0.166
   1998        0.000         0.199         0.200                0.130                        0.115                       -0.245                    0.174                        0.180                   -0.154
   1999        0.000         0.212         0.212                0.132                        0.123                       -0.254                    0.201                        0.173                   -0.162




                                                                                      60
Appendix Table 4
Decomposition of the Variance of Two-year Changes in Log Earnings Residuals, Age 40-49, ESP Model (continued)
         Variance of   Variance of   Variance
Second   Change in     Change in     of                                   2                         −2𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡−2 ∗                                          2                        −2𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡−2 ∗
                                                𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡2 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 )   𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡−2 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−2 )                                 𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡2 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 )   𝛽𝛽𝑡𝑡−2 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉(𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−2 )
Year     Permanent     Transitory    Change                                                         𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , 𝜇𝜇𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−2 )                                                       𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐(𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , 𝜐𝜐𝑖𝑖,𝑎𝑎−2 )
         Component     Component     in Total
2000     0.000         0.225         0.225      0.134                   0.130                       -0.264                        0.228                   0.167                       -0.170
2001     0.001         0.263         0.264      0.121                   0.132                       -0.252                        0.269                   0.193                       -0.198
2002     0.002         0.302         0.303      0.108                   0.134                       -0.241                        0.310                   0.219                       -0.227
2003     0.002         0.322         0.323      0.121                   0.121                       -0.241                        0.309                   0.258                       -0.245
2004     0.002         0.341         0.343      0.134                   0.108                       -0.241                        0.308                   0.297                       -0.263
2005     0.001         0.329         0.330      0.140                   0.121                       -0.260                        0.286                   0.296                       -0.253
2006     0.000         0.316         0.316      0.146                   0.134                       -0.280                        0.264                   0.295                       -0.243
2007     0.001         0.311         0.311      0.157                   0.140                       -0.296                        0.276                   0.274                       -0.239
2008     0.001         0.306         0.307      0.168                   0.146                       -0.313                        0.288                   0.253                       -0.235
2009     0.001         0.344         0.345      0.177                   0.157                       -0.333                        0.341                   0.265                       -0.261
2010     0.000         0.383         0.383      0.185                   0.168                       -0.353                        0.394                   0.276                       -0.288
2011     0.000         0.452         0.453      0.187                   0.176                       -0.363                        0.465                   0.327                       -0.340
2012     0.000         0.522         0.522      0.189                   0.185                       -0.374                        0.535                   0.379                       -0.392
2013     0.001         0.520         0.521      0.169                   0.187                       -0.355                        0.466                   0.446                       -0.393
2014     0.002         0.517         0.520      0.150                   0.189                       -0.336                        0.397                   0.514                       -0.394
Notes: See formula in Appendix.




                                                                                  61
