                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        ACCOUNTING FOR FACTORLESS INCOME

                                      Loukas Karabarbounis
                                         Brent Neiman

                                       Working Paper 24404
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24404


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2018, Revised June 2018




We thank Anhua Chen for providing exceptional research assistance and Andy Atkeson,
Emmanuel Farhi, Oleg Itskhoki, Greg Kaplan, Casey Mulligan, Richard Rogerson, Matt Rognlie,
and Bob Topel for helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the National
Science Foundation. Karabarbounis thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and Neiman thanks
the Becker Friedman Institute at the University of Chicago for generous financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.˛

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24404.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Loukas Karabarbounis and Brent Neiman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for Factorless Income
Loukas Karabarbounis and Brent Neiman
NBER Working Paper No. 24404
March 2018, Revised June 2018
JEL No. E1,E22,E23,E25

                                           ABSTRACT

Comparing U.S. GDP to the sum of measured payments to labor and imputed rental payments to
capital results in a large and volatile residual or “factorless income.” We analyze three common
strategies of allocating and interpreting factorless income, specifically that it arises from
economic profits (Case Π), unmeasured capital (Case K), or deviations of the rental rate of capital
from standard measures based on bond returns (Case R). We are skeptical of Case Π as it reveals
a tight negative relationship between real interest rates and economic profits, leads to large
fluctuations in inferred factor-augmenting technologies, and results in profits that have risen since
the early 1980s but that remain lower today than in the 1960s and 1970s. Case K shows how
unmeasured capital plausibly accounts for all factorless income in recent decades, but its value in
the 1960s would have to be more than half of the capital stock, which we find less plausible. We
view Case R as most promising as it leads to more stable factor shares and technology growth
than the other cases, though we acknowledge that it requires an explanation for the pattern of
deviations from common measures of the rental rate. Using a model with multiple sectors and
types of capital, we show that our assessment of the drivers of changes in output, factor shares,
and functional inequality depends critically on the interpretation of factorless income.


Loukas Karabarbounis
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
Hanson Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
loukas@umn.edu

Brent Neiman
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
brent.neiman@chicagobooth.edu
1         Introduction

The value added produced in an economy equals payments accruing to labor and capital plus

economic profits earned by producers selling at prices that exceed the average cost of produc-

tion. Equivalently, the labor share of income, the capital share of income, and the profit share

of income sum up to one. Separating these components of income is crucial in order to under-

stand the economy’s production technology, the evolution of competition across firms, and the

responsiveness to various tax and regulatory policies.

        Measurement of each of the three shares has proven a challenging task. Payments accruing

to labor are most directly observable because they are commonly included in standard reporting

for corporate financial and tax purposes. Direct measurements of the capital share and profit

share are more difficult to obtain. This is because most producers own, rather than rent, their

capital stocks and capital accumulation is subject to factors that are difficult to observe such

as investment risk, adjustment costs, depreciation and obsolescence, and financial constraints.

Additionally, various forms of capital such as brand equity and organizational capital are difficult

to measure in practice. Given the relative ease of observing payments to labor, the labor share

has historically been a more common focus of empirical work on factor shares than the capital

share or the profit share.1

        A large wave of recent work has documented a decline in the labor share starting around

1980. Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) found this decline to be a global phenomenon, present

within the majority of countries and industries around the world.2 Most analyses of the U.S.

data that we are aware of, including our baseline analysis below, show that imputed payments to
    1
     We acknowledge measurement difficulties that arise from a potential gap between the actual cost of employing
labor and reported payments to labor. Measurement difficulties also arise from splitting sole proprietors’ income
between labor and capital. Gollin (2002) is a classic treatment on the topic, while Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin (2013)
examine this issue in the context of the recent decline in the labor share in the United States. Smith, Yagan,
Zidar, and Zwick (2017) offer evidence that labor income has increasingly been misreported as capital income in
U.S. S-corporations in order to minimize tax exposures, leading to an overstatement of the U.S. labor share decline.
Guvenen, Mataloni, Rassier, and Ruhl (2017) find that U.S. multinationals have increasingly shifted intellectual
property capital income to foreign jurisdictions with lower taxes, leading to an understatement of the U.S. labor
share decline.
   2
     Piketty and Zucman (2014) and Dao, Das, Koczan, and Lian (2017) additionally offer detailed analyses of the
labor share decline for various countries and periods.



                                                         1
capital do not rise sufficiently during this period to fully offset the measured decline in payments

to labor. As a result, there is a significant amount of residual payments – or what we label

“factorless income” – that, at least since the early 1980s, have been growing as a share of value

added. Formally, we define factorless income as the difference between measured value added Y

and the sum of measured payments to labor W L and imputed rental payments to capital RK:

                                    Factorless Income = Y − W L − RK,                                               (1)

where we obtain value added Y , payments to labor W L, and capital K from the national accounts

and calculate the rental rate R using a standard formula as in Hall and Jorgenson (1967).

    How should one interpret factorless income? A first method, Case Π, embraces the possibility

that firms have pricing power that varies over time and interprets factorless income as economic

profits Π.3 A second method, Case K, emphasizes that capital stock estimates can be sensitive to

initial conditions, assumptions about depreciation and obsolescence, and unmeasured investment

flows in intangibles or organizational capital and attributes factorless income to understatement

of K.4 A third method, Case R, attributes factorless income to elements such as time-varying

risk premia or financial frictions that generate a wedge between the imputed rental rate R using

a Hall-Jorgenson formula and the rental rate that firms perceive when making their investment

decisions.5 When thinking about strategies that allocate factorless income, in short, we need to

decide: “Is it Π, is it K, or is it R?”

    The contribution of this paper is to assess the plausibility of each of these three methodologies

to allocate factorless income and to highlight their consequences for our understanding of the

effects of various macroeconomic trends. We begin our analyses in Section 2 in a largely model-

free environment. Aside from a standard model-based formula for the rental rate of capital, we
   3
     Case Π follows a long tradition including Hall (1990), Rotemberg and Woodford (1995), and Basu and Fernald
(1997). More recent analyses of longer-term factor share trends such as Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), Rognlie
(2015), and Barkai (2016) also used variants of this method. Recent work related to this approach focuses on the
cyclicality of the inverse of the labor share to infer the cyclicality of markups. See, for instance, Gali, Gertler, and
Lopez-Salido (2007), Nekarda and Ramey (2013), Karabarbounis (2014), and Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2018).
   4
     Examples in a large literature that follow this approach include Hall (2001), McGrattan and Prescott (2005),
Atkeson and Kehoe (2005), Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009), and Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013).
   5
     Such an imputation of the rental rate underlies the internal rate of return in the prominent KLEMS dataset.
Similar approaches have been employed by Caselli and Feyrer (2007), Gomme, Ravikumar, and Rupert (2011), and
Koh, Santaeulàlia-Llopis, and Zheng (2016).

                                                           2
rely only on accounting identities and external measurements to ensure an internally consistent

allocation of the residual income. Section 3 introduces a variant of the neoclassical growth model

with monopolistic competition, multiple sectors and types of capital, and representative hand-to-

mouth workers and forward-looking capitalists. In Section 4, we back out the exogenous driving

processes such that the model perfectly reproduces the time series of all endogenous variables in

the data as interpreted by each of the three cases. We then solve for counterfactuals in which

we shut down various exogenous processes driving the economy’s dynamics and assess how their

effects on output, factor shares, and consumption inequality between capitalists and workers

depend on the strategy employed for allocating factorless income.

       Case Π, where the residual is allocated to economic profits, is characterized by a tight negative

comovement between the real interest rate, measured by the difference between the nominal rate

on 10-year U.S. Treasuries and expected inflation, and the profit share. Mechanically, the decline

in the real interest rate since the early 1980s has driven the surge in the profit share since then,

a pattern emphasized in Barkai (2016) and Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold (2018). A focus on

recent decades, however, masks a significant decline in the profit share between the 1970s and

the 1980s. We find that the profit share, as interpreted under Case Π, is in fact lower today

than it was in the 1960s and the 1970s when real rates were also low.

       Further, Case Π requires both labor-augmenting and capital-augmenting technology to fluc-

tuate wildly between the late 1970s and the early 1980s along with the rise and fall of the real

interest rate. This extreme variability of technology is found regardless of whether the elasticity

of substitution between capital and labor is above or below one. Our counterfactuals for Case Π

imply that the significant decline in markups between the 1970s and the 1980s contributed to a

decline in the relative consumption of capitalists and to an increase in the labor share. The sub-

sequent rise in profits reverses these trends after the mid 1980s. Beginning from 1960, however,

the effects of markups on output, factor shares, and inequality are muted because markups did

not exhibit a significant trend over the past 55 years.6
   6
    The model we develop follows most of the related literature in assuming constant returns to scale production
with no fixed costs, so the economic profit share is a fixed monotonic transformation of the markup of price over


                                                       3
   We conclude that the large swings in the profit share and the volatility in inferred factor-

augmenting technologies cast doubts on the plausibility of Case Π as a methodology to account

for factorless income. De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), however, use a different approach that

also reveals a recent surge in profits. They demonstrate in Compustat data a significant rise

in sales relative to the cost of goods sold (COGS) since the 1980s, a shift that underlies their

estimate of an increase in markups. We demonstrate in these same data, however, that the

increase in sales relative to COGS almost entirely reflects a shift in the share of operating

costs that are reported as being selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expenses instead

of COGS. Using the sum of COGS and SG&A instead of COGS only, we find that the inferred

markup is essentially flat over time.7 The shift from COGS to SG&A – which we document

also occurred in a number of other countries – is consistent with many possibilities including

changing classifications of what constitutes production, outsourcing, and greater intensity in the

use of intangibles in production. It is also consistent with a rise in fixed costs, which opens the

possibility of increasing markups without a rise in economic profits. Given this sensitivity, we

remain skeptical of Case Π.

   Case K attributes factorless income to unmeasured forms of capital. We calculate time

series for the price, depreciation rate, and investment spending on unmeasured capital that fully

account for factorless income. Many such series can be constructed, but we offer one where these

variables do not behave implausibly after the 1980s. While the size of missing capital is broadly

consistent with the inferred e-capital in Hall (2001) and the measured organizational capital in

Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) after the 1980s, accounting for factorless income requires in the

years before 1970 that the stock of missing capital be worth nearly 60 percent of the entire capital

stock. Case K additionally implies that output growth deviates from the growth of measured

GDP in the national accounts. We demonstrate that this deviation need not be significant in

most years, with growth being within 0.5 percentage point of measured growth in all but four
marginal cost. As such, unless otherwise noted, we use the terms profits and markups interchangeably.
   7
     Traina (2018) first showed the sensitivity of the markup estimate in De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) to the
split between COGS and SG&A. Further, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) estimate small changes in markups using
the De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) methodology but replacing COGS with total expenses.


                                                      4
years since 1960. There are some years, however, when the growth rates deviate significantly.

       Case K leads to far more reasonable inferences of labor-augmenting and capital-augmenting

technology. While quantitative differences exist for the role of exogenous processes in driving

the U.S. dynamics, the key patterns generated under Case K resemble those under Case Π.

For example, similar to Case Π, we find that this case also assigns the most important role in

accounting for the long-term increase in consumption inequality between capitalists and workers

to the slowdown of labor-augmenting technology growth.

       Our last case, Case R, adjusts the opportunity cost of capital until it implies a rental rate

such that equation (1) results in zero factorless income. We demonstrate that this adjusted

opportunity cost component in firms’ rental rate has been relatively stable, ranging during the

last half century from levels slightly above 10 percent to levels slightly above 5 percent. We also

find that this adjusted cost increased between the 1980s and the 2000s. This contrasts with the

real interest rate based on U.S. Treasury prices, which jumped by nearly 10 percentage points

from the late 1970s to the early 1980s, before slowly returning to the near zero levels by the 2010s.

Our Case R results relate closely to the conclusion in Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017)

that rising risk premia have generated a growing wedge between Treasury rates and corporate

borrowing costs in recent decades.8 Among the three cases, we show that the fluctuations in

both labor-augmenting and capital-augmenting technology are the smallest in Case R.9 Finally,

Case R attributes to the opportunity cost of capital the most important role for consumption

inequality between capitalists and workers simply because this cost, and therefore capitalists’

consumption growth, is higher than in the other cases.

       Collectively, we view our results as tempering enthusiasm for any one of these ways to alone

account for factorless income, especially so for Case Π and Case K. The observation in Case

Π of a post-1980 increase in profits has called for heightened enforcement of anti-trust laws and
   8
     Similar to our Case Π, these authors back out implied markups for various parameterizations and demonstrate
that the increase in risk premia is largely robust to the behavior of markups.
   9
     We also demonstrate that, among all three cases, Case R generates the smallest gap between the growth of TFP
as measured by the Solow Residual and the growth of a modified measure of TFP that uses cost shares consistent
with the allocation of factorless income.




                                                       5
calls to eliminate licensing restrictions and other barriers to entry. But our work leads to the

conclusion that profits are only now returning to the historical levels of the 1960s and 1970s after

having been unusually low in the 1980s and 1990s. Further, Case Π requires a narrative tightly

linking lower interest rates to rising market power at high frequencies, such as through the greater

ease of financing mergers, or tightly linking greater market power to lower interest rates, such

as through reduced investment demand by monopolists. Case K plausibly accounts for recent

movements of factorless income and, given the changing nature of production, we do not think it

should be dismissed in terms of its implications for growth, factor shares, and investment. The

case we explore requires an implausibly large unmeasured capital stock early in the sample in

order to entirely account for factorless income. We acknowledge, however, the possibility that

additional flexibility in the specification of missing capital accumulation may allow researchers

to account for factorless income with less extreme values of initial missing capital. Case R in

many ways produces the most stable outcomes. While we find it plausible that the cost of

capital perceived by firms in making their investment decisions deviates from the cost of capital

one would impute based on U.S. Treasuries, we acknowledge that embracing this case more

fully requires a thorough understanding of what causes time variations in this deviation and

we currently do not offer such an explanation. Finally, we note that the interpretation of some

key macroeconomic trends during the past 50 years proves largely invariant to the treatment of

factorless income. For example, the rapid decline in the relative price of IT investment goods and

the slowdown in labor-augmenting technology growth play important roles for macroeconomic

dynamics in all cases.


2    Three Strategies for Allocating Factorless Income

In this section we analyze the three strategies for allocating factorless income. We begin by

populating the terms in equation (1) used to define factorless income. Our data cover the U.S.

economy and come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), including the National Income

and Product Accounts (NIPA) and Fixed Asset Tables (FAT). All our analyses begin in 1960,


                                                 6
since the BEA began its measurement of a number of categories of intellectual property products

in 1959 and refined its measure of research and development in 1960.

       We study the private sector and therefore remove the contribution of the government sector

to nominal output Y and labor compensation W L in equation (1).10 Some of our analyses

distinguish between the business sector’s value added (P Q Q) and profits (ΠQ ) and the housing

sector’s value added (P H H) and profits (ΠH ), where total output is Y = pQ Q + pH H and total

profits are Π = ΠQ + ΠH .

   We impute rental payments to capital RK in equation (1) as the sum of those accruing
                                                    P j j
to each of several types of capital j, so that RK =  j R K . Similar to our treatment of

output and compensation, we remove government capital and bundle the other capital types

into three mutually exclusive groups: information technology (IT) capital (j = I), non-IT capital

(j = N ), and residential or housing capital (j = H).11 Profits in the housing sector are defined

as ΠH = P H H − RH K H .

       Each rental rate Rj is constructed using data on capital prices ξ j , depreciation rates δ j , the

real interest rate r, the tax rate on investment τ x , and the tax rate on capital τ k using the

formula:12
                                     "               j
                                                           !                                         #
                     (1 + τtx )ξtj             x
                                         (1 + τt−1 )ξt−1                                 τtk δtj
             Rtj   =                                           1+ 1−   τtk              j
                                                                              rt − 1 − δt −            .         (2)
                       1 − τtk            (1 + τtx )ξtj                                     1 + τtx

We derive equation (2) in Section 3.4 from the optimality conditions of a representative capitalist.

Our baseline measure of the real interest rate equals the nominal rate on 10-year U.S. Treasuries
  10
     As a baseline, we measure W L as compensation to employees. As we demonstrate below, this measure of the
labor share produces fewer negative values for factorless income in the early 1980s than commonly used alternatives
such as measures which allocate a fraction of taxes and proprietors’ income to labor or labor’s share of income in
the corporate sector.
  11
     IT capital includes the subtypes of information processing equipment and software. Non-IT capital includes non-
residential structures, industrial equipment, transportation equipment, other equipment, research and development
and entertainment, literary, and artistic originals.
  12
     We construct the price of capital ξ j for each j by dividing the total nominal value of type-j capital by a
chained Törnqvist price index constructed using the investment price indices for each capital subtype. Similarly,
the depreciation rates δ j are calculated by dividing the nominal value of depreciation for that capital type, itself
the sum of depreciation across subtypes, by the nominal value of capital for that capital type, which itself equals
the sum of the value of capital subtypes. The tax rates come from McDaniel (2009) and are effective average tax
rates calculated from national accounts. Note that in a steady state and with zero taxes, equation (2) reduces to
the familiar R = ξ(r + δ).



                                                               7
                                                                                                    .25
                          .7
                          .65




                                                                                                    .2
   Share of Value Added




                                                                             Share of Value Added
                                                                                                    .15
                          .6
                          .55




                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                    .05
                          .5
                          .45




                                                                                                    0
                                1960      1980             2000   2020                                    1960                1980                    2000                  2020
                                                   Labor                                                         IT Capital          Non−IT Capital          Residential Capital



                                         (a) Labor Share                                                                 (b) Capital Shares

                           Figure 1: Labor and Capital Shares in U.S. Private Sector Before Allocating Residual


minus a 5-year moving average of realized inflation that proxies expected inflation.13 Additional

details on our data construction are found in the Appendix.

       Figure 1 plots the share of private sector value added paid to labor, or the labor share

sL = W N/Y , and the implied shares of each type of capital, sjK = Rj K j /Y . We smooth all

times series (throughout the paper) by reporting 5-year moving averages.14 The labor share

measure declines secularly, from levels near 60 percent before 1980 to 56 percent by 2016. The

capital share calculations, done separately for each of the three types of capital, reveal a unique

pattern for IT capital which increased from zero to about 5 percent of value added around

2000. Non-IT capital and housing capital follow essentially the same time series patterns, which

highlights that they are driven by a common factor. Even in this 5-year smoothed form, the

imputed capital income shares vary significantly. The sum of the labor share and the four capital

shares does not necessarily equal one – the residual is factorless income’s share in value added.

2.1                             Case Π

The first approach attributes factorless income in equation (1) entirely to economic profits Π.

Figure 2(a) plots the business sector’s profit share, sQ    Q   Q
                                                       Π = Π /(P Q), implied by this approach.
  13
     To fill in Treasury rates for the small number of years early in the sample where they are missing, we grow later
rates backward using growth in the AAA rate.
  14
     Here and with all time series reported as moving averages, we use 3-year moving averages and then the 1-year
change to fill in the series for the earliest and latest two years of the sample.


                                                                         8
                                   .25




                                                                                                              .08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .08
                                                                                                                                                                 1
   Share of Business Value Added




                                                                                                                                  Share of Housing Value Added
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                 .75
                                                                                                              .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .06
                                   .15




                                                                                                                    Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                              .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .04
                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                 .25
                                   .05




                                                                                                              .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .02
                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                   0




                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                         1960             1980               2000                    2020                                                              1960            1980            2000                   2020
                                                Business Profit Share       Real Interest Rate (right axis)                                                                   Housing Profit Share   Real Interest Rate (right axis)



                                                        (a) Business Sector                                                                                                           (b) Housing Sector

                                                                        Figure 2: Profit Shares and Interest Rate, Case Π


The solid black line plots sQ
                            Π ’s 5-year moving average against the left axis and shows that between

1960 and 1980 profits averaged just below 20 percent of business value added. The profit share

collapses to essentially zero in the early 1980s before reverting by the 2000s to levels averaging

about 15 percent.15

        This rise in the profit share after the 1980s has been noted by recent analyses such as Karabar-

bounis and Neiman (2014), Rognlie (2015), and Barkai (2016) in relation to the decline in the

labor share. We think it is important to emphasize, however, the critical role played by the real

interest rate in reaching this conclusion. The dashed red line in Figure 2(a) is plotted against

the y-axis on the right and shows the moving average of the real interest rate series used in these

calculations. After hovering near low levels in the 1960s, the real interest rate jumps toward 10

percent in the early 1980s before slowly returning to the earlier low levels.16 Comparing the real

interest rate with the profit share, one notes that the real interest rate and the profit share are

very tightly (negatively) correlated at both high and low frequencies. The series in Figure 2(a),
  15
     We wish to acknowledge that Matt Rognlie sent a figure documenting essentially this same pattern in private
correspondence. Our methodology differs slightly from that used in Barkai (2016) due to our inclusion of taxes,
different methods for smoothing, and focus on the entire business sector. The calculations, however, produce nearly
identical results in terms of the time-series changes of our profit shares. When we apply his exact methodology to the
business sector and lag by one-year to account for different timing conventions, the resulting series has a correlation
with that in Figure 2(a) of 0.90. In the Appendix, we plot these two series together with Barkai’s calculated profit
share in the nonfinancial corporate sector, extended earlier than his 1984 start date.
  16
     The timing of these changes accords well with the estimates of the real return on bonds presented by Jorda,
Knoll, Kuvshinov, Schularick, and Taylor (2017) for 16 countries.



                                                                                                                              9
for example, have a correlation of -0.91.17

       A conclusion from Figure 2(a) is that taking seriously Case Π and the implied behavior of

profits requires a narrative that links the real interest rate to the profit share. There are such

possibilities. For example, cheaper credit might be crucial for facilitating corporate mergers and

acquisitions in a way that increases concentration and market power. Alternatively, a growing

share of firms with higher market power might desire lower investment and result in a lower real

interest rate. But the linkages between these variables must be tight and operate at relatively

high frequency to account for these data.

       Further, while the timing of the rise in profits from the early 1980s accords relatively well

with the decline in the labor share, the even higher profit share early in the sample is difficult to

reconcile with the conventional U.S. macroeconomic narrative. Taken literally, these calculations

imply that labor’s share of business costs, W L/(W L + RI K I + RN K N ), averaged roughly 85

percent in the 1960s and 1970s and dropped to roughly 70 percent in the 1980s before slowly

climbing back up above 80 percent after 2000.

       What are the implications of Case Π for the housing sector? Inspired by what is essentially

the same exercise in Vollrath (2017), Figure 2(b) plots the housing profit share sH
                                                                                  Π = 1 −

RH K H /(P H H).18 Just as in the analyses of capital rental costs for the business sector, we

combine data on the real interest rate, housing depreciation rate, price of residential capital, and

the stock of housing capital to measure housing capital rental costs. We find that sH
                                                                                    Π exhibits

the same basic time series patterns as sQ
                                        Π but is dramatically more volatile.
                                                                             19
                                                                                The correlation of

the business profit share sQ                               H
                           Π and the housing profit share sΠ is 0.78.

       The surging profit share in housing may indeed reflect greater market power in housing rental
  17
     The series in Figure 1(b) are much more volatile, and move more closely together, than the very similar plots of
capital income shares by capital type offered in Rognlie (2015). The reason for this difference is exactly our point
that Case Π implies a tight link of capital income and profit shares to the real interest rate. Rognlie uses a constant
interest rate in constructing his plotted series, so they are less volatile and comove by less.
  18
     We note that the labor share in the housing sector is essentially zero because its value added in the national
accounts is primarily composed of imputed rental income in owner-occupied housing and explicit rental payments.
  19
     We set Rj = 0 when we would otherwise impute a negative value and note that this is particularly commonly
employed in the case of housing. To maintain consistency with the rest of our framework, we use the real interest
rate based on 10-year Treasuries here. If we instead do this calculation using 30-year fixed rate mortgages rates, the
level changes, but the time-series pattern for the most part does not.



                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.05
                                   .25




                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                              1
   Share of Business Value Added




                                                                                                                               Share of Housing Value Added
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                              .75
                                   .15




                                                                                                                Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Percent
                                                                                                          .05




                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                              .25
                                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −.95
                                   0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                              0
                                         1960             1980           2000                    2020                                                               1960            1980            2000                   2020
                                                Business Profit Share   Real Interest Rate (right axis)                                                                    Housing Profit Share   Real Interest Rate (right axis)



                                                        (a) Business Sector                                                                                                        (b) Housing Sector

                                                                 Figure 3: Profit Shares with Flat Interest Rate, Case Π


markets. Over the last 10 years, for example, the Blackstone group has become a landlord of

enormous scale, acquiring and renting out nearly 50,000 homes. Perhaps this is representative

of increasing concentration in housing markets. Further, this measure of the profit share is less

suited to the housing sector than to the business sector as it disregards risk and may miss labor

costs. Still, the extremely volatile path of sH
                                              Π and its tight link to r contribute to our doubts

that Case Π is the appropriate treatment of factorless income.

        Another way to emphasize the critical role played by variations in the real interest rate for

Case Π is to calculate the profit share under this methodology but using a constant real interest

rate instead of time-varying Treasury rates. Using r = 0.05 yields the series for business and

housing profit shares in Figures 3(a) and 3(b). Under this methodology the business profit share

rises by only a few percentage points since the early 1980s instead of nearly 20 percentage points

seen in Figure 2(a). Further, the calculated profit shares during the Great Recession return to

their low levels during the 1980s. We conclude that absent the variation in the real interest rate,

Case Π would not point to surging profits.

        Our basic conclusions remain largely undisturbed if we consider alternative measures of the

labor share and additional alternative series for the real interest rate. First, we continue to use

compensation to measure the labor share but use the Moody’s AAA bond yield index instead of

the 10-year Treasury yield as an input when calculating our rental rates Rj . Next, we construct


                                                                                                                          11
                                  .9




                                                                                                                                     .2
  Share of Business Value Added




                                                                                                     Share of Business Value Added
                                  .85




                                                                                                                                     .1
                                  .8




                                                                                                                                     0
                                  .75




                                                                                                                                     −.1
                                  .7




                                                                                                                                     −.2
                                  .65




                                        1960               1980          2000            2020                                              1960               1980          2000            2020
                                                Measured          AAA   Adjusted   Corporate                                                       Measured          AAA   Adjusted   Corporate



                                               (a) Business Sector Labor Shares                                                                   (b) Business Sector Profit Shares

                                                   Figure 4: Alternative Business Sector Labor and Profit Shares, Case Π


an “Adjusted” labor share measure by adding to our baseline measure of compensation a fraction

of proprietors income and net taxes on production, where this fraction equals the share of labor

compensation in the part of business value added other than proprietors income and net taxes

on production. As a third case, we assume the entire business sector has a labor share equal to

that measured in the corporate sector.

                            Figure 4(a) shows our baseline labor share series, which is not impacted by changing the real

interest rate series to “AAA”. The series slowly declines in recent decades but is flatter than the

private sector series shown in Figure 1(a) due to the exclusion of housing, a difference uncovered

and emphasized in Rognlie (2015). The “Adjusted” and “Corporate” lines exhibit somewhat

different patterns, with the former dropping by most in the late 1970s and the latter dropping

most since 2000.

                            Figure 4(b) shows the corresponding profit share calculations. Unsurprisingly, the higher real

interest rate (“AAA”) and higher labor share measures (“Adjusted” and “Corporate”) result in a

downward shift in the level of the associated profit shares, including more periods with negative

measured profit shares. However, consistent with our conclusion that the time series patterns

in the real interest rate mechanically drive the evolution of the calculated profit shares, all four

lines in Figure 4(b) move very closely together.

                                                                                                12
        .08




                                                                                   .25
                                                                                   .2
        .06




                                                                                   .15
  Percent




                                                                             Percent
        .04




                                                                                   .1
        .02




                                                                                   .05
        0




                                                                                   0
              1960              1980          2000             2020                      1960              1980          2000             2020
                     Baseline     AR(1)   ARMA(3,3)   Michigan Survey                           Baseline     AR(1)   ARMA(3,3)   Michigan Survey



                           (a) Real Interest Rates                                              (b) Business Sector Profit Shares

                                Figure 5: Alternative Inflation Expectation Measures, Case Π


        Figure 5 shows that our conclusions remain unchanged when we use alternative measures

of inflation expectations to construct the real interest rate and the business profit share. The

solid black line in Figure 5(a) shows the moving average of our baseline real interest rate, which

uses a 5-year moving average of realized inflation rates to proxy for expected inflation. The

corresponding profit share is shown with the solid black line in Figure 5(b). The other lines in

Figure 5(a) show the moving average of real interest rates constructed using an AR(1) process, an

ARMA(3,3) process, and the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers to measure expected

inflation.20 The corresponding profits shares are plotted in Figure 5 and show essentially identical

profit share dynamics.

        Calculations using aggregate data to show that the sum of sL and sK is declining are not

the only evidence suggesting economic profits have increased since the 1980s. De Loecker and

Eeckhout (2017) apply the methodology of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) to Compustat

data and uncover a striking rise in markups from 1.18 in 1980 to 1.67 by the end of their data,

reproduced as the solid black line in Figure 6(a). With constant returns and absent fixed costs,

this trajectory corresponds to an increase in sQ
                                               Π from about 15 percent to 40 percent. The
  20
    Our measure of inflation is based on the price of non-housing consumption. We considered inflation processes
that belong in the ARMA(p, q) family. The Akaike information criterion selected (p, q) = (3, 3) and the Bayesian
information criterion selected (p, q) = (1, 0).


                                                                        13
          1.8




                                                                                         1.8
          1.6




                                                                                         1.6
  Ratio




                                                                                 Ratio
          1.4




                                                                                         1.4
          1.2




                                                                                         1.2
          1




                                                                                         1
                1960        1980                2000                 2020                      1960          1980                 2000                  2020
                       Estimated Markup (DLE, 2017)                                                   Estimated Markup (DLE, 2017)
                       Aggregation of Firms’ Sales/COGS                                               Replication, Removing Measurement Error
                       Aggregation of Firms’ Sales/(COGS+SG&A)                                        Replication, w/o Removing Measurement Error
                       Aggregation of Firms’ Sales/(COGS+SG&A−R&D)                                    Using COGS+SG&A, w/o Removing Measurement Error



                       (a) Raw Data Series                                                                   (b) Estimates

                                              Figure 6: Markups in Compustat Data


inflection point of 1980 closely corresponds to the timing of the global labor share decline as

documented in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014).

      De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) use cost of goods sold (COGS) as their proxy for variable

costs. Their methodology is more involved, but the fall of COGS relative to sales in their sample

appears to be the core empirical driver of their result. The long-dashed red line in Figure 6(a)

simply plots the average across firms of the sales to COGS ratio in these same data and tracks

the estimated markup trajectory quite well.21

      This pattern plausibly reflects forces other than growing economic profits.22 In particular,

COGS suffers from some important shortcomings as a proxy for the behavior of spending on vari-

able inputs. Compustat’s data definitions describe it as including “all expenses directly allocated

by the company to production, such as material, labor, and overhead...” While materials align

well with the notion of variable costs, it is unclear that only variable labor costs are included

and overhead is unlikely to capture variable costs in the way desired. Further, as was first noted
  21
     We weight the ratios in this plot by firms’ sales to mimic the weighting scheme used in the estimates of De Loecker
and Eeckhout (2017) and multiply by a constant to normalize the series’ levels in 1980.
  22
     Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson, and Van Reenen (2017), Kehrig and Vincent (2017), and Hartman-Glaser, Lustig,
and Zhang (2016) demonstrate that the reallocation of market share toward lower labor share firms underlies
the trends of increasing concentration and declining labor share. This evidence is consistent with certain firms
increasing their markups but also is consistent with technology-driven substitution toward firms operating more
capital intensive production methods in an environment with stable markups. Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017)
confirm that concentration has risen in the U.S. but do not find that to be the case in Europe.


                                                                            14
in this context by Traina (2018), the Compustat variable Selling, General, and Administrative

Expense (SG&A) also includes some variable costs. SG&A is described in Compustat’s data

definitions as including “all commercial expenses of operation (such as, expenses not directly

related to product production) incurred in the regular course of business pertaining to the secur-

ing of operating income...” Such expenses explicitly include categories like marketing or R&D,

where it is unclear if they should be variable costs in the sense desired for markup estimation,

but also includes bad debt expenses, commissions, delivery expenses, lease rentals, retailer rent

expenses, as well as other items that more clearly should be included as variable costs. Most

importantly, Compustat itself explicitly corroborates the blurred line between COGS and SG&A

when it states that items will only be included in COGS if the reporting company does not

themselves allocate them to SG&A. Similarly, Compustat does not include items in SG&A if the

reporting company already allocates them to COGS.

       The dashed blue line in Figure 6(a) shows the average across firms of the ratio of sales to

the sum of COGS and SG&A. There is a very mild increase in sales relative to this measure of

operating costs. Put differently, the empirical driver of the rising markup result in Compustat

data appears to be the shift in operating costs away from COGS and toward SG&A, not a

shift in operating costs relative to sales.23 This may be consistent with a rise in markups, but

also might be consistent with other trends such as a rise in outsourcing (which could cause

a reclassification of otherwise economically similar expenses), changing interpretations of what

is meant by “production,” or substitution of production activities performed by labor toward

production activities performed by capital, the expenses of which may then be recorded by

companies under a different category.24

       Finally, we wish to emphasize that it is important to keep in mind the difference between

markups of price over marginal cost and economic profits, which can be thought of as markups
  23
     The ratio of sales to operating costs (COGS+SG&A) fluctuated from 1.20 in 1953 to 1.14 in 1980 to 1.22 in
2014. Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) have reported similar results when replacing COGS with total expenses.
  24
     While not all firms that report COGS also report SG&A, those that do represent a fairly stable share of total
sales since 1980, ranging from about 72 to 82 percent. We further verified that the rise in sales to COGS looks
similar in this subset of firms as in the whole set of firms, and in fact is even sharper.




                                                       15
of price over average cost. For example, imagine that COGS perfectly captured variable costs

and SG&A perfectly captured fixed costs of production. If this was the case, the fact that COGS

declines relative to Sales would suggest an increase in markups on the margin. However, the rise

in SG&A relative to Sales would, all else equal, reduce profits. Without adding more structure

to quantify these relative forces, their overall impact on the average profit share is ambiguous.

While markups on the margin are important for various questions of interest in economics, the

average profit share is more salient for issues such as the decline in the labor share or the degree

of monopoly power.

    While we believe the evolution of the raw sales to COGS ratio is the proximate driver of the

markup estimate in De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), their methodology is more nuanced and

sophisticated than a simple aggregation of raw operating ratios. To evaluate the sensitivity of

their result to the choice of variable cost proxy, therefore, we would like to exactly implement

their full methodology but substituting COGS+SG&A for COGS as the proxy of variable costs.

The solid black line in Figure 6(b) plots the headline result from De Loecker and Eeckhout

(2017) and the long-dashed red line shows our best effort to exactly replicate their calculations,

leveraging the publicly available replication code for De Loecker and Warzynski (2012).25 Our

calculated series clearly fails to track theirs – we suspect the gap in our estimate reflects a

different treatment of the variable used for the capital stock, which plays the largest role when

running the first-stage non-parametric regression to purge out measurement errors.26 Indeed,

when we skip that step entirely, our estimated markup series comes much closer to theirs, and

is plotted in the dashed blue line. We use that same methodology but using COGS+SG&A as

our proxy for variable cost and plot the implied markup as the short-dashed green line, which

confirms that substituting operating expenses for COGS reduces or eliminates the inferred rise

of markups in Compustat data, consistent with the findings in Traina (2018).27 The estimated
  25
     These series use a quasi-Newton method in the second stage estimation of industry-specific output elasticity
of variable cost. Using other methods such as Nelder-Mead only changes the level of the estimated markup and
continues to result in a flat time-series.
  26
     We have tried using the perpetual inventory method, as well as directly using gross and net values for property,
plant, and equipment. Our results presented here use the gross property, plant, and equipment measure for all North
American firms, but little changes when using the other capital stock measures or restricting only to U.S. firms.
  27
     We have experimented with removing expenditures associated with advertising (XAD), R&D (XRD), pension

                                                         16
markup rises only mildly since 1980.

   The labor share decline since 1980 is a global phenomenon that was accompanied by flat or

mildly declining investment rates in most countries.28 This observation suggests that factorless

income has risen in recent decades around the world. We evaluate the extent to which the ratio

of sales to COGS or sales to COGS+SG&A has trended up in other countries using data from

Compustat Global. Table 1 lists, for each country with at least 100 firms in the data, the linear

trend (per 10 years) in Sales/COGS and Sales/(COGS+SG&A). There are a number of cases

where the Sales/COGS ratio has significantly increased including large economies such as India,

Japan, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The remaining eight countries either

experienced significant declines or insignificant trends. As with the U.S. case, however, the scale

and significance of the trends generally change if one instead considers Sales/(COGS+SG&A).

In that case, the positive trends in the United Kingdom and United States, for example, remain

statistically significant but drop in magnitude by roughly three-quarters. Statistically significant

declines emerge in China, Italy, and Korea. Whereas a simple average of the trend coefficients

on Sales/COGS is 0.041, the average trend coefficient for Sales/(COGS+SG&A) is 0.002. While

Compustat’s coverage in terms of time and scope varies significantly across countries, the results

in Table 1 cast further doubt that increasing markups can explain the bulk of rising factorless

income in recent decades.

   To recap Case Π, the large residual share of value added that is neither recorded as labor

compensation nor imputed as payments to capital rises rapidly from the early 1980s. Fully em-

bracing the interpretation of this residual as rising economic profits may offer a plausible story

for labor share’s decline since 1980 and carries important implications for a range of topics from

asset pricing to competition policy. Our analysis, however, casts doubt on this strict interpre-

tation of factorless income as profits. First, one must acknowledge that the same methodology

driving inference about rising profit shares since 1980 reveals that profit share levels in the 1960s
and retirement (XPR), and rent (XRENT), one at a time, from our measure of COGS+SG&A and do not find
meaningful differences from the case when they are included. Many firms do not report these variables separately,
however, so we cannot remove them all without excluding a large majority of firms in the data.
  28
     Chen, Karabarbounis, and Neiman (2017) document these patterns using firm-level data from many countries.


                                                       17
                        Table 1: Trends in Markups in Compustat Global Data


                                Trend (per 10 years)                   Years Covered       Firms Included
    Country              Sales/COGS Sales/(COGS+SG&A)                  Start    End        Min     Max

    Brazil                  -0.038                -0.002                1996     2016       128       284
                           (0.035)               (0.029)

    China                   -0.008               -0.021                 1993     2016       314      3683
                           (0.014)             (0.007)***

    France                  -0.068                -0.012                1999     2016       111       631
                           (0.039)*              (0.011)

    Germany                 0.002                 0.034                 1998     2016       119       668
                           (0.017)             (0.008)***

    India                   0.118                 0.058                 1995     2016       630      2890
                         (0.041)***             (0.024)**

    Italy                   0.004                -0.057                 2005     2016       202       264
                           (0.031)             (0.018)***

    Japan                   0.059                 0.028                 1987     2016       2128     3894
                         (0.008)***            (0.004)***

    Korea                   0.000                -0.032                 1987     2016       419      1682
                           (0.009)             (0.005)***

    Russia                  -0.133                -0.012                2004     2016       127       245
                           (0.097)               (0.089)

    Spain                   0.274                 -0.026                2005     2016       102       128
                          (0.117)**              (0.044)

    Taiwan                  -0.051                -0.021                1997     2016       160      1789
                          (0.026)**              (0.018)

    United Kingdom          0.280                 0.072                 1988     2016       183      1489
                         (0.015)***            (0.007)***

    United States           0.088                 0.021                 1981     2016       3136     8403
                         (0.004)***            (0.002)***


The table summarizes estimates of the linear trend in the Sales/COGS and the Sales/(COGS+SG&A) ratios.
Standard errors are displayed in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent level.




                                                      18
and 1970s generally exceeded the levels reached today and this overall pattern is evident not

only in the business sector but also in the housing sector. Second, one must directly link any

story of economic profits to the real interest rate, as their tight negative comovement reveals the

real interest rate as the mechanical driver of calculated profit shares.

2.2       Case K

We now consider a second approach which attributes factorless business income entirely to a

gap between the measure of capital in the national accounts and the quantity of capital used

in production. The basis for this possibility is the idea that capital stocks are imputed and

potentially suffer significant measurement difficulties. The mismeasurement may reflect faulty

parametric assumptions in the perpetual inventory method used to impute capital stocks but

may also reflect missing investment spending, as detailed in the influential work of Corrado,

Hulten, and Sichel (2009).

       Certain intangible investments are particularly good candidates for missing investment spend-

ing. For example, when a chain restaurant pays advertising firms or their own marketing exec-

utives to increase awareness and positive sentiment for their brand, conventional accounts treat

this spending as intermediate expenses and not as investment, much like the treatment of their

spending on food. When a management consultancy pays staff to develop internal knowledge

centers to organize their industry expertise, this is treated as an input to their existing produc-

tion and not as an investment in the firm’s capital stock. The U.S. BEA explicitly recognized the

importance of various misclassified investment expenditures when they changed their treatment

of software in 1999 and of R&D and artistic originals in 2013 and, accordingly, revised upward

their historical series for investment and capital stocks.29

       Let X U equal the real value and ξ U equal the price of unmeasured investment, which accumu-

lates into an unmeasured capital stock K U with an associated rental rate RU . These magnitudes
  29
   See Koh, Santaeulàlia-Llopis, and Zheng (2016) for a helpful primer on these changes and their impact on the
measured labor share decline.




                                                      19
are related to measured income according to:

               Ỹ = Y + ξ U X U = W L + RI K I + RN K N + RH K H + Π + RU K U ,                 (3)

where Ỹ is unmeasured (or “revised”) output which may differ from measured GDP Y .

   To see how unmeasured investment matters for factorless income and output, consider two

extreme cases. First, consider the case where there is unmeasured capital in the economy accu-

mulated from past investment flows, so RU K U > 0, but current investment spending of this type

equals zero, ξ U X U = 0. In this case, output is correctly measured and Ỹ = Y . Capital income,

however, is underestimated by RU K U . Alternatively, imagine that RU K U = 0 in some year, but

there is unmeasured investment and ξ U X U > 0. This means that output is larger than measured

GDP, but standard measures of RK correctly capture capital income. In cases in between these

extremes both capital income and output will be mismeasured.

   We can rearrange equation (3) so the left hand side equals the gap between unmeasured capital

income and unmeasured investment spending and the right hand side contains only measured

income terms and economic profits:

             RU K U − ξ U X U = Y − W L − RI K I − RN K N − RH K H − ΠQ − ΠH .                  (4)

For any given paths of business sector profits ΠQ and housing sector profits ΠH , there will

generally be many possible paths of RU , K U , ξ U , and X U that satisfy equation (4) for the years

covered in our data. Most such paths, however, may not be economically sensible. To put more

discipline on our exercise, we additionally require that RU is generated like the other rental

rates Rj in equation (2) and that capital and investment are linked through a linear capital
                       U
accumulation equation Kt+1 = (1 − δ U )KtU + XtU .

   We solve for one set of paths {RU , K U , ξ U , X U } as follows. First, we create a grid with

different combinations of business profit share levels sQ                       U
                                                        Π , depreciation rates δ , and values of the

capital stock relative to measured GDP in 2010 (chosen because prices are normalized to one in

2009). For each combination of {sQ    U    U                                                U
                                 Π , δ , (K /Y )2010 }, we consider a number of values for ξ2010 ,

the price of investment in 2010. Each resulting value of ξ U in 2010 can be used to calculate a

                                                20
value for RU in 2010 using equation (2) since ξ2009
                                               U
                                                    = 1. Since the right hand side variables of

equation (4) are then all known for 2010 (we keep ΠH at its values from Case Π), and we have

assumed values for RU K U and ξ U on the left hand side, we can then back out the value for the
                               U
remaining left hand side term X2010 , real investment in unmeasured capital in 2010. Using the

capital accumulation equation, we then calculate K U in 2011 and start the sequence again.

   We iterate forward in this way through 2015 and do the same in reverse to iterate backward

from 2010 to 1960. This results in a series of thousands of possible paths for each node of the

grid {sQ    U    U
       π , δ , (K /Y )2009 }. From all those possibilities, we select the paths such that investment

is non-negative and where the variance and magnitude of the price and stock of unmeasured

capital is minimized. Additional details on our exact algorithm and selection criteria are found

in the Appendix.

   Figure 7 plots the 5-year moving average of key magnitudes describing the unmeasured in-

vestment where sQ             U
                Π = 0.06 and δ = 0.05. Figure 7(a) shows a path for the price of unmeasured

investment in terms of the price of non-housing consumption. After having essentially flat or

slightly declining investment prices from 1960 to 1980, the price grows rapidly at almost 13

percent per year until 2000. Prices are then fairly flat through 2010 and have declined at about

6 percent per year since then.

   This price path may seem unusual, but as shown in Figure 7(a), the rate of price change

is orders of magnitude smaller than that of IT capital. Further, though both IT and non-IT

depreciation rates evolve over time in the data, we reduce our degrees of freedom and assume a

constant value for δ U . Allowing more flexibility in our choice of δ U (or, similarly, allowing sQ
                                                                                                  Π

to fluctuate around a constant level) would likely allow us to find paths of ξ U with a bit less

unusual behavior. Combined with the underlying real interest rate and depreciation rate, this

price path translates into a path for the rental rate of unmeasured capital RU , plotted in Figure

7(b), which comoves negatively with the non-IT rental rate. It has generally risen from near zero

in the 1960s to nearly 15 percent in recent years.

   Figure 7(c) shows investment spending in each type of capital relative to revised output Ỹ . It


                                                21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                              .15
                                                                                                       8
                              1
                              .8




                                                                                                       6




                                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                        Rental Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rental Rate
                              .6
  Index




                                                                                                           Index
                                                                                                       4
                              .4




                                                                                                                                              .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                                                                       2
                              .2
                              0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                    1960             1980                2000                   2020                                                1960               1980                2000                   2020
                                            Non−IT           Unmeasured              IT (right axis)                                                          Non−IT           Unmeasured              IT (right axis)



                                           (a) Business Investment Prices                                                                                       (b) Business rental rates
                              .15




                                                                                                                                              4
  Investment Spending / GDP




                                                                                                                        Capital Value / GDP
                                                                                                                                              3
                              .1




                                                                                                                                              2
                              .05




                                                                                                                                              1
                              0




                                                                                                                                              0




                                    1960              1980                  2000                           2020                                   1960                  1980                  2000                             2020
                                           Non−IT           Unmeasured          IT              Residential                                                  Non−IT           Unmeasured          IT              Residential



                                                (c) Investment Rates                                                                                       (d) Value of Capital Stocks / GDP

                                       Figure 7: Hypothetical Paths Governing Missing Investment and Capital, Case K


shows that investment spending on unmeasured capital need not be particularly large to account

for factorless income. As shown in the figure, there is a surge in early 1980s investment in

unmeasured capital. Recall that factorless income, or what Case Π calls profits, is high prior to

the early 1980s at nearly 25 percent of GDP and then plunges to less than zero before growing

back to levels seen earlier. This investment surge in the early 1980s, combined with the rising

rental rates from the 1990s onward as seen in Figure 7(b), helps match that pattern.

                         Finally, Figure 7(d) plots the value of each capital stock relative to output, ξ j K j /Ỹ . The

figure shows that the value of this missing capital stock is at times quite large. Early in the


                                                                                                                   22
                     .06




                                                                                                             .7
                                                                             Share of Business Value Added
  Growth (in logs)
                     .04




                                                                                                             .68
                                                                                                             .66
                     .02




                                                                                                             .64
                     0




                           1960        1980          2000        2020                                              1960            1980          2000        2020
                                         Measured      Revised                                                                       Measured      Revised



                                  (a) Log Real GDP Growth                                                                 (b) Business Sector Labor Shares

                                              Figure 8: Implications of Mismeasured GDP, Case K


sample, the capital stock is worth roughly three times output and accounts for more than half

of the value of the capital stock. From 1970 onward, however, this capital would only need to

be worth between one-half and twice of output. Over that period, unmeasured capital accounts

for roughly 30 percent of the value of all capital in the economy and roughly 40 percent of all

business capital.30

                Under Case K, the deviation of revised output from measured GDP equals unmeasured

investment spending, which Figure 7(c) shows to be quite low. Figure 8(a) compares moving

averages of log changes in the two (real) output series, which are visually quite similar except

for the key periods in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The 25th to 75th percentile range in

the distribution of deviations of the two growth rates is -0.5 percentage point to 0.6 percentage

point, with a median deviation equal to zero. There are some years, most notably 1982, in

which the gap is large. Such gaps often represent shifts in the timing of growth periods, and

indeed, measured growth during the subsequent two years exceeds revised growth by a total of
   30
      We note that the selection procedure in our algorithm plays a role in this. We focus on paths where nominal
investment spending is small so GDP mismeasurement, discussed below, is also small. A consequence of this,
however, is that there is little scope for the unmeasured capital stock to quickly grow prior to periods in which there
is large or increasing factorless income. The initial stock of unmeasured capital therefore, according to this particular
procedure, must be large. With less emphasis on minimizing the scale of unmeasured investment spending, we would
likely be able to moderate the scale of initial unmeasured capital.




                                                                        23
8.4 percent, undoing some of the 1982 gap.

   An implication of Case K is that the path of the revised labor share differs from that of

the measured labor share. Figure 8(b) compares moving averages of these series. Though they

largely move together, the revised labor share declines significantly in the early 1980s due to the

surge in output from investment in unmeasured capital at that time. As a result, the revised

labor share in the business sector does not end at a historic low as does the measured business

labor share. Both series however, exhibit almost parallel trends starting from the mid 1980s.

   The magnitude of our estimates of unmeasured investment and capital for the post-1980

period is only moderately larger than other estimates in the literature. Hall (2001) examines

the relationship between the stock market and intangibles he referred to as “e-capital” from

technical resources and organizational know-how. He argues that e-capital accumulation from

the 1990s resulted in an e-capital stock roughly 50 percent as large as measured GDP by 2000.

McGrattan and Prescott (2005) attribute the gap between income and the sum of observed

compensation to labor and imputed income to measured capital (what we call factorless income)

to payments to intangibles. Their methodology restricts to balanced growth paths and implies a

stock of missing capital equal to roughly two-thirds of output. Atkeson and Kehoe (2005) apply

the same methodology for the U.S. manufacturing sector and also arrive at the same estimate.

Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) construct organizational capital from SG&A expenses and the

perpetual inventory method. They find that the value of organizational capital typically exceeds

that of physical capital.

   Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) base their approach on more direct measurements. They

show that, by 2000, investments in brand values and firm-specific resources account for up to 6

percent of measured output. But they assume these intangible capital stocks depreciate rapidly

and set their values equal to zero in the decades preceding our data. Their implied estimates

for the scale of these capital stocks are far smaller, therefore, than what we show in Figure 7(d).

Barkai (2016) benchmarks in part to their work and argues that the size of missing capital would

have to be implausibly large in order to account for factorless income. His calculations further


                                                24
assume that missing investment exceeds depreciation. By contrast, our estimated capital stock

does not surge after 1980 in part because we allow the rate of investment to fall below the rate

of depreciation.

2.3    Case R

We now consider a third approach which attributes factorless income entirely to the rental rate

of capital faced by firms. For this analysis, we focus only on the business sector and ignore

housing. Denoting by R̃j the revised rental rates (which may differ from the Rj used to calculate

factorless income), we write:


                                P Q Q = W N + R̃I K I + R̃N K N + ΠQ ,                           (5)


where unlike Case Π the level of business profits ΠQ is simply taken as given (i.e. chosen based

on external information) and unlike Case K there is no missing capital. There are multiple ways

to calculate R̃j such that equation (5) holds given values for P Q Q, W N , K j , and ΠQ . To add

more discipline to the exercise, we solve for the unique revised real interest rate r̃ such that

the revised rental rates R̃j calculated according to equation (2) satisfy equation (5). The gap

between r̃ and our measure r taken from Treasury yields and used in the other cases can be

thought of as standing in for a time-varying risk premium or the impact of particular forms of

adjustment costs or financial frictions. In our calculations, we set ΠQ to generate a constant

sQ
 Π = 0.06, the value also used in Case K.

   Figure 9 compares 5-year moving averages of the resulting revised interest and rental rates

(labeled “Revised” and plotted in dashed red lines) with those calculated using the 10-year Trea-

sury yields (labeled “Measured” and plotted in solid black lines). Figure 9(a) offers the intuitive

result that r̃ is generally higher than r because it absorbs factorless income. Additionally, r̃ does

not decline in parallel with r after 1990s because higher levels of r̃ account for the increasing

factorless income as a share of value added.

   Given the lack of decline in r̃, the revised rental rates R̃j become flatter relative to the

measured rental rates Rj calculated with r. The change in the real interest rate underlying

                                                 25
                                                                                          2
                .1




                                                                                          1.5
                                                                            Rental Rate
  Percent




                                                                                          1
                .05




                                                                                          .5
                0




                                                                                          0
                      1960           1980           2000        2020                            1960        1980          2000          2020
                                       Measured       Revised                                                 Measured        Revised



                                 (a) Real Interest Rate                                                  (b) IT Rental Rate
                .15




                                                                                          .15
                .1




                                                                                          .1
  Rental Rate




                                                                            Rental Rate
                .05




                                                                                          .05
                0




                                                                                          0




                      1960           1980           2000        2020                            1960        1980          2000          2020
                                       Measured       Revised                                                 Measured        Revised



                                (c) Non-IT Rental Rate                                                 (d) Housing Rental Rate

                             Figure 9: Measured and Revised Real Interest Rate and Rental Rates, Case R


the construction of the rental rates does not impact IT, non-IT, and housing capital income

in the same way because these assets have different depreciation rates and investment price

changes. The higher depreciation rate on IT capital means that the real interest rate is a less

important driver of its rental rate compared with that of non-IT capital. The rental rate of

IT capital declines rapidly due to the decline in the price of IT investment goods ξ I , often

attributed to productivity improvements in the development of communication, computers, and

semiconductor technologies. Non-IT and housing rental rates, plotted in Figures 9(c) and 9(d),

are more sensitive to the measure of the real interest rate. Relative to Case Π, these revised


                                                                       26
rental rates are all flatter after the 1980s.

       Is there other evidence that risk premia or factors other than profits have caused an increasing

wedge between Treasury rates and the opportunity cost of capital perceived by firms when making

their investment decisions?31 Our Case R results relate closely to the conclusion in Caballero,

Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017) that rising risk premia have generated a growing wedge between

Treasury rates and corporate borrowing costs in recent decades. Their calibration exercises

suggest that absent these rising risk premia since 1980, changes in the Treasury rates would

have produced implausible factor share movements given the standard range of elasticities they

consider. In a sample of 16 economies, the estimates of Jorda, Knoll, Kuvshinov, Schularick, and

Taylor (2017) suggest that the gap between the return on risky equity and housing and the return

on safe assets has slightly increased between the 1990s and the 2010s. We acknowledge that the

evidence for rising risk premia is mixed. Earlier research by Jagannathan, McGrattan, and

Scherbina (2000) and Fama and French (2002) documents a decline in the U.S. equity premium

between 1980 and 2000. More recent work by Duarte and Rosa (2015), however, demonstrates

that the first principle component of 20 model-based estimates of the equity risk premium has

increased dramatically since the 2000s and reached again the historically high levels observed

during the late 1970s.

2.4       Implications for Total Factor Productivity

What are the implications of each of our three cases for productivity? Macroeconomists calculate

Solow Residuals to try to infer the rate of growth of technology or TFP. Appealing to the

assumption of perfect competition, the convention is to weight the growth of labor and capital

input by the labor share and one minus the labor share. For the business sector, we write the

growth of the standard or “Naive” measure of TFP as:
                                                                   X sQ
                 d ln TFPNaive = d ln Q −   sQ
                                             L
                                                                 Q
                                                 × d ln L − 1 − sL           Kj
                                                                              Q
                                                                                × d ln K j ,                (6)
                                                                            s
                                                                    j∈{I,N } K

  31
    Following Barkai (2016), we have also calculated real interest rates using Moody’s AAA borrowing rates. This
change did not meaningfully alter any of our conclusions, but in that case the wedge calculated in Case R should
be interpreted as a risk premium over those AAA bond rates.


                                                       27
                                                      .04
                       Growth (in logs, annualized)
                                                      .03
                                                      .02
                                                      .01
                                                      0




                                                            1960−1965 1966−1975 1976−1985 1986−1995 1996−2005 2006−2015

                                                                  TFP (Naive)       Case Π         Case K        Case R



          Figure 10: Naive TFP and Modified Solow Residuals in U.S. Business Sector


where we also follow the convention in creating an index of business capital growth as a capital-j

share weighted average of growth in IT and Non-IT capital stocks.

   As discussed in Hall (1990), Basu and Fernald (2002), and Fernald and Neiman (2011), when

measured factor shares do not equal the true factor shares in costs, due to imperfect competition

or measurement error, this standard Solow Residual will fail to approximate technology. Rather,

one must use revised factor shares of cost in what is called a “Modified” Solow residual:

                                                                           sQ                       X          sQ
                                                                                                                Kj
          d ln TFPModified = d ln Q −                                       L
                                                                                  × d ln L −                              × d ln K j .   (7)
                                                                        1 − sQ
                                                                             Π                   j∈{I,N,U }
                                                                                                            1 − sQ
                                                                                                                 Π


   All three of our interpretations of factorless income imply that modified TFP in equation (7)

will differ from the naive TFP measure in equation (6). In Case Π, the primary difference arises

as the large and fluctuating profit share sQ
                                           Π drives a wedge between labor’s share of costs and

labor’s share of revenues. Case K and Case R also have non-zero profit shares, though they are

typically smaller and are constant. Further, under Case K, modified TFP will differ from the

naive measure because of unmeasured value added and unmeasured capital. Finally, under Case

R, modified TFP will differ from the naive measure because the revised rental rates for IT and

Non-IT capital changes their relative shares in costs.


                                                                                     28
       The solid black bars in Figure 10 report the average growth rates of the naive TFP measure

in equation (6) for 1960-1965 and subsequent 10-year periods to 2015.32 The evolution of these

bars is consistent with the conventional U.S. productivity growth narrative, with high rates in

the 60s slowing down in the early 70s, and a short-lived burst during the mid-1990s collapsing in

the mid-2000s. The hollow red bars report the modified TFP measure in equation (7) under the

Case Π interpretation of factorless income. Capital input has generally grown faster than labor

input, so the large markups in this case imply that the naive measure understates technology

growth. The extent of this difference varies over time. Case Π suggests that in the most recent

10-year period, the naive measure implies growth rates 20 percent lower than what would be

inferred from the modified Solow Residual. It also suggests that during the 1966-1975 period –

a period often considered the start of the “Great Productivity Slowdown” – the modified TFP

measure of technology growth was almost twice the rate implied by the naive measure.

       For Case K, the blue bars in Figure 10 show that, in all periods aside from 1986-1995, the

growth of the naive measure of TFP is significantly lower than the growth implied by the modified

measures. The basic logic for this difference is that GDP growth is not meaningfully impacted

by unmeasured investments but the stock of capital is. Given the unmeasured capital stock is

generally falling according to Case K, the capital input growth used in equation (6) is too high.

       For Case R, the green bars show the smallest gap between the naive and the modified measures

of TFP. Attributing a growing fraction of income to rental payments, as Case R does, tends to

decrease the growth of modified TFP relative to that of naive TFP. The small but non-zero

profit share used in that case tends to increase the growth of modified TFP relative to naive

TFP. These forces tend to offset each other, causing the naive measure of TFP to be closest to

the modified measure of TFP in Case R.
  32
    In performing the calculations, factor shares are calculated as the average values across adjacent periods corre-
sponding to a Törnqvist index once chained together.




                                                         29
2.5     Taking Stock

To summarize our results, we have developed three strategies to allocate factorless income in an

environment which, aside from a standard model-based formula for the rental rate of capital,

relies on accounting identities to ensure an internally consistent allocation of the residual income.

Case Π requires a tight link between real interest rates and markups. While it implies rising

profits from the early 1980s, it suggests that current profit levels remain below their levels in

the 1960s and 1970s. Our implementation of Case K leads to plausible results after the 1980s,

but requires that unmeasured capital in the 1960s comprises more than half of total capital.

Using a different selection criterion might allow for a smaller unmeasured capital stock in 1960

but at a cost or requiring more unmeasured flows later in the sample. Case R seems most

promising as it stabilizes relative capital shares and preserves the traditional narrative of TFP’s

evolution. We recognize, however, that more evidence of rising risk premia or other wedges in

firm’s opportunity cost of capital is required before one more fully embraces this case. We next

introduce a variant of the growth model with capital accumulation to make more progress at

assessing the plausibility of these three interpretations of factorless income and to evaluate their

implications for a richer set of macroeconomic outcomes.


3      A Multi-Sector Model with Multiple Capital Types

We consider an economy with multiple sectors and multiple types of capital.33 The business

sector uses labor, IT capital, non-IT capital, and intangible or organizational capital – which is

not measured in the fixed asset tables – to produce consumption and investment goods. The

housing sector uses residential capital to produce housing services. The horizon is infinite and

there is no aggregate uncertainty. The economy is populated by workers and capitalists who

have perfect foresight about the evolution of all exogenous driving processes. The economy is
  33
    Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997) consider the macroeconomic effects of investment-specific technical
change in a model that differentiates between equipment and structures. Related recent work with heterogeneous
capital stocks includes Eden and Gaggl (2018) who consider a model with two types of capital and Rognlie (2015)
who considers multiple types of productive capital and housing.




                                                      30
small in the sense that it treats the path of the real interest rate as exogenous.34

3.1     Demographics and Growth

In each period t there is a measure Lt of identical workers. Labor-augmenting technology ÃL
                                                                                           t

grows at an exogenous rate gt , ÃL            L
                                  t = (1+gt )Ãt−1 . In the balanced growth path of the economy the

measure of workers and the growth rate of labor-augmenting technology are constant, Lt = L and

gt = g. In what follows, we describe the model directly in terms of variables that are detrended

by their respective growth rates in the balanced growth path. Thus, if x̃t is a variable growing

at a rate gx = {0, g} along the balanced growth path, the detrended variable xt is defined as

xt = x̃t /(1 + gx )t .

3.2     Final Goods

The economy produces six final goods. The (non-housing) consumption good is denoted by C

and serves as the numeraire good. The consumption of housing services is denoted by H. There

are four types of investment goods. We denote the jth investment good by X j and, as before,

denote the capital stocks by K j for j = {I, N, U, H}, where I denotes IT capital, N denotes non-

IT capital, U denotes unmeasured types of capital such as organizational and intangible capital,

and H denotes residential capital. The first three types of capital are used in the production

of consumption C and investments X j . Residential capital is used in the production of housing

services H.

Consumption Ct . Producers of final consumption are perfectly competitive. They operate a
                            R         Q      Q
                                                   εQt /(εQt −1)
                               1
CES production function Ct = 0 ct (z)(εt −1)/εt dz                , where ct (z) denotes the quantity

of intermediate business variety z and εQ
                                        t > 1 denotes the elasticity of substitution between

business varieties. Denoting the price of consumption by PtC and the price of intermediate

business variety by pQt (z), the profit maximization problem yields the demand functions for
                               −εQt
varieties ct (z) = pQ
                    t  (z)/P t
                              C
                                      Ct . Normalizing PtC = 1 and anticipating the symmetric
  34
    We adopt the small open economy assumption with an exogenous real interest rate because it simplifies sub-
stantially our inference of the exogenous processes.


                                                     31
equilibrium across all varieties z, we obtain ct (z) = Ct .

Investments Xtj . Producers of investment good j = {I, N, U, H} are similar to the producers

of consumption, with the difference being that they operate a CES production function Xtj =
            (εQt −1)/εQt    εQt /(εQt −1)
       1 j
 1
                                              , where ξtj denotes the efficiency of producing investment
    R
ξj
 t
      0 xt (z)              dz

good j. The price of investment good j relative to consumption is given by Ptj = ξtj . An

improvement in the efficiency of producing investment (a lowering of ξtj ) is associated with a

fall in the relative price of investment good j. Anticipating the symmetric equilibrium across all

varieties z, we obtain xjt (z) = ξtj Xtj .

Housing services Ht . Producers of housing services operate a CES production function
    R                     εHt /(εHt −1)
       1 j   (εH −1)/εH
Ht = 0 Ht (ζ)  t      t dζ                , where Ht (ζ) denotes the quantity of intermediate housing

variety ζ and εH
               t > 1 denotes the elasticity of substitution between housing varieties. Differ-

ences in the elasticities of substitution across varieties in the business and the housing sector

generate differences in markups across sectors. Denoting the price of housing services by PtH

and the price of intermediate housing varieties by pH
                                                    t (ζ), the profit maximization problem yields
                                                             H
                                                         H −εt
the demand functions for varieties Ht (ζ) = pH   t (ζ)/Pt       Ht . Anticipating the symmetric

equilibrium across all varieties ζ, we obtain Ht (ζ) = Ht and pH         H
                                                               t (ζ) = Pt .


Market clearing. The final consumption good Ct is consumed by workers CtL , by capitalists

CtK , and by the rest of the world in the form of net exports NXt . Each investment good Xtj is

used to augment the respective capital stock Ktj . The market clearing condition in the business

sector is given by Qt = CtL + CtK + NXt + j ξtj Xtj , where Qt denotes business output in units of
                                         P

consumption. Housing services are consumed by workers and capitalists, Ht = HtL + HtK . Total

output in units of consumption equals the sum of business and housing output, Yt = Qt + PtH Ht .

3.3     Intermediate Good Producers

There are two types of intermediate good producers. The business sector produces varieties for

consumption Ct and investments Xtj . The housing sector produces varieties for final housing


                                                  32
services Ht . The two sectors differ both in their production and in their demand functions.

Business Sector. There is a measure one of differentiated intermediate goods z. Business

variety z produces output using a CES function of an aggregator of the three capital goods,

ktQ (ktI (z), ktN (z), ktU (z)), and labor `t (z):
                                                                                     σ
                                                  σ−1                      σ−1
                                                                                   σ−1
                                               Q      σ
                           qt (z) = α AK                 + (1 − α) AL
                                                                            
                                          t kt (z)                  t `t (z)            ,             (8)
                                                                               σ




where σ denotes the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital, α is a distribution factor,

AK                                             L
 t denotes capital-augmenting technology, and At denotes labor-augmenting technology. The

bundle of capital inputs ktQ (z) is rented at a rate RtQ and labor `(z) is rented at a price Wt .

   The producer of variety z sells qt (z) = ct (z)+ j ξtj xjt (z) to final consumption and investment
                                                   P

goods producers, internalizing the downward sloping demand function for qt (z). The profit-

maximization problem is:

                                max                 πtQ (z) = pQ              Q Q
                                                               t (z)qt (z) − Rt kt (z) − Wt `t (z),   (9)
                      pQ                    Q
                       t (z),qt (z),`t (z),kt (z)

                                −εQt
subject to qt (z) =       pQ
                           t (z)         Qt and the production function in equation (8). In the symmetric

equilibrium of the model, all varieties have the same production function and make identical

choices of inputs and prices. Therefore, for all z we obtain pQ
                                                              t (z) = 1, qt (z) = Qt , `t (z) = Lt ,

ktQ (z) = KtQ , and πtQ (z) = ΠQ
                               t . Henceforth, we describe the model in terms of the aggregate

variables denoted by capital letters.

  The first-order conditions with respect to labor and capital are given by:
                                                 1
                                           σ−1 Qt σ
                              (1 − α) At L σ
                                                         = µQ
                                                            t Wt ,                       (10)
                                                  Lt
                                                  !1
                                                     σ
                                        σ−1    Qt
                                     K σ
                                                       = µQ  Q
                                      
                                α At            Q         t Rt ,                         (11)
                                              Kt
                      
       Q     Q    Q
where µt = εt / εt − 1 is the gross markup of price over marginal cost in the business sector.

Variations in the elasticity of substitution εQ                                             Q
                                              t over time result in (exogenous) changes in µt . Total

business income is divided between labor payments, capital payments, and economic profits,

Qt = Wt Lt + RtQ KtQ + ΠQ
                        t .


                                                                33
Business Capital Aggregator. There is a perfectly competitive intermediary firm that trans-

forms capital types KtI , KtN , and KtU into aggregate business capital KtQ with the CES production

function:                                                 θ
                                           X   1   θ−1 θ−1
                                   KtQ =     νtj   Ktj
                                                  θ     θ
                                                              ,                                         (12)
                                                j6=H

where θ denotes the elasticity of substitution between types of capital and νtj denotes j-specific

capital-augmenting technology.

   The intermediary firm rents the capital types from the capitalists at prices RtI , RtN , and RtU

respectively and rents the capital aggregator to the business sector at a rate RtQ . From the cost

minimization problem we derive the first-order conditions for each type of capital:
                                                   !−θ
                                                 j
                                               R
                                  Ktj = νtj     Q
                                                 t
                                                       KtQ ,                                             (13)
                                              Rt
where the rental rate of business capital is given by:
                                                        1
                                           X       1−θ 1−θ
                                 RtQ =        νtj Rtj      .                                           (14)
                                                  j6=H


Zero profits in the sector that intermediates capital implies RtQ KtQ =                      Rtj Ktj .
                                                                                 P
                                                                                      j6=H


Housing Sector. There is a measure one of differentiated intermediate goods ζ. Housing variety

ζ uses only residential capital ktH (ζ) in the production process:

                                                ht (ζ) = AH  H
                                                          t kt (ζ),                                      (15)

where AH
       t is the technology in the housing sector. Residential capital is rented from the capitalists

at a rental rate RtH .

   The producer of variety ζ sells ht (ζ) to final housing services producers, internalizing the

downward sloping demand function for ht (ζ). The profit-maximization problem is:

                               max              πtH (ζ) = pH              H H
                                                           t (ζ)ht (ζ) − Rt kt (ζ),                      (16)
                         pH             H
                          t (ζ),ht (ζ),kt (ζ)

                            −εtH          H
subject to ht (ζ) = (pH
                      t (ζ))    (PtH )εt Ht and the production function in equation (15). In the

symmetric equilibrium of the model, all varieties have the same production function and make

                                                         34
identical choices of inputs and prices. Therefore, for all ζ we obtain pH         H
                                                                        t (ζ) = Pt , ht (ζ) = Ht ,

ktH (ζ) = KtH and πtH (ζ) = ΠH
                             t .

   From the first-order condition for profit maximization, we obtain the price of housing services

relative to consumption:
                                                      RtH
                                           PtH = µH
                                                  t       ,                                  (17)
                                                      AH
                                                       t
                        
where µH
       t = ε H
             t / ε H
                   t − 1  is the gross markup of price over marginal cost in the housing sector.

Total income generated in the housing sector is divided between capital payments and economic

profits, PtH Ht = RtH KtH + ΠH
                             t .


3.4    Households

The household sector consists of workers who simply consume their labor income and capitalists

who choose how much of their capital income to consume, save, and invest.

Workers. There is a measure Lt of identical workers who provide labor inelastically and value

non-residential consumption CtL and housing services HtL according to a Cobb-Douglas utility

function:
                                                1−νtH         νtH
                                     max CtL             HtL          ,                      (18)
                                    CtL ,HtL

where νtH denotes the time-varying preference for housing services. Workers do not have access to

capital markets and consume their after-tax-and-transfers labor income. Their budget constraint

is given by:

                               (1 + τtc ) CtL + PtH HtL = Wt Lt + TtL ,                      (19)

where τtc denotes the tax rate on consumption expenditures and TtL denotes transfers from the

government.

   Workers maximize their utility function (18) subject to the budget constraint (19). Their

optimal choice of housing to consumption is given by:

                                      HtL     νtH 1 + τtc
                                          =               .                                  (20)
                                      CtL   1 − νtH PtH



                                                 35
The government rebates back to workers TtL = τtc CtL and, therefore, in equilibrium the total

expenditure of workers equals their labor income, CtL + PtH HtL = Wt Lt .35

Capitalists. There is a measure one of identical capitalists who own claims to all firms in the

economy and the business and housing capital stocks. They value streams of utility according

to:
                             ∞ t
                                                                !            !
                             X Y                            1        1                   1−νtH      ν H   1− ρ1     
               max                             βk (1 + g)   ρ
                                                                         1            CtK          HtK t              −1 ,   (21)
                    j
        CtK ,HtK ,{Kt+1 },Dt+1 t=0
                                         k=0
                                                                    1−   ρ

where ρ denotes the elasticity of intertemporal substitution and βt denotes the time-varying

transformed discount factor. Capitalists trade an international bond Dt at an exogenous interest

rate rt . Their budget constraint is given by:
                                                                    X
                   (1 + τtc ) CtK + PtH HtK + (1 + τtx )                 ξtj Xtj + (1 + 1 − τtk rt )Dt
                                                                                               
                                                                     j
                                                  
                               X j j                                     X j j j
                     1 − τtk   Rt K t + Π Q     H                    k
                                                                          δt ξt Kt + TtK .
                            
              =                            t + Π t   + (1 + g)Dt+1 + τt                                                      (22)
                                     j                                                              j

In the budget constraint, τtx denotes the tax rate on investment spending and τtk denotes the tax

rate on capital income (net of depreciation). The government rebates to capitalists a lump-sum
                                             P                            P j j j
equal to TtK = τtc CtK + τtx j ξtj Xtj + τtk      j j     Q     H
                            P
                                                R  K
                                               j t t  + Π t + Π t − r D
                                                                     t t −  j δt ξt Kt . Finally,

the stocks of capital evolve according to the law of motion:

                                                       j
                                               (1 + g)Kt+1 = (1 − δtj )Ktj + Xtj ,                                           (23)

where δtj is the time-varying depreciation rate of the type-j capital stock.

       Capitalists maximize their value function (21) subject to the budget constraint (22) and the

law of motions for capital (23). Capitalists’ optimal choice of housing to non-durable consumption

is:
                                                     HtK     νtH 1 + τtc
                                                         =               .                                                   (24)
                                                     CtK   1 − νtH pH
                                                                    t
  35
     We abstract from labor income taxes because labor is provided inelastically and, to simplify the computation of
the model, we rebate to each household the corresponding tax revenues. We model consumption taxes τtc because
their time-variation affects our inference of the time series of the discount factor βt and the relative preference for
housing νtH . Similarly, we model capital τtk and investment τtx taxes because they affect the rental rate of capital
Rtj and our inferences of the exogenous processes driving the model.

                                                                    36
The first-order conditions with respect to bonds Dt+1 yields a standard Euler equation:

                                                       1 + τtc
                                                                
                               0
                                   CtK                                        k
                                                                                    rt+1 U 0 Ct+1
                                                                                              K
                                                                                               
                           U                 =β            c         1 + 1 − τt+1                   .                 (25)
                                                      1 + τt+1
                                                               j
The first-order conditions with respect to the capital stocks Kt+1 yield:

             j           j    j               j         j
        k            k                    x
                                                              ) = (1 + τtx ) ξtj 1 + 1 − τt+1
                                                                                          k
                                                                                                   
   1 − τt+1  Rt+1 + τt+1 δt+1 ξt+1 + 1 + τt+1  ξt+1 (1 − δt+1                                   rt+1 .

                                                                                                                      (26)

The left-hand side of equation (26) denotes the marginal benefit of purchasing capital in period

t. This consists of the after-tax rental rate earned in period t + 1 plus the resale value of

undepreciated capital in period t + 1. The right-hand side of equation (26) is the marginal cost

of purchasing capital in period t. This equals the foregone gross return capital owners would

have earned had they invested resources (1 + τtx ) ξtj in the international bond with net return
              k
                  
equal to 1 − τt+1   rt+1 . Lagging by a period and rearranging this equation yields the formula

we used in equation (2) to construct the capital shares.

3.5        Driving Processes

We describe the exogenous processes in two groups. The first, grouped into the vector xO
                                                                                       t ,

includes exogenous processes that we take directly from the data without solving for the equi-

librium of the model. These include the real interest rate {rt }, tax rates {τtc , τtx , τtk }, labor

supply {Lt }, depreciation rates {δtI , δtN , δtU , δtH }, relative prices of investment {ξtI , ξtN , ξtU , ξtH },

markups in the business sector {µQ                                        H 36
                                 t }, and markups in the housing sector {µt }. The second,

grouped into the vector xIt , includes exogenous processes that we infer so that model-generated

variables match their counterparts in the data perfectly as we describe below. These include the

discount factor {βt }, labor-augmenting technology {AL                                      K
                                                     t }, capital-augmenting technologies {At }

and {νtI , νtN , νtU }, housing preferences {νtH }, and housing technology {AH
                                                                             t }.
  36
       The sequences of rt , δtU , ξtU , µQ        H
                                          t , and µt will in general differ across the three cases described above.




                                                                     37
3.6       Equilibrium

Households and firms have perfect foresight about the exogenous processes driving the economy.

Given these exogenous processes, an equilibrium for this economy is defined as a sequence of

prices:

                                       {Wt , RtQ , RtI , RtN , RtU , RtH , PtH },                             (27)

and a sequence of quantities:

             {HtL , HtK , Ht , CtL , CtK , Qt , KtQ , KtI , KtN , KtU , KtH , XtI , XtN , XtU , XtH , Dt },   (28)

such that the following conditions hold:

                                                                      j j
  1. The business market clears, Qt = CtL + CtK +
                                                                P
                                                                   j ξt Xt   + (1 + rt )Dt − (1 + g)Dt+1 , and the

      housing market clears, Ht = HtL + HtK .

  2. Firms produce intermediate business varieties with the production function (8), their labor

      choice satisfies the first-order condition (10), and their capital choice satisfies the first-order

      condition (11).

  3. The allocation of business capital satisfies the three first-order conditions (13) and the

      aggregate rental rate is given by equation (14).

  4. Firms produce intermediate housing services with the production function (15) and their

      capital choice satisfies the first-order condition (17).

  5. Workers’ optimal choices satisfy their budget constraint (19) and their first-order condition

      for housing relative to consumption (20).

  6. Capitalists’ optimal choices satisfy their budget constraint (22), the four capital accumu-

      lation equations (23), their first-order condition for housing relative to consumption (24),

      their Euler equation (25), and the four equations for the rental rates (26).

The 23 endogenous variables of the model are pinned down from these 24 equations (one equation

is redundant by Walras Law).

                                                          38
       Recalling that we have transformed the model in terms of stationary variables, we define

a steady state of the transformed model economy as an equilibrium in which all exogenous

processes are constant and, as a result, all endogenous variables are constant.37 In the balanced

growth path, prices {RtQ , RtI , RtN , RtU , RtH , PtH } are constant and the wage and all quantities in

equation (28) grow at a constant exogenous growth rate g.


4        Quantitative Results

In this section we present quantitative results from the model for each of Case Π, Case K, and

Case R. We begin by describing how we infer the exogenous stochastic processes and by reporting

their values. We then present counterfactual experiments in which we shut down some of the

exogenous processes to assess their effects on macroeconomic outcomes. Differences across cases

reflect both differences in the inferred exogenous processes and differences in the responsiveness

of the economy to the dynamics induced by the exogenous processes.

4.1       Inference

We assume that the economy reaches a balanced growth path in 2017, the year after our sample

ends.38 We drop time subscripts to denote variables in the balanced growth path and assume

that r = 0.04. We fix all other exogenous processes and endogenous variables in the balanced

growth path at their 2016 values. The only exceptions are the capital stocks. Consistency with

the capital accumulation equations and the observed investment flows in 2016 requires setting

their balanced growth values to K j = X j /(g + δ j ).

       We assume logarithmic preferences, ρ = 1, and set the growth rate in the balanced growth

path to its sample average of g = 0.033.39 We consider two values for the elasticity of substitution

between capital and labor in the production function (8), σ = {1.25, 0.75}, the first of which
  37
                                                                                                                  
     We assume that in the steady state the small open economy faces a real interest rate rt = r̄t + ψ Dt − D̄ ,
where r̄t is an exogenous interest rate,D̄ is aparameter,
                                                        and ψ is a small but positive parameter that allows to pin
                                            1      1                   r−r̄
down a unique steady state with r = 1−τ k          β − 1 and D = D̄ + ψ . We assume that rt is exogenous during
the transition, with the understanding that rt approximates arbitrarily well r̄t under a sufficiently small ψ.
  38
     Owing to the small open economy setup, the economy jumps to the balanced growth path once all exogenous
variables settle down to a constant value.
  39
     As noted before, the growth rates of output are very similar between Case K and the other cases.

                                                        39
                                                                                                      .175
                          -2




                                                                                                                                                                                  1.02
 Log Housing Technology




                                                                                                      .17
                                                                                 Housing Preference




                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                          -2.1




                                                                                                                                                                Discount Factor
                                                                                                                                                                                  .98
                                                                                                      .165




                                                                                                                                                                                  .96
                          -2.2




                                                                                                      .16




                                                                                                                                                                                  .94
                          -2.3




                                                                                                                                                                                  .92
                                                                                                      .155
                                 1960   1970    1980   1990     2000      2010                               1960   1970    1980     1990     2000      2010                             1960     1970    1980   1990     2000      2010

                                           Case Π      Case K          Case R                                          Case Π        Case K          Case R                                          Case Π      Case K          Case R


                                 (a) Housing Technology AH
                                                         t                                                    (b) Housing Preference νtH                                                        (c) Discount Factor βt

                                               Figure 11: Housing Technology, Housing Preference, and Discount Factor


is close to estimates in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) and the second of which is close

to the estimates in Oberfield and Raval (2014) and the values discussed in Chirinko (2008).

We normalize the level of labor-augmenting technology in balanced growth to equal the wage,

AL = W , and choose the distribution factor α in the production function (8) so that the model

generates a labor share that equals its data analog in the balanced growth path. We begin our

analyses assuming a unitary elasticity θ = 1 across capital types in the production function (12)

and present sensitivity analyses for different values of θ in the Appendix.

                          Given parameter values and observed exogenous processes xO
                                                                                   t taken directly from the data, we

infer the values of the exogenous processes xIt such that the model-generated values of endogenous

variables match their analogs in the data. We note that our procedure guarantees that the model

perfectly replicates the time series on prices in equation (27) and quantities in equation (28).

                          In Figure 11 we plot time series of inferred exogenous processes for each of the three cases.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ht
Inverting the production function for housing services in equation (15), we calculate AH
                                                                                       t =                                                                                                                                                KtH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .

In Figure 11(a), we see that AH
                              t is growing until the 1990s and then remains relatively stable.

We calculate the parameter that determines the preference for housing by solving the first-order
                                                                                                                                                         PtH Ht
conditions in equations (20) and (24) for the share νtH =                                                                                            Pt Ht +(1+τtc )Ct
                                                                                                                                                      H                                         . Figure 11(b) shows that

this share has remained relatively constant at roughly 0.17 over time.

                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                    1
                           .5




                                                                                        Non-IT Capital Technology
   IT Capital Technology
                           .4




                                                                                                                    .8
                           .3




                                                                                                                    .6
                           .2




                                                                                                                    .4
                           .1




                                                                                                                    .2
                           0




                                1960    1970    1980    1990     2000      2010                                          1960       1970    1980   1990     2000      2010

                                           Case Π       Case K          Case R                                                         Case Π      Case K          Case R


                                       (a) IT Capital Technology νtI                                                            (b) Non-IT Capital Technology νtN

                                                          Figure 12: Capital-Specific Technologies


         We infer the path of the discount factor βt in Figure 11(c) by inverting the Euler equation

for the capitalists (25) and substituting in the values of rt , τtc , PtH , νtH , and CtK . We calculate

the analog of CtK in the data as the difference between non-housing aggregate consumption Ct
                                                                           (1−νtH )Wt Lt
and the consumption of workers CtL =                                         1+νtH τtc
                                                                                         .                          Given the path of consumption growth for

capitalists, we generally obtain a lower value of βt under Case R because the rt under this case is

generally higher. At annual frequencies, the inferred discount factors generally comove positively

across the three cases.

         Next, we use the first-order conditions for capital types in equation (13) to infer the capital-

specific technologies νtj for j = {I, N, U }. In Figure 12 we find that νtI has grown over time

relative to νtN in all three cases. This trend reflects the increasing share of IT relative to non-

IT capital income over time. To understand the differences across the three cases, recall that

Case R uses a revised real interest rate that is generally higher than the real interest rate in

Case Π and Case K. As equation (26) for the rental rate shows, the capital income accruing

to IT is less sensitive to rt than the capital income accruing to non-IT because the former has

a higher depreciation rate. Therefore, a higher rt increases the share of non-IT capital relative

to IT capital and the dashed blue line corresponding to Case R lies below the solid black line

corresponding to Case Π in Figure 12(a) and the opposite in Figure 12(b). In Case K, part of

                                                                                   41
                                                                                                                                     .8
   Log Labor-Augmenting Technology




                                                                                                   Log Labor-Augmenting Technology
                                     1




                                                                                                                                     .6
                                     .5




                                                                                                                                     .4
                                     0




                                                                                                                                     .2
                                     -.5




                                                                                                                                     0
                                           1960   1970     1980    1990     2000       2010                                               1960   1970     1980    1990     2000       2010

                                                     Case Π        Case K          Case R                                                           Case Π        Case K          Case R


                                             (a) Elasticity of substitution σ = 1.25                                                        (b) Elasticity of substitution σ = 0.75

                                                                  Figure 13: Labor-Augmenting Technology ALt


capital income is attributed to the unmeasured factor KtU . As a result, the share of capital income

accruing to both IT and non-IT is smaller and both dashed red lines shift down proportionally

by the same factor relative to Case Π.

             Figure 13 presents the inferred time series of (log) labor-augmenting technology AL
                                                                                               t as a

function of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor σ. To understand how our

results depend on which of the three interpretations of factorless income is used, together with

the value of σ, we solve the first-order condition (10) for labor-augmenting technology:

                                                                                   σ
                                                                                        1   σ
                                                                                       sQ       µQ
                                                                                            σ−1    σ−1
                                                                     AL
                                                                      t = (1 − α) 1−σ
                                                                                        L,t      t     Wt .                                                                                  (29)

             Labor-augmenting technology AL
                                          t in Case R, a case featuring constant markups and no

unmeasured capital, is plotted with the dot-dashed blue line and is declining over time. As

equation (29) illustrates, with an elasticity of σ > 1, the decline in AL
                                                                        t reflects both the decline

in sQ
    L,t and the decline in Wt over time. With an elasticity of σ < 1, we still obtain a declining
                                                                                   Q 40
AL
 t because quantitatively the decline in Wt is more important than the decline in sL,t . Case

K (dashed dotted red line) differs from Case R only because sQ
                                                             L,t is the labor share of income

which now also includes capital income accruing to the unmeasured factor. While there are some
  40
    Recall that we have detrended all variables that grow in the balanced growth path. So the decline in AL     t is
relative to a trend of g = 0.033 per year. We find that W declines by roughly 0.25 log point over the entire sample.

                                                                                              42
  Log Capital Technology to Rental Rate




                                                                                                       Log Capital Technology to Rental Rate
                                                                                                                                               5
                                          3




                                                                                                                                               4
                                          2




                                                                                                                                               3
                                          1




                                                                                                                                               2
                                          0




                                                                                                                                               1
                                          -1




                                                                                                                                               0
                                          -2




                                               1960   1970     1980    1990     2000       2010                                                    1960   1970     1980    1990     2000       2010

                                                         Case Π        Case K          Case R                                                                Case Π        Case K          Case R


                                                 (a) Elasticity of substitution σ = 1.25                                                             (b) Elasticity of substitution σ = 0.75

                                                                                                                     Q
                                                        Figure 14: Capital-Augmenting Technology to Rental Rate AK
                                                                                                                 t /Rt



differences in the time series of AL
                                   t under the two cases (especially around 1980), all time series

are declining over time for both values of σ.

              The solid black line shows that AL
                                               t is significantly more variable under Case Π, which allocates

factorless income using time-varying markups. Equation (29) shows that with σ > 1, the inferred
                                  Q
AL
 t is positively associated with µt . With σ = 1.25, the decline in markups between the 1970s

and the early 1980s leads to a roughly 1.5 log points decline in AL
                                                                  t . The increase in markups

from the early 1980s is associated with an increase in AL
                                                        t until roughly the Great Recession.

These dynamics of AL                                          L
                   t flip when σ = 0.75 because the inferred At is negatively associated with

µQ                                    L
 t . We view such large movements in At under Case Π as implausible.

              Finally, Figure 14 presents the inferred time series of (log) capital-augmenting technology
                                                      Q
relative to the rental rate of business capital, AK
                                                  t /Rt . To understand why our results differ

across the three cases and two values for σ, consider the first-order condition (11) for capital-

augmenting technology relative to the business rental rate:

                                                                                AK          σ
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                 t
                                                                                       = α 1−σ sQ  µ
                                                                                                K,t t
                                                                                                     Q σ−1 Q
                                                                                                          µt ,                                                                                        (30)
                                                                                RtQ

where the rental rate in the business sector RtQ is given by equation (14). We present the ratio
     Q
AK
 t /Rt because it is uniquely pinned down from equation (30), irrespective of how one normal-


                                                                                                  43
izes the capital-specific technologies νtj in equation (14) and AK
                                                                 t . By contrast, the individual
                   Q                                             j
components AK                                                           K 41
            t and Rt depend on how one normalizes the levels of νt and At .
                                                        Q
       The dashed blue line shows that for Case R, AK
                                                    t /Rt is increasing over time when σ = 1.25,

as shown in Figure 14(a), and is decreasing over time when σ = 0.75, as shown in Figure 14(a).

As equation (30) shows, these dynamics reflect the increase in sQ
                                                                K,t over time under Case R. Case

K, plotted in the dashed dotted red line, differs from Case R only because sQ
                                                                            K,t is the capital

share of income which also includes capital income accruing to the unmeasured factor. While
                                                      Q
there are some differences in the time series of AK
                                                  t /Rt under the two cases (especially around

1980), the broad trends are similar across the two cases.
                                                                       Q
       Similar to our inference of AL                              K
                                    t , we find that the inferred At /Rt becomes significantly more

variable under Case Π with time-varying markups as seen in the solid black line.42 This reflects

the fact that the capital share sQ                                                             Q
                                 K,t fluctuates significantly more under Case Π. By contrast, sK,t

is more stable either by imputing a revised real interest rate that makes factor shares sum to one

in Case R or by attributing the missing income to the unmeasured factor in Case K. Equation
                                              Q
(30) shows that with σ > 1, the inferred AK
                                          t /Rt under Case Π is positively associated with the

capital share of costs, sQ    Q                 Q
                         K,t µt and the markup µt . With σ = 1.25, we obtain a sharp increase in
     Q
AK
 t /Rt between the 1970s and the early 1980s because the increase in the capital share of costs

dominates the decline in the markup. With σ = 0.75 we obtain the opposite patterns. We again
                                             Q
view such large movements in AK
                              t relative to Rt generated by Case Π as implausible.
  41
      With J types of business capital, we have J equations (equations (13) for the J − 1 relative shares and equation
(30) for the first-order condition for capital) to pin down J + 1 unknowns (the J capital-specific technologies νtj
and AK t ). This means that Pwe need one more condition that normalizes the νtj relative to AK  t . In our inference, we
imposed the normalization j νtj = 1. To see how this normalization matters, denote the equilibrium of the model
under our normalizing condition with the superscript 1 and the equilibrium of the model under some alternative
normalizing condition with the superscript 2. Suppose that the aggregate rental rates in the two normalizing
conditions are related by (RtQ )2 = xt (RtQ )1 , where xt is a (potentially) time-varying factor. From equation (30),
                                                                                                Q 1             Q 2
we see that the ratio AK /RQ does not depend on the normalizing condition, so (AK                          K
                                                                                           t /Rt ) = (At /Rt ) and
   K 2         K 1
(At ) = xt (At ) . Since our inference of exogenous processes guarantees that we match perfectly business capital
income RtQ KtQ under any normalizing condition, we obtain that (KtQ )1 = xt (KtQ )2 . This implies that AK         t Kt
                                                                                                                       Q
                                                                                             K         L
is identical under both normalizing conditions and so are output Qt , consumptions Ct and Ct , and all other
endogenous variables of the model. To summarize, the split of RtQ KtQ and AK          Q             Q
                                                                                  t Kt between Kt and either Rt or
                                                                                                                    Q

AKt depends on the particular normalizing condition that a researcher imposes, but all other variables do not.
   42                                                                            Q
      Case Π under an elasticity σ = 0.75 implies explosive values of log(AK t /Rt ) during the mid 1970s. To improve
the visual presentation of the results, in Figure 14 we replace such explosive values with a value of 5.




                                                          44
4.2       Counterfactuals

In this section we discuss several counterfactuals and show how our conclusions for the drivers of

functional inequality, factor shares, and output depend critically on which case is used to account

for factorless income. Our measure of inequality is the consumption of capitalists relative to

workers CtK /CtL .43 While admittedly stark, in our model CtK /CtL reflects the between income

groups consumption inequality as workers earn all labor income and capitalists earn all capital

income in the economy.

       To understand the drivers of relative consumption CtK /CtL , we express it as a function of

relative incomes net of depreciation across the two types of households, the investment behavior

of capitalists, and the saving behavior of capitalists. We define the share of business depreciation
                                                    δtj ξtj Ktj
                                               P
in business output as ψtQ =                     j6=H
                                                   Qt             and the share of net business output in total net income
             Qt − j6=H δtj ξtj Ktj
                 P
as φQ
    t =       Yt − j δtj ξtj Ktj
                  P                .     Using the budget constraints of the capitalists and the workers, we

arrive at the expression:

                          sQ     Q
                      "              P j j          j j
                                                                                      #
      CtK     1 − ψtQ       L,t φt     j ξt (Xt − δt Kt )   (1 + rt )Dt − (1 + g)Dt+1
           = Q Q 1−                −                      −                             .                               (31)
       CtL                1 − ψtQ     Yt − j δtj ξtj Ktj        Yt − j δtj ξtj Ktj
                                             P                        P
              sL,t φt

       A body of work since at least Weitzman (1976) has argued that the net concept of the labor

share may be more closely associated with welfare and inequality than their gross counterparts

because, unlike the rest of gross income, depreciation cannot be consumed by households. This

logic appears in equation (31), which shows that relative consumption of capitalists in decreasing
                                                              sQ    Q
                                                               L,t φt
in the net labor share of total income                            1−ψtQ
                                                                          . However, this equation shows that there are addi-

tional factors that influence inequality. Investment motives affect relative consumption through

the third term in the brackets, with relative consumption decreasing in the net investment rate
                       ξtj (Xtj −δtj Ktj )
                  P
                     j
of capitalists      Yt − j δtj ξtj Ktj
                          P                .   Saving motives affect relative consumption through the last term in

  43
    With identical log preferences over a Cobb-Douglas bundle, the ratio of consumption completely characterizes
welfare differences across the two types of households in a balanced growth path. We do not present welfare-based
measures of inequality during the transition because these depend on ad-hoc assumptions about when the economy
reaches a balanced growth path. We also wish to acknowledge that our results for inequality depend crucially on
the assumption that capitalists are infinitely-lived and have perfect foresight. In this case CtK depends on the after-
tax return on bonds (the substitution effect) and terminal consumption (the wealth effect) as seen from the Euler
equation (25).


                                                                            45
the brackets. Relative consumption decreases when capitalists decrease their stock of debt and
             (1+rt )Dt −(1+g)Dt+1
the term        Yt − j δtj ξtj Ktj
                     P               is positive.44

       We organize our discussion of the counterfactuals for relative consumption log(C K /C L ) in

Table 2, for the business labor share sQ
                                       L in Table 3, and for business output log Q in Table 4.

Each table is split in two panels. The top panel represents changes in these variables between

the beginning of the sample (represented by the average value of each variable between 1961

and 1965) and the end of the sample (represented by the average value of each variable between

2011 and 2015). The bottom panel represents changes of these variables between the middle of

the panel (averages between 1986 and 1990) and the end of the sample. The columns of the

table present Case Π, Case K, and Case R under the two different values of the elasticity of

substitution between capital and labor σ.

       The top row of each table, labeled “Baseline,” shows changes which, by construction, match

the changes of the corresponding variables in the data perfectly. For example, Table 2 shows that

from the beginning to the end of the sample C K /C L increased by 0.427 log point. The other

rows display counterfactuals in which we shut down particular exogenous processes that drive

the transitional dynamics of the model. The entries in each counterfactual show the change in

the baseline minus the change in each counterfactual. A positive entry means that the exogenous

process causes a particular variable to increase. For example, row 1 in the upper panel of Table

2 shows that under Case Π and σ = 1.25, markups led to a 0.009 log point decrease in C K /C L .

       The first counterfactual we consider is setting the markup µQ
                                                                   t to its average value in each

of the three cases over the entire sample period. We illustrate the evolution of log(CtK /CtL ) in

Figure 15 for σ = 1.25 and σ = 0.75. The solid black lines in Figure 15 are labeled “Baseline” and

correspond to the roughly 0.4 log point increase in log(CtK /CtL ) found in the data and perfectly

reproduced by the model when all exogenous processes are active. Since markups are constant
                                                                                               ξj K j
                                                                                           P
  44                                                                                   g
    In a balanced growth path with g > 0 the third term in the brackets becomes Y −Pj δj ξj K j and is positive
                                                                                            j
because capitalists have to finance the growing capital of the economy. When r > g and D > 0, the fourth term in
the brackets becomes Y −(r−g)D
                          P j j j and is positive because capitalists have to finance growing interest payments on
                            j δ ξ K
their debt.




                                                       46
                     Table 2: Counterfactuals: Relative Consumption log(C K /C L )

                                        Elasticity σ = 1.25             Elasticity σ = 0.75

                                    Case Π     Case K    Case R    Case Π     Case K     Case R

                                             Changes between 1961-1965 and 2011-2015

                   Baseline         0.427       0.427     0.427     0.427      0.427      0.427

                   1. µQ            -0.009      0.002     0.000     -0.009     0.002      0.000

                   2. r             -0.350      -0.319    1.021     -0.353     -0.319     1.042

                   3. AL            0.415       0.289     0.370     0.154      0.259      0.180

                   4. ξ I           -0.142      -0.146   -0.172     -0.172     -0.166     -0.202

                   5. (AK , ν I )   -0.386      -0.643   -0.309     -0.215     -1.005     -0.206

                   6. ξ N           0.036       0.035     0.094     0.032      0.033      0.083

                   7. (AK , ν N )   -0.093      -0.752   -0.110     0.165      -0.645     0.078

                   8. L             -0.183      -0.183   -0.183     -0.183     -0.183     -0.183

                   9. τ k           0.103       0.079     0.156     0.103      0.081      0.156

                                             Changes between 1986-1990 and 2011-2015

                   Baseline         0.335       0.335     0.335     0.335      0.335      0.335

                   1. µQ            0.151       0.000     0.000     0.152      0.000      0.000

                   2. r             -0.240      -0.327    0.527     -0.242     -0.320     0.517

                   3. AL            -0.228      0.340     0.345     0.342      0.003      -0.002

                   4. ξ I           -0.094      -0.098   -0.124     -0.122     -0.116     -0.152

                   5. (AK , ν I )   0.216       -0.313   -0.276     -0.402     -0.214     0.011

                   6. ξ N           -0.009      -0.009    0.057     -0.009     -0.008     0.049

                   7. (AK , ν N )   0.433       0.033    -0.202     -0.132     0.615      0.141

                   8. L             0.019       0.019     0.019     0.019      0.019      0.019

                   9. τ k           0.055       -0.016    0.115     0.055      -0.008     0.115

The table summarizes the counterfactual changes for relative consumption log(C K /C L ). The rows labeled “Baseline”
shows changes between 1961-1965 and 2011-2015 (upper panel) and 1986-1990 and 2011-2015 (lower panel) in the
baseline model which, by construction, match the changes of log(C K /C L ) in the data perfectly. Positive entries
denote an increase in log(C K /C L ). The entries in rows 1 to 9 denote differences relative to the baseline. The
differences are calculated as the change in the baseline minus the change in each counterfactual. A positive entry in
rows 1 to 9 means that the exogenous process causes log(C K /C L ) to increase.




                                                         47
                             Table 3: Counterfactuals: Business Labor Share sQ
                                                                             L


                                        Elasticity σ = 1.25              Elasticity σ = 0.75

                                     Case Π     Case K    Case R     Case Π    Case K     Case R

                                              Changes between 1961-1965 and 2011-2015

                    Baseline         -0.016      -0.003   -0.016     -0.016     -0.003     -0.016

                    1. µQ            0.007       -0.001    0.000      0.007     -0.001      0.000

                    2. r             -0.005      0.000    -0.014      0.005      0.000      0.011

                    3. AL            0.000       0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000

                    4. ξ I           -0.024      -0.025   -0.029      0.028      0.027      0.033

                    5. (AK , ν I )   -0.064      -0.114   -0.055      0.032      0.154      0.033

                    6. ξ N           0.006       0.006     0.015     -0.005     -0.006     -0.014

                    7. (AK , ν N )   -0.015      -0.123   -0.019     -0.027      0.109     -0.013

                    8. L             0.000       0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000

                    9. τ k           0.001       -0.003    0.000     -0.001      0.003      0.000

                                              Changes between 1986-1990 and 2011-2015

                    Baseline         -0.030      -0.029   -0.030     -0.030     -0.029     -0.030

                    1. µQ            -0.071      0.000     0.000     -0.083      0.000      0.000

                    2. r             -0.015      -0.030    0.012      0.016      0.029     -0.011

                    3. AL            0.000       0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000

                    4. ξ I           -0.016      -0.016   -0.021      0.019      0.018      0.024

                    5. (AK , ν I )   0.041       -0.056   -0.048      0.063      0.025     -0.003

                    6. ξ N           -0.002      -0.002    0.009      0.002      0.002     -0.008

                    7. (AK , ν N )   0.075       0.009    -0.035      0.023     -0.094     -0.024

                    8. L             0.000       0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000

                    9. τ k           0.000       -0.012    0.002      0.000      0.011     -0.001


The table summarizes the counterfactual changes for the business labor share sQ       L . The rows labeled “Baseline”
shows changes between 1961-1965 and 2011-2015 (upper panel) and 1986-1990 and 2011-2015 (lower panel) in the
baseline model which, by construction, match the changes of sQ    L in the data perfectly. Negative entries denote a
decrease in sQ
             L . The entries in rows 1 to 9 denote differences relative to the baseline. The differences are calculated
as the change in the baseline minus the change in each counterfactual. A negative entry rows 1 to 9 means that the
exogenous process causes sQ L to decrease.




                                                          48
                                     Table 4: Counterfactuals: Output log Q

                                         Elasticity σ = 1.25              Elasticity σ = 0.75

                                     Case Π      Case K    Case R     Case Π     Case K     Case R

                                               Changes between 1961-1965 and 2011-2015

                    Baseline          -0.068      -0.087   -0.068     -0.068      -0.087     -0.068

                    1. µQ             0.000       -0.001    0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000

                    2. r              0.038       -0.001    0.103      0.025      0.000      0.045

                    3. AL             -0.415      -0.289   -0.370     -0.154      -0.259     -0.180

                    4. ξ I            0.177       0.183     0.215      0.129      0.125      0.151

                    5. (AK , ν I )    0.482       0.804     0.386      0.161      0.754      0.154

                    6. ξ N            -0.045      -0.044   -0.117     -0.024      -0.025     -0.062

                    7. (AK , ν N )    0.116       0.940     0.138     -0.124      0.483      -0.058

                    8. L              0.183       0.183     0.183      0.183      0.183      0.183

                    9. τ k            -0.005      0.025    -0.001     -0.003      0.014      -0.001

                                               Changes between 1986-1990 and 2011-2015

                    Baseline          -0.147      -0.148   -0.147     -0.147      -0.148     -0.147

                    1. µQ             -0.046      0.000     0.000     -0.028      0.000      0.000

                    2. r              0.113       0.221    -0.094      0.069      0.128      -0.048

                    3. AL             0.228       -0.340   -0.345     -0.342      -0.003     0.002

                    4. ξ I            0.118       0.123     0.155      0.091      0.087      0.114

                    5. (AK , ν I )    -0.270      0.391     0.345      0.302      0.160      -0.008

                    6. ξ N            0.011       0.012    -0.071      0.006      0.006      -0.037

                    7. (AK , ν N )    -0.541      -0.041    0.252      0.099      -0.461     -0.106

                    8. L              -0.019      -0.019   -0.019     -0.019      -0.019     -0.019

                    9. τ k            -0.003      0.086    -0.013     -0.001      0.045      -0.007

The table summarizes the counterfactual changes for output log Q. The rows labeled “Baseline” shows changes
between 1961-1965 and 2011-2015 (upper panel) and 1986-1990 and 2011-2015 (lower panel) in the baseline model
which, by construction, match the changes of log Q in the data perfectly. Negative entries denote a decrease in log Q
relative to a trend of g = 0.033. The entries in rows 1 to 9 denote differences relative to the baseline. The differences
are calculated as the change in the baseline minus the change in each counterfactual. A negative entry in rows 1 to
9 means that the exogenous process causes log Q to decrease.




                                                           49
       Capitalists to Workers Log Consumption




                                                                                                                     Capitalists to Workers Log Consumption
                                                -.5




                                                                                                                                                              -.5
                                                -1




                                                                                                                                                              -1
                                                -1.5




                                                                                                                                                              -1.5
                                                       1960    1970       1980        1990     2000   2010                                                           1960    1970       1980        1990     2000   2010
                                                              Baseline       Case Π          Case K    Case R                                                               Baseline       Case Π          Case K    Case R



                                                                         (a) σ = 1.25                                                                                                  (b) σ = 0.75
                                                                                 Figure 15: Relative Consumption and Markups


in Case R and almost constant in Case K, counterfactuals that eliminate markup variation in

those cases do not affect endogenous variables. The lines corresponding to those cases, therefore,

are visually indistinguishable from the baseline.45

       The dashed red lines in Figure 15 show that eliminating the inferred markups from Case Π

over the full sample period makes little difference for the trend in inequality, since the dashed red

line starts and ends at a similar distance below the solid black line. We find that this conclusion

is robust to the value of σ. Though markups have not significantly impacted the trajectory of

relative consumption from 1960 to 2015, the dashed red lines rise more steeply than the baseline

during the first half of the sample and are flatter since the early 1980s. So, under Case Π, the

interpretation is that the declining markups in the first half of our sample decreased the relative

consumption of capitalists while the increasing markups in the second half restored it to near its

initial value.

       Eliminating the variation in markups results in movements in the business labor share in the

opposite direction as the movements in inequality. This is expected from equation (31) which

shows that, holding constant everything else, a lower sQ            K  L
                                                       L increases C /C . Table 3 shows that

markups are associated with a 0.7 percentage point increase in the labor share since the beginning
  45
    The small effects under Case K are explained by the fact that in the baseline of Case K we have set the profit
share a constant fraction of measured business output Q − ξ U X U rather than business output Q.


                                                                                                                50
       Capitalists to Workers Log Consumption




                                                                                                                     Capitalists to Workers Log Consumption
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                              -.5
                                                -.5




                                                                                                                                                              -1
                                                -1




                                                                                                                                                              -1.5
                                                -1.5




                                                       1960    1970       1980        1990     2000   2010                                                           1960    1970       1980        1990     2000   2010
                                                              Baseline       Case Π          Case K    Case R                                                               Baseline       Case Π          Case K    Case R



                                                                         (a) σ = 1.25                                                                                                  (b) σ = 0.75
                                                                         Figure 16: Relative Consumption and Real Interest Rate


of the sample in 1960. Barkai (2016) and Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold (2018), by contrast,

emphasize the increase of markups for the labor share decline. The difference in our conclusions

stems from the different starting points of our samples, as shown in Figure 2(a). Similar to these

authors who begin their analysis in the 1980s, we find that the increase in markups leads to a

decline in the labor share of roughly 7 to 8 percentage points between 1986-1990 and 2011-2015

depending on the elasticity of substitution.46 We also find declines in business output in these

counterfactuals of roughly 0.03 to 0.05 log point during that period.

       Next, we set the real interest rate equal to its value in the balanced growth path in all

periods beginning in 1960, r = 0.04. Choosing the same level of r in all three cases guarantees

that our results are not driven by differences in the long-run level of capitalists’ consumption

across the three cases. The short-dashed green lines in Figure 16 correspond to counterfactuals

where r = 0.04 but where all other exogenous driving processes are preserved at their inferred

values under Case R. Unlike the baseline case which features an increase in inequality, these

short-dashed green lines reveal a decline of inequality over time by nearly a log point. The high

level of r in Case R leads to an increase in C K /C L because capitalists save more to finance a
  46
    Barkai (2016) starts his sample in 1984. Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold (2018) show markup series starting in
1980 in all their analyses with the exception of Figure A.4 that starts in 1970. Consistent with our analysis, their
Figure A.4 shows that the profit share has a similar level in 1970 and 2010.



                                                                                                                51
    Capitalists to Workers Log Consumption




                                                                                                                  Capitalists to Workers Log Consumption
                                                                                                                                                           -.5
                                             -.5




                                                                                                                                                           -1
                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                           -1.5
                                             -1.5




                                                    1960    1970       1980        1990     2000   2010                                                           1960    1970       1980        1990     2000   2010
                                                           Baseline       Case Π          Case K    Case R                                                               Baseline       Case Π          Case K    Case R



                                                                      (a) σ = 1.25                                                                                                  (b) σ = 0.75
                                                            Figure 17: Relative Consumption and Labor-Augmenting Technology


growing consumption and this pushes down the last term of equation (31).Case Π and Case K

feature lower and more declining values for r, so counterfactuals which remove that variation

cause the lines corresponding to those cases to increase relative to the baseline case. We conclude,

therefore, that the cost of capital is quantitatively significant for accounting for the increase in

relative consumption under Case R but not under Case Π and Case K.

    The impact of r on sQ
                        L and Q is intermediated by changes in the business sector rental rate

of capital RQ . Given constant markups, equation (30) shows that a decline in r leads to a

decline in sQ
            L when σ > 1 and R
                               Q
                                 declines, whereas it leads to an increase in sQ
                                                                               L if σ < 1

and RQ increases or the reverse.47 We also find that the lower r in the baseline compared to

the counterfactual increases Q in most cases, as capitalists substitute from consumption toward

capital accumulation. An important exception is the period between the end of 1980s and the

2010s under Case R, in which the high baseline levels of r compared to the counterfactual lead

to a decline in Q.

    In Figure 17 we plot the relative consumption path under the counterfactual that labor-

augmenting technology AL always equals its value in the first period of our sample. In all cases
  47
     Compositional changes across types of capital imply that the rental rate RQ is differentially sensitive to changes
in r across the three cases. In most cases, we find that r leads to a decline in sQ
                                                                                  L when σ > 1, although the effects
differ significantly across sample periods and cases.



                                                                                                             52
    Capitalists to Workers Log Consumption




                                                                                                                  Capitalists to Workers Log Consumption
                                             -.5




                                                                                                                                                           -.5
                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                           -1
                                             -1.5




                                                                                                                                                           -1.5
                                                    1960    1970       1980        1990     2000   2010                                                           1960    1970       1980        1990     2000   2010
                                                           Baseline       Case Π          Case K    Case R                                                               Baseline       Case Π          Case K    Case R



                                                                      (a) σ = 1.25                                                                                                  (b) σ = 0.75
                                                                              Figure 18: Relative Consumption and IT Prices


and for both elasticities, the lines exhibit either a decline or a more muted increase than the

baseline case over the full sample. With σ = 1.25, AL accounts for nearly all of the increase in

C K /C L from the 1960s under Case Π and for roughly 85 and 70 percent of the increase under

Case K and Case R respectively. With σ = 0.75, AL accounts between roughly 35 and 60 percent

of the increase in C K /C L .48 We conclude that the decline in AL since the 1960s can be robustly

linked to an increase in C K /C L . The key force leading to the increased inequality is the decline

in the investment rate of the capitalists as shown in the third term of equation (31). As shown in

Table 3, labor-augmenting technology AL has no effect on the business labor share sQ
                                                                                   L . Table 4

shows that the negative effects of AL on output Q are larger in the higher substitution economy

with σ = 1.25 than in the lower substitution economy with σ = 0.75.

   Finally, Figure 18 shows the relative consumption path when we remove the decline in the

relative price of IT investment ξ I and instead set it equal to its value in the first period of

our sample. The decline in ξ I increases capitalists’ investment rate, which as the third term of

equation (31) shows, leads to a decline in the relative consumption of capitalists. We conclude

that IT-specific technological change lowered inequality and this conclusion is robust across
  48
     We note that the effects of AL on C K /C L change significantly when we begin our analysis in the mid 1980s.
This because the patterns of inferred AL vary significantly both across cases and across values of σ when we begin
our analysis in the mid 1980s, as shown in Figure 13.



                                                                                                             53
different cases and values of the elasticity. On the other hand, the effects on sQ
                                                                                 L depend on the

elasticity of substitution. Given constant markups, equation (30) shows that a decline in ξ I leads

to a decline in sQ                     Q
                 L when σ > 1 because R declines and the opposite when σ < 1. Table 3 shows

that, for σ = 1.25, the decline in ξ I contributes to a decline in the labor share between 2.4 and

2.9 percentage points.49 By contrast if σ = 0.75, the decline in ξ I increases the labor share by

roughly 2.7 to 3.3 percentage points. As shown in Table 4, in all cases the decline in the relative

price of IT causes business output to rise between 0.18 and 0.21 log point when σ = 1.25 and

between 0.13 and 0.15 log point when σ = 0.75.

       The other rows in Tables 2, 3, and 4 present summary statistics for counterfactuals in which we

keep constant at their 1960 values IT capital-augmenting technology (AK and ν I ), the relative

price of non-IT investment (ξ N ), non-IT capital-augmenting technology (AK and ν N ), labor

supply (L), and capital taxes (τ k ). We find significant declines in C K /C L and increases in Q

in response to IT capital-augmenting technology (AK and ν I ), with the effects being the largest

in Case K. Under an elasticity σ > 1, IT capital-augmenting technology also accounts for large

declines in sQ
             L . The increase in labor supply L relative to the 1960s contributed to a decline in

C K /C L and an increase in Q of roughly 0.18 log point in all three cases. Finally, the decline

in capital taxes τ k since the 1960s raised the after-tax return on saving and the consumption

growth of capitalists and is associated with an increase in C K /C L between 0.08 and 0.16 log

point across cases.


5        Conclusion

U.S. GDP deviates significantly from the sum of measured payments to labor and imputed rental

payments to capital. This deviation, or what we call factorless income, could reflect economic
  49
     In a model with a single investment good, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) argued that the decline in the
aggregate price of investment goods led to a decline in the labor share of roughly 2.5 percentage points. Our results
here with multiple types of capital are broadly consistent with Eden and Gaggl (2018) who estimate a production
function with IT and non-IT capital and argue that the decline in the relative price of IT accounts for roughly half
of the decline in the U.S. labor share. Recent work by Autor and Salomons (2018) presents evidence across countries
and industries that relates productivity-enhancing technological advances (potentially caused by the adoption of
industrial robots and patenting flows) to declines in the labor share after the 1980s.




                                                         54
profits, missing capital, or a gap between the return on risk-free bonds and the cost of capital that

firms perceive when making their investment decisions. In this paper we assess the plausibility

of each of these strategies in allocating factorless income and demonstrate their implications

for our understanding of macroeconomic outcomes such as functional inequality, factor shares,

productivity, and growth.

   We have laid out our skepticism of Case Π. Future work embracing this interpretation must

articulate the mechanism by which a lower opportunity cost of capital is associated with higher

markups and greater monopoly power. Further, if Case Π forms the basis for new calls for anti-

trust enforcement, it should be acknowledged that the logic for such calls was equally present

in the 1960s and 1970s. We have similarly laid out our skepticism of Case K and emphasize

that future work embracing this interpretation must take a broad view of what constitutes

unmeasured capital, potentially including forms of missing investment that far predate the IT

revolution. However, we also recognize that more flexible analyses of missing capital may be

able to cast this possibility in a more favorable light. We find Case R the most promising

and hope future work explores reasons why simple measures of the rental rate of capital might

deviate from the rental rate that firms face when making their investment decisions. While we

have considered the three methodologies in isolation to document with clarity their individual

strengths and weaknesses, a direction for future research is to consider combinations of these

methodologies.

   Our interest in factorless income emerged from our prior work documenting a decline in the

global labor share and associating it with capital-specific technological change. What do these

three cases teach us about the labor share decline? Our skepticism about Case Π corroborates

the view in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) that while rising markups likely contributed, much

of the decline remains to be explained by technological change. Our scepticism about Case K

alleviates measurement concerns arising from missing output and reaffirms our measures of the

labor share decline. Case R most closely approximates an environment with a stable opportunity

cost of capital and in which IT-capital prices drive a significant amount of the variation in rental


                                                 55
rates and factor shares, as in our earlier analyses.

   Finally, though this study focuses on the United States, we note that the labor share decline

has been a global phenomenon impacting developed countries in Continental Europe and Scan-

dinavia and emerging economies such as China, India, and Mexico. We maintain our view that

much can be learned from comparisons across this diverse set of experiences. In some countries

like the United States, investment spending has been relatively low in recent decades. In others,

like China, investment has been increasing. We hope our methodology will be applied to many

economies and that the study of factorless income around the world enhances our understanding

of global changes in technology, product markets, and capital markets.



References
Atkeson, A., and P. Kehoe (2005): “Modeling and Measuring Organization Capital,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 113(5), 1026–1053.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2017): “Con-
  centrating on the Fall of the Labor Share,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper.

Autor, D., and A. Salomons (2018): “Is Automation Labor-Displacing? Productivity
  Growth, Employment, and the Labor Share,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Barkai, S. (2016): “Declining Labor and Capital Shares,” University of Chicago Working
  Paper.

Basu, S., and J. Fernald (1997): “Returns to Scale in US Production: Estimates and
  Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 249–283.

Basu, S., and J. G. Fernald (2002): “Aggregate productivity and aggregate technology,”
  European Economic Review, 46(6), 963–991.

Bils, M., P. Klenow, and B. Malin (2018): “Resurrecting the Role of the Product Market
  Wedge in Recessions,” American Economic Review, 108(4-5), 1118–1146.




                                                56
Caballero, R., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2017): “Rents, Technical Change, and
  Risk Premia Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning
  Yields, and Factor Shares,” American Economic Review, 107(5), 614–620.

Caselli, F., and J. Feyrer (2007): “The Marginal Product of Capital,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 122(2), 535–568.

Chen, P., L. Karabarbounis, and B. Neiman (2017): “The Global Rise of Corporate
  Saving,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 89, 1–19.

Chirinko, R. (2008): “σ: The Long and Short of It,” Journal of Macroeconomics, 30, 671–686.

Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2009): “Intangible Capital and US Economic
  Growth,” Review of Income and Wealth, 55(3), 661–685.

Dao, M. C., M. Das, Z. Koczan, and W. Lian (2017): “Why is Labor Receiving a Smaller
  Share of Global Income? Theory and Empirical Evidence,” International Monetary Fund
  Working Paper.

De Loecker, J., and J. Eeckhout (2017): “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeco-
  nomic Implications,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

De Loecker, J., and F. Warzynski (2012): “Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,”
  American Economic Review, 102(6), 2437–2471.

Duarte, F., and C. Rosa (2015): “The Equity Risk Premium: A Review of Models,” Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report.

Eden, M., and P. Gaggl (2018): “On the Welfare Implications of Automation,” Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 29, 15–43.

Eggertsson, G., J. Robbins, and E. Wold (2018): “Kaldor and Piketty’s Facts: The Rise
  of Monopoly Power in the United States,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper.

Eisfeldt, A., and D. Papanikolaou (2013): “Organization Capital and the Cross-Section
  of Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 68(4), 1365–1406.

Elsby, M. W., B. Hobijn, and A. Şahin (2013): “The Decline of the US Labor Share,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2013(2), 1–63.


                                            57
Fama, E., and K. French (2002): “The Equity Premium,” Journal of Finance, 57, 637–659.

Fernald, J., and B. Neiman (2011): “Growth Accounting with Misallocation: Or, Doing
  Less with More in Singapore,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(2), 29–74.

Gali, J., M. Gertler, and D. Lopez-Salido (2007): “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
  Costs of Business Fluctuations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1), 44–59.

Gollin, D. (2002): “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2),
  458–474.

Gomme, P., B. Ravikumar, and P. Rupert (2011): “The Return to Capital and the Business
  Cycle,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 262–278.

Greenwood, J., S. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long-Run Implications of
  Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87(3), 342–362.

Gutiérrez, G., and T. Philippon (2017): “Declining Competition and Investment in the
  U.S.,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

Guvenen, F., R. Mataloni, D. Rassier, and K. Ruhl (2017): “Offshore Profit Shifting
  and Domestic Productivity Measurement,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper.

Hall,      R. (1990):    “Invariance Properties of Solow’s Productivity Residual,”        in
  Growth/Productivity/Unemployment: Essays to Celebrate Bob Solow’s Birthday, pp. 71–112.

           (2001): “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,” American Economic Review,
  91(5), 1185–1202.

Hall, R., and D. Jorgenson (1967): “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,” American
  Economic Review, 57(3), 391–414.

Hartman-Glaser, B., H. Lustig, and M. Zhang (2016): “Capital Share Dynamics When
  Firms Insure Workers,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

Jagannathan, R., E. McGrattan, and A. Scherbina (2000): “The Declining U.S. Equity
  Premium,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review.




                                             58
Jorda, O., K. Knoll, D. Kuvshinov, M. Schularick, and A. Taylor (2017): “The
  Rate of Return on Everything, 1870-2015,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper.

Karabarbounis, L. (2014): “The Labor Wedge: MRS vs. MPN,” Review of Economic Dy-
  namics, 17(2), 206–223.

Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2014): “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103.

Kehrig, M., and N. Vincent (2017): “Growing Productivity Without Growing Wages: The
  Micro-Level Anatomy of the Aggregate Labor Share Decline,” ERID Working Paper.

Koh, D., R. Santaeulàlia-Llopis, and Y. Zheng (2016): “Labor Share Decline and Intel-
  lectual Property Products Capital,” University of Arkansas Working Paper.

McDaniel, C. (2009): “Updated Tax Series OECD 1950-2009,” http: // www. caramcdaniel.
  com/ researchpapers .

McGrattan, E., and E. Prescott (2005): “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value of U.S. and
  U.K. Corporations,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(3), 767–796.

Nekarda, C., and V. Ramey (2013): “The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-Cost Markup,”
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

Oberfield, E., and D. Raval (2014): “Micro Data and Macro Technology,” Princeton Uni-
  versity Working Paper.

Piketty, T., and G. Zucman (2014): “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Coun-
  tries 1700-2010,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1255–1310.

Rognlie, M. (2015): “Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share: Accumulation
  or Scarcity?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring(1), 1–69.

Rotemberg, J., and M. Woodford (1995): “Dynamic General Equilibrium Models With
  Imperfectly Competitive Product Markets,” in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton
  University Press.

Smith, M., D. Yagan, O. Zidar, and E. Zwick (2017): “Capitalists in the 21st Century,”
  University of Chicago Working Paper.


                                             59
Traina, J. (2018): “Markup Estimation Using Financial Statements: Cost of Goods Sold vs.
  Operating Expense,” University of Chicago Working Paper.

Vollrath, D. (2017): “An Update on the Profits from Housing,” https://growthecon.com/
  blog/Ricardian-Housing/.

Weitzman, M. (1976): “On the Welfare Significance of National Product in a Dynamic Econ-
  omy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 156–162.




                                            60
