                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE US GAINS FROM TRADE:
        VALUATION USING THE DEMAND FOR FOREIGN FACTOR SERVICES

                                       Arnaud Costinot
                                    Andrés Rodríguez-Clare

                                      Working Paper 24407
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24407


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




The authors thank Rodrigo Adao, Dave Donaldson, Thibault Fally, Mark Gertler, Gordon
Hanson, Enrico Moretti, and Tim Taylor for very helpful comments and Mauricio Ulate for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Arnaud Costinot and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The US Gains from Trade: Valuation Using the Demand for Foreign Factor Services
Arnaud Costinot and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
NBER Working Paper No. 24407
March 2018
JEL No. F10,F11,F12,F14,F15,F17

                                          ABSTRACT

About 8 cents out of every dollar spent in the United States is spent on imports. What if, because
of a wall or some other extreme policy intervention, imports were to remain on the other side of
the US border? How much would US consumers be willing to pay to prevent this hypothetical
policy change from taking place? The answer to this question represents the welfare cost from
autarky or, equivalently, the welfare gains from trade. In this article, we discuss how to evaluate
these gains using the demand for foreign factor services. The estimates of gains from trade for the
US economy that we review range from 2 to 8 percent of GDP.


Arnaud Costinot
Department of Economics, E52-534
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER
costinot@mit.edu

Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
University of California at Berkeley
Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
andres1000@gmail.com
1     Introduction
About 8 cents out of every dollar spent in the United States is spent on imports.1
    What if, because of a wall or some other extreme policy intervention, these
goods were to remain on the other side of the US border? How much would
US consumers be willing to pay to prevent this hypothetical policy change from
taking place? The answer to this question represents the welfare cost from autarky
or, equivalently, the welfare gains from trade.
    Unfortunately (or not!), there is little direct empirical evidence about the im-
pact of autarky on prices and quantities. The Jeffersonian trade embargo at the
beginning of the nineteenth century is one rare exception. It is not clear, how-
ever, what such historical evidence can tell us about the magnitude of US gains
from trade today. In order to make progress on this important issue, we therefore
propose an alternative strategy combining both theory and empirics.
    Our strategy is based on two observations. First, when countries exchange
goods, it is as if they were indirectly exchanging the factor services embodied in
the production of these goods: unskilled labor, skilled labor, physical capital, land
etc. Second, when a country is under autarky, it is as if the prices of all foreign
factor services were at least as high as their reservation values.
    These observations suggest a parallel between the valuation of the welfare
gains from trade and the “new good” problem in the field of industrial organi-
zation. When industrial organization economists want to evaluate the welfare
gains from the introduction of a new product, from Apple Cinnamon Cheerios to
the minivan, they estimate the demand for such products, determine the reserva-
tion price at which demand would be zero, and then measure consumer surplus
by looking at the area under the (compensated) demand curve between the price
at which these new products are currently being sold and their reservation price

    1 According to the World Input Output Database, the ratio of imports over total US spending is

7.6 percent in 2014. Since total US spending includes both spending by consumers on final goods
and spending by firms on intermediate goods, this number differs from the ratio of imports over
GDP, which is 14 percent in 2014 according to the same database. We come back to this distinction
in Section 3.

                                                1
(for example, Hausman, 1996; Petrin, 2002; Nevo, 2003). Trade economists can fol-
low a similar strategy to measure the welfare gains from trade. In this approach,
foreign factor services are just like new products that appear when trade is free,
but disappear under autarky.
    This theoretical connection, in turn, points towards two key empirical consid-
erations for the valuation of the US gains from trade: 1) How large are the US
imports of factor services? 2) How elastic is the demand for these imported factor
services? If consumers do not spend much on a new product or if this product is a
close substitute to other existing products, the welfare gains to consumers from its
introduction are likely to be small. Likewise, if the United States does not import
much from the rest of the world or if the factor services that it imports are close
substitutes to those that it would have access to under autarky, the US gains from
trade are unlikely to be large.
    The rest of this article is organized as follows. In the next section, we start
from the textbook treatment of the welfare gains from trade, as described in Bhag-
wati, Panagariya and Srinivasan (1998). Following the work of Adao, Costinot
and Donaldson (2017), we explain the advantages of measuring the gains from
trade by focusing on the international exchange of factor services, rather than on
the specific goods and services that are imported and exported. This approach
also provides an intuitive perspective on the welfare formula for the gains from
trade derived in Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012a). Throughout
this section, we restrict ourselves to a static economy, with a representative agent,
and without distortions. This reflects both the emphasis in the existing literature
and our view that this benchmark environment has worthwhile lessons to teach.
    We then turn to measurement, with a focus on the US economy. We describe
the level of the US demand for foreign factor services and discuss the estimation
of the elasticity of the US demand for foreign factor services. For a large and fairly
closed economy like the United States, our analysis points towards welfare gains
from trade ranging from 2 to 8 percent of GDP.
    We conclude by discussing three issues set aside in our benchmark analysis:
growth, distortions, and redistribution. In theory, their introduction may either

                                          2
increase or decrease the magnitude of the gains from trade. In practice, existing
estimates incorporating such considerations do not suggest a significant and sys-
tematic bias of our benchmark estimates.


2     Gains From Trade in Theory

2.1        The Textbook Approach
As a warm up, suppose that the United States only exports apples—the fruit, not
the computer—in exchange for bananas. Since realism is clearly not the main ob-
jective at the moment, suppose further that we know everything that there is to
know about the US technology and the tastes of US consumers. We have summa-
rized this information into a production possibility frontier and a series of indif-
ference curves in Figure 1.
    In this economy, measuring the gains from trade is a fairly pedestrian affair. In
the autarky equilibrium consumption, C A , is equal to output, Q A . In the trade
equilibrium, production of apples for export increases, and US firms produce
at Q T . After exporting apples and importing bananas, US households consume
CT . To measure the gains from trade, compare the level of income needed to
achieve the post-trade utility on the higher indifference curve with the level of
income (at the same relative prices) needed to achieve the utility from the au-
tarky equilibrium. Graphically, the US gains from trade are therefore given by
GT = 1 − OA/OT.2
    The actual US pattern of trade is a tad more complex. In 2005, for instance,

    2 Informal terms, the US gains from trade corresponds to the absolute value of the equivalent
variation between the two equilibria. Expressed as a percentage of US initial GDP, we get

                                                    e( pT , U A )
                                         GT = 1 −                  ,                                  (1)
                                                    e ( p T , UT )

where e( p T , UT ) represents the income required to achieve the utility level in the trade equilibrium,
which is also equal to US initial GDP, and e( p T , U A ) represents the income required to achieve the
autarky utility level, U A , at the trade equilibrium prices, p T .

                                                   3
            Bananas

                                              CT




                                  CA = Q A
                                                                UT
                                                                UA

                                                       QT



                  O                                A    T      Apples

             Figure 1: A First Look at the Welfare Gains from Trade.


Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) report that the United States had positive exports
in about 8,500 of the product categories in the Harmonized System 10-digit clas-
sifications, ranging from “new motor vehicle engine between 1500–3000 cc, more
than 6 cylinders” to “bicycles with wheels greater than 63.25 cm diameter.” Prod-
uct differentiation, of course, does not stop there. Within each product category,
a large number of firms may themselves be exporting differentiated varieties of
these products. For such an economy, how can we measure 1 − OA/OT?
    One potential strategy would be to scale up the textbook approach. Namely,
one could start by estimating production sets and indifference curves for all these
differentiated products around the world. With those in hand, one could then
compute any counterfactual equilibrium, including the one where we send the
US economy back to autarky, as well as the welfare cost associated with moving
to such an equilibrium. However, the amount of actual information required to
implement the textbook approach is, to put it mildly, non-trivial. On the demand-
side, for instance, the goal is not merely to obtain information about own-price
and cross-price elasticities within any given industry. For this approach, we would


                                        4
need to estimate all own-price and cross-price elasticities for all goods around the
world. This means estimating the cross-price elasticity between US smart phones
and French red wine, Japanese hybrid cars and Costa-Rican coffee, and all other
possible combinations.


2.2    From Trade in Goods to Trade in Factor Services
In recent work, Adao, Costinot and Donaldson (2017) have proposed an approach
to reduce the dimensionality of what is required for counterfactual analysis, in
general, and the measurement of the gains from trade, in particular.
    The starting point of their analysis is the equivalence between neoclassical
economies and what are called “reduced exchange economies” in which countries
simply trade factor services. They show that for any competitive equilibrium of
a general neoclassical economy, with arbitrary preferences, technologies and sets
of goods and factors, there exists an equilibrium in a reduced exchange economy
that is equivalent in terms of welfare, factor prices, and the factor content of trade.
Preference and technological considerations in the original neoclassical economy
simply map into preferences over factor services in the reduced exchange econ-
omy. For the purposes of measuring the gains from trade, this approach implies
that instead of estimating production and demand functions around the world,
we only need to estimate the reduced demand for factors, that is, the demand
for factor services embodied in the goods purchased from countries around the
world.3
    Figure 2 describes this basic strategy. While the United States is endowed
with domestic factors, it has, by definition, no foreign factors. In the trade equi-
librium, the former can be exchanged for the latter, leading to consumption CT .
   3 From   an empirical standpoint, the fewer factors there are, the easier the estimation of the
reduced demand for factors is. It should be clear, however, that the approach of Adao, Costinot
and Donaldson (2017) does not hinge on the assumption, common in the trade literature, that there
are more goods than factors. The critical observation to reduce the dimensionality of what needs
to be estimated is that knowledge of the reduced demand for factors is sufficient to measure the
gains from trade; separate knowledge of demand for goods, by consumers and firms, and demand
for factors, by firms, is not required.

                                                5
            Foreign      UA
            Factors
                                                CT




                                                                    UT




                                                           E
                   O                  A                   T     Domestic
                                                                 Factors
             Figure 2: Another Look at the Welfare Gains from Trade.


But under autarky, consumption would have to be equal to the US endowment of
domestic factors, as described by point E. Like in the textbook case, we can mea-
sure the gains from trade as GT = 1 − OA/OT. But here, we no longer need to
worry about estimating production and demand functions for goods. The gains
from trade only depend on the shape of the indifference curve over domestic and
foreign factor services.
     In this situation, we can compute the gains from trade in the same way as one
would compute the welfare gains from the introduction of new products. Fig-
ure 3 illustrates the approach. Under autarky, the expenditure share on foreign
factors would be zero and the relative price of foreign factors would be equal to
their reservation value, p A . With trade, the expenditure share on foreign factors,
λ F , would be strictly positive and the relative price of foreign factors, p T , would
be strictly below its reservation value. Using Shepard’s Lemma, we can compute
(the log of) the difference between the income level required to achieve the au-
tarky utility level, U A , at the autarky and trade prices by integrating below the


                                          6
                ln( price)
              o f Foreign
                 Factors




                  ln( p A )




                              A
                  ln( p T )




                                     lF                   1         Expenditure Share
                                                                  o f Foreign Factors

                Figure 3: Integrating Below the Factor Demand Curve.


(compensated) expenditure share on foreign services between (the log of) p A and
p T . After simple manipulations, this leads to the following general formula for
the welfare gains from trade,

                                      GT = 1 − exp(−A),                                           (2)

where A denotes the gray area in Figure 3.4


2.3    The ACR Formula in Perspective
The previous discussion offers an intuitive way to understand the welfare formula
derived by Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012a), which we will refer

   4 For    a small change in the log of the price of foreign factor services, d ln p, Shepard’s Lemma
implies d ln e = λ F d ln p. Using US factor services as our numeraire and integrating, we therefore
obtain ln e( p A , U A ) − ln e( p T , U A ) = A. Under this choice of numeraire, US factor income and
US expenditure must also be unchanged between the autarky and trade equilibria: e( p A , U A ) =
e( p T , UT ). Starting from equation (1), the two previous observations lead to equation (2).

                                                  7
to as the ACR formula.
    In a class of commonly used trade models, including the models developed by
Anderson (1979), Krugman (1980), Eaton and Kortum (2002) and various versions
of Melitz (2003), welfare gains from trade can be expressed as a function of two
sufficient statistics,
                                  GT = 1 − λ1/ε
                                             D ,                              (3)

where λ D = 1 − λ F denotes the share of expenditure on domestic goods in the
trade equilibrium and ε ≥ 0 denotes the trade elasticity.
    The economics is straightforward. In spite of their different micro-theoretical
foundations, the previous models all generate a similar demand for foreign factor
services. Namely, in all these models, the share of expenditure on foreign factors,
both compensated and uncompensated, takes a Constant Elasticity of Substitution
(CES) form. Depending on the specifics of the model, the trade elasticity may have
a different structural interpretation. In Anderson (1979) and Krugman (1980), ε
corresponds to the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods.
In Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Melitz (2003), ε instead measures the dispersion
of productivity across goods within a country.5 In all models, however, domestic
and foreign factor services remain imperfect substitutes, with ε being the elasticity
of substitution between them. Together with how much we trade, this is all we
need to know to compute the gains from trade.6
    To be clear, this approach is related to, but distinct from, the work of Feen-
stra (1994) and Broda and Weinstein (2006) on the gains from trade as a result of

    5 Both  Krugman (1980) and Melitz (2003) feature monopolistic rather than perfect competi-
tion. In general, this may lead to inefficiencies not captured in the analysis of Adao, Costinot and
Donaldson (2017). The assumption of constant elasticity of substitution preferences over goods in
Krugman (1980) and Melitz (2003) rules that out.
    6 In the constant elasticity of substitution case, integrating below the demand for foreign factor

services between ln p T and infinity, which is the price of foreign factors under autarky, one can
check that A = ln(1 + p−     ε
                           T ) /ε. To go from this expression to the ACR formula, one can then use
the fact that the CES demand system is invertible. Thus, one can infer the relative price of foreign
factors in the trade equilibrium, p T , from the share of expenditure on those, λ F . Specifically, given
        p−  ε
λF =     T
       1+ p − ε,   we get 1 + p−
                               T = 1/ (1 − λ F ) = 1/λ D and, in turn, A = −(ln λ D ) /ε. Combining the
                                 ε
            T
previous expression with equation (2), we get the ACR formula in the text.

                                                      8
new varieties becoming available, under the assumption of CES preferences for
varieties from different countries. Here, we emphasize that by estimating the total
demand for foreign factor services and examining the area below that demand
curve, we can measure the overall gains from trade.7


2.4       Can It Be That Simple?
Although the formula for welfare gains from trade derived in Section 2.2 is fairly
general, the overwhelming number of applications of these concepts by trade
economists involve a CES factor demand system, as illustrated by the ACR for-
mula in Section 2.3. Clearly, CES is a very strong functional-form restriction. There
is a priori no reason to believe that the same assumption that has become popular
in the trade literature to date – where popularity is often determined by tractabil-
ity – should be the best guide to estimate the gains from trade in the United States
in practice. In general, we do not expect “the” trade elasticity to be unique: for
example, import demand may be much less elastic around autarky than around
free trade, or much different in Costa Rica and France than in the United States, a
scenario that CES necessarily rules out.
    Rather than focus on the specific formula for the welfare gains from trade dis-
played in equation (3), the basic insight from the work of Arkolakis, Costinot and
Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012a) is that measuring the gains from trade requires address-
ing two questions: (i ) How large are imports of factor services in the current trade
equilibrium? and (ii ) How elastic is the demand for these imported services along
the path from trade to autarky? The two sufficient statistics in the ACR formula
are just specific answers to these two questions. If we do not trade much or if the
factor services that we import are close substitutes to those that we would have
access to under autarky, then the grey area in Figure 3 must be small, and so must

   7 Itshould also be clear that our approach simultaneously captures the benefits of importing
and exporting. In general equilibrium, what matters is the relative price of US imports in terms of
US exports, which is here summarized by the price of foreign factor services relative to US factor
services. The reason why producer surplus does not appear in our computations is because firms’
revenues are fully rebated to factors of production.

                                                9
be the gains from trade. In the next section, we will organize our discussion of the
US gains from trade around these two questions.
    Before delving into numbers, however, we want to highlight that aggregation
issues will make addressing these questions more complex than the discussion so
far might have suggested. By going from trade in goods to trade in factor ser-
vices, we have argued that we can reduce the dimensionality of what needs to
be estimated. The idea is that instead of estimating both production and demand
functions for goods, one could just estimate the demand for factors from differ-
ent countries. It does not follow, however, that factors from different countries
can be aggregated into a single domestic factor and a single foreign factor. This
aggregation holds true in the CES case, but not necessarily otherwise.
    In general, the factor demand system that one needs to estimate may remain
high-dimensional. Think of each country implicitly buying skilled workers, un-
skilled workers, and physical capital from around the world. For foreign factor
services, there can be an empirical strategy for getting back to the one- factor case
by treating all foreign factor services as a Hicks-composite good.8 For domestic
factor services, however, one cannot escape the fact that as the prices of all for-
eign factors are taken to their reservation values, one still needs to compute the
relative prices of domestic factors under autarky. Again, this problem is similar to
the one arising in the context of a single differentiated sector in the industrial or-
ganization literature. If Apple Cinnamon Cheerios (and a range of other brands)
were no longer available, the prices of other ready-to-eat cereals may respond.
Thus, when computing the equivalent variation associated with the removal of
Apple Cinnamon Cheerios, such price responses should be included. Here, sim-
ilar economic considerations are at play economy-wide. If foreign factor services
complement certain domestic factor services (say, skilled labor), but substitute for
others (say, unskilled labor), then moving to autarky will affect the relative price
of these domestic factors, which will affect the utility that is possible under a situ-
ation of autarky—that is U A in Figure 2—as well as the income required to achieve

   8 Forempirical purposes, this approach requires the existence of a price shifter that uniformly
moves the price of all foreign factor services relative to domestic ones.

                                               10
that utility level—that is e( p A , U A ).
   Finally, it is worth emphasizing that the previous considerations arise under
the maintained assumption that there exists a representative agent owning all do-
mestic factors. We discuss the specific issues associated with the distributional
consequences of trade in Section 4.


3     Gains from Trade in Practice

3.1     How Large Are the US Imports of Factor Services?
The simplest way to measure the US imports of foreign factor services is to look at
the total value of all goods imported by the United States and assume that this is
equal to the total payments to foreign factors used to produce these goods. Figure
4 shows the US import share, λ F , computed as the share of total spending devoted
to imports for each year from 1995 to 2014, using data from the World Input-
Output Database (WIOD).9 Despite a decrease during the Great Recession and a
slight downtick in the subsequent years, the figure reveals a gradual increase in
the importance of trade in the United States over the last two decades, with an
increase in the US import share from about 6 to around 8 percent.
    The low US import share partly reflects the fact that, as in most rich coun-
tries, US spending disproportionately falls on services, which are less likely to be
traded. Although the US import share within manufacturing is much higher at
24.5 percent, manufacturing accounts for only 22 percent of total US spending.
Another reason behind the low US import share is the size of the US economy,
which mechanically raises the importance of intra-national relative to interna-
tional trade. Thus, in spite of fairly low barriers to international trade, the US
import share is one of the lowest in the world. In contrast, a small open economy
like Belgium has an import share above 30 percent.

    9 Specifically,
               we use WIOD releases in 2013 and 2016; see Timmer and de Vries (2015). The
WIOD release 2013 has 35 sectors and 41 countries (including a synthetic Rest of the World); the
WIOD release 2016 has 56 sectors and 44 countries (including a synthetic Rest of the World).

                                              11
                                 Figure 4: US Import Share

Notes: The figure contains the import share λ F for the United States between the years 1995 and
2014. Data for the years from 1995 to 2000 come from the 2013 release of the WIOD tables, while
data for the years 2000 to 2014 come from the 2016 release of the WIOD tables. The time series
coming from the two different releases of the WIOD were spliced so that they take the same value
in the year 2000 (this adjustment is very small since the two series match very closely). The import
share is calculated as gross total imports (adding across imports for intermediate input use and
imports for final use) over total expenditure.




                                                12
    The previous import shares implicitly abstract from global input-output link-
ages. In their absence, the US share of expenditure on imports, which we have
plotted in Figure 4, must be equal to the share of spending by US consumers on
foreign factor services, which is what our welfare formula emphasizes. In the
presence of such linkages, it may not be.10
    To assess the quantitative importance of these linkages, we again turn to the
World Input-Output Database, which not only has the (gross) trade flows that we
have used above, but also country-level input-output flows as well as final con-
sumption and the value-added share in each sector-country. Under a proportion-
ality assumption, this database provides a world input-output matrix that gives
the share of output in each sector-country that comes from value added and from
intermediate goods from each other sector-country.11 As in Johnson and Noguera
(2012), this matrix can be used to compute the factor services that every country i
exports to every other country j both directly – that is, as value added embodied in
exports for final consumption – and indirectly as part of worldwide input-output
trade flows. This exercise reveals that import shares λ F computed from gross
trade flows (as in Figure 4) systematically understate the extent to which coun-
tries are open to international trade. When computed with value added trade
flows, the US import share becomes 11.4 percent rather than 8 percent. The same
upward adjustment extends to all countries in the World Input-Output Database.
The GDP-weighted average import share is 28 percent, whereas measured in gross
flows this is 20 percent. In value added terms, the United States and the world ap-
pear more open.

   10 Because of intermediate goods, both measures also tend to be lower than the ratio of imports
over GDP. Note, however, that even in the absence of intermediate goods, imports over GDP
may differ from the expenditure share on imports because of trade imbalances. In the case of the
United States, a country with a large trade deficit, this consideration further lowers the share of
expenditure on imports relative to imports over GDP. Trade imbalances, of course, are related to
the gains from intertemporal trade, which static models in the trade literature abstract from. We
refer the reader interested in this issue to Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) and Heathcote and
Perri (2014) for further discussions.
   11 Antras and de Gortari (2017) propose a model of global value chains potentially leading to

deviations from such proportionality assumptions. de Gortari (2017) further explores the issue
empirically using Mexican firm-level data.

                                                13
    The key channel behind this adjustment is the fact that US domestic produc-
tion also uses foreign factor services, through imports of intermediate goods. This
raises the share of spending by US consumers on foreign value added above the
share of spending by US consumers on foreign goods. This is what happens, for
instance, when some cars made and sold in the US include imports of German
factor services used to produce the transmissions in those cars.
    To add one more level of complexity, the import share computed with Johnson
and Noguera’s (2012) value added flows excludes domestic factor services used
to produce intermediate goods that were first exported and then imported back in
the form of final goods – such services are counted as domestic, though they are
traded in practice. Think of US imports of cars assembled in Mexico with US en-
gines. Under autarky, however, all factor services that are currently traded would
no longer be available. To compute the gains from trade, one should therefore
expand the measure of spending on imports to include all traded factor services,
not just the foreign ones.12
    Using again the World Input-Output Database, this adjustment turns out to be
small: for example, in the year 2014, the import ratio for the US increases from 11.4
to 12.1 percent, and similar results hold for the rest of the countries. Intuitively, the
presence of trade costs tends to make this second adjustment—involving US factor
services exported back and forth—small relative to the first adjustment—involving
foreign factor services exported once.


3.2        How Elastic Is the Demand for Imported Factor Services?
The standard approach in the literature is to assume that the demand for factor
services exhibits a constant elasticity of substitution, as in the models covered by
the ACR formula. Letting λij denote the share of expenditure by destination coun-
try j on factor services from origin country i and letting tij be an observable shifter
   12 In
       models with input-output loops, such as Alvarez and Lucas (2007), this means that the
relevant price of foreign factor services is not the price of foreign value added, but the price of
the bundle of inputs required for production abroad, a bundle that combines foreign value added
with domestic value added, through imports of intermediate goods abroad.

                                                14
of the costs associated with trading those factor services, then we can estimate this
elasticity ε from the regression equation,

                                  ln λij = δio + δjd − ε ln tij + νij .

The term δio is an origin-specific fixed effect that captures the role of the price of
factor services in country i as well as anything that makes it costly for that country
to export those services anywhere else. The term δjd is a destination-specific fixed
effect that captures how costly it is on average for country j to buy factor services.
Finally, νij is an error term that captures trade costs not included in tij .13
    In practice, trade cost shifters may be tariffs, which vary across country pairs
thanks to preferential trade agreements (see for example Caliendo and Parro 2015)
or freight costs (see for example Shapiro, 2016 and Adao, Costinot and Donald-
son, 2017). The identifying assumption is that there is no correlation between the
observable shifter tij and the unobservable term νij , so that one can estimate ε us-
ing a simple OLS regression. In their review of the literature using this general
approach, Head and Mayer (2013) report a median estimate of ε = 5.
    The standard approach raises some obvious concerns. One unfortunate feature
of the empirical estimates of ε is that they come mostly from variation in trade
costs and trade flows across foreign countries. Indeed, the previous regressions
are often ran excluding domestic flows. Yet, the relevant elasticity from a welfare
standpoint is the elasticity of substitution between domestic and all foreign factors
   13 Forhistorical reasons due to the pioneering work of Tinbergen (1962), such an equation is
commonly referred to as a “gravity” equation; see Anderson (2011). Given the assumption that the
demand for factor services exhibits a constant elasticity of substitution, the share of expenditure
on factors from any origin country i in any destination j can be expressed as

                                                     (τij pi )−ε
                                            λij =                  ,
                                                    ∑l (τlj pl )−ε

where pi denotes the price of factor services from country i; τij is a a summary measure of all
trading frictions between i and j; and ε is the trade elasticity that we want to estimate. Assuming
that τij = τio τjd tij exp νij , where tij is some observable trade cost shifter, and then taking the log of
this equation leads to the regression equation in the main text, where the first two terms of that
equation in the text become δio ≡ −ε ln(τio pi ) and δjd ≡ − ln(∑l (τlj pl )−ε ), respectively.

                                                      15
combined.14
    Another concern is the assumption of a constant elasticity of demand for factor
services. Adao, Costinot and Donaldson (2017) have proposed a strict generaliza-
tion of the constant elasticity of substitution assumption inspired by the work of
Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) in the field of industrial organization. Their
“mixed CES” demand system allows the degree of substitutability across factor
services from different countries to vary systematically with observable charac-
teristics of those countries. While the average trade elasticity estimated by Adao,
Costinot and Donaldson (2017) is close to the estimates reviewed by Head and
Mayer (2013), they find that poor countries, like China, are closer substitutes
to other poor countries, like Bangladesh and Vietnam, than rich countries, like
France and Germany. For the purposes of measuring the gains from trade, this
suggests combining their estimates of factor demand with information about the
entire vector of expenditure shares – that is, looking at factor demand for foreign
shares on a country-by-country basis, not just overall.15
    Although the demand system estimated in Adao, Costinot and Donaldson
(2017) relaxes the CES assumption, it is still very far from a nonparametric proce-
dure that would flexibly trace out the response of the demand for foreign factors
as we raise their prices to their reservation values. Given the limits on the num-
ber of observations and the amount of exogenous variation typically available in
real world datasets, it is not surprising that few papers actually try to estimate the
demand for foreign factors directly.
    By far the most common alternative approach is to write down a Computable
General Equilibrium (CGE) model in which the values of all structural parame-
ters indirectly pin down the demand for foreign factors. Such models typically
involve a variety of nested relationships that each use their own constant elastic-

   14 Feenstra, Luck, Obstfeld and Russ (2018) is a notable exception.  Their estimates point towards
less substitutability between domestic and foreign sources than between different foreign sources.
   15 The issue of global-input linkages, of course, carries over to the estimation of factor demand.

The empirical analysis of Adao, Costinot and Donaldson (2017) is conducted under the assump-
tion that the value of total factor services from a given country i sold in country j is equal to the
total value of the goods sold by i in j.

                                                 16
ity of substitution assumption, both on the supply and demand side, though there
is a tremendous amount of variation across CGE models in terms of the number
of structural parameters that need to be estimated, from a single one in Eaton and
Kortum (2002) to more than 13,000 in the latest model of the Global Trade Analysis
Project (Hertel et al., 2012).
    This leads to a trade-off. Parsimonious CGE models can be estimated in a fairly
transparent manner, which has contributed to their recent popularity in the field,
but their predictions require stronger functional form restrictions, with many elas-
ticities implicitly assumed to be identical or equal to one. This is what Dawkins
et al. (2001) refer to as the “idiot’s law of elasticities”: all elasticities are equal to
one until shown otherwise. Of course, both sets of parameters—those that are es-
timated in a transparent manner, like the trade elasticity within an industry, and
those that are not, like the elasticity of substitution between goods from different
industries or the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods and pri-
mary factors—matter for the elasticity of the demand for foreign factor services,
an important limitation that should be kept in mind.16


3.3    So How Large Are the US Gains from Trade?
We now put together the results of the previous two subsections and discuss their
implications for the gains from trade. We first present results using the ACR for-
mula for the size of gains from trade presented earlier. Figure 5 shows the gains
from trade for the United States, with λ D = 1 − λ F equal to 92 percent and ε vary-
ing from 2 to 12, which is the range of values for ε estimated in Eaton and Kortum
(2002). Not surprisingly, the figure reveals that the gains from trade are highly
sensitive to the value of epsilon: they are equal to 0.7 percent for ε = 2 and 4.1
   16 In general, the elasticity of demand for foreign factors will be some average of upper-level and

lower-level elasticities of substitution, with weights depending on the pattern of inter- and intra-
industry trade (Ossa, 2012; Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare, 2014). Instead of assuming that the
elasticity of substitution between industries is equal to one, one could therefore instead estimate
that upper-level elasticity by targeting a trade elasticity for aggregate trade flows equal to the one
estimated in the literature. Such a procedure would guarantee that multi-industry CGE models
do not imply a demand for foreign factor services whose elasticity is counterfactually too low.

                                                 17
             Figure 5: The US Gains from Trade for Different Elasticities.

Notes: The figure shows the gains from trade for the US in 2014. It uses data from the WIOD release
2016. Gains are computed as in equation (3) with various values of e.


percent for ε = 12. Evaluated at ε = 5, the median estimate in Head and Mayer
(2013), the US gains from trade are equal to 1.7 percent. For comparison, a country
like Belgium, with a much larger import share, has gains equal to 7.7 percent.
    The previous estimates all implicitly rely on the assumption, embodied in
a CES factor demand system, that factor services from different countries are
equally substitutable. To explore the quantitative importance of this restriction,
we apply the methodology described in Section 2.2 using the more general fac-
tor demand system estimated by Adao, Costinot and Donaldson (2017). Results
are reported in Figure 6.17 From 1995 to 2011, the US gains from trade estimated
under mixed CES grow from about 1.3 to 2.3 percent. Using the same data, but re-
stricting demand to be CES, one would have wrongly concluded that the US gains
from trade over that same time period only grew from 1.1 to 1.5 percent.18 The dif-

   17 We  thank Rodrigo Adao for help with these counterfactual exercises.
   18 When   restricting demand to be CES, Adao, Costinot and Donaldson (2017) estimate a trade
elasticity ε around 6, hence the somewhat smaller gains from trade than before.

                                                18
            Figure 6: The US Gains from Trade: CES versus Mixed CES.

Notes: The figure shows the gains from trade for the US between 1995 and 2011. It uses data from
the WIOD release 2013. Gains are computed using the estimated demand parameters of Adao et
al. (2017).


ferential growth rates reflect the fact that over that time period, the United States
not only imported more, but also imported relatively more from countries with
lower GDP per capita, namely China, whose factor services have been estimated
to be less substitutable to domestic factors in the US.
    As mentioned previously, a more common way in which the literature has de-
parted from a CES factor demand system is indirectly via CGE models. Costinot
and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) report results for the gains from trade for the coun-
tries in the World Input-Output Database for the year 2008 under various struc-
tural assumptions. Focusing on the United States, the gains from trade increase
from 1.8 percent in the model with a single sector to 4.4 percent of GDP in the
multi-sector model with unitary elasticity of substitution across different indus-
tries. If one further allows for intermediate goods and assumes as in Caliendo
and Parro (2015) that the elasticity of substitution between primary factors and


                                              19
inputs from different sectors is again one, the implied gains from trade increase to
8.3 percent of GDP.19
    One notable omission of the previous computable general equilibrium models
is an explicit treatment of natural resources. If a country has no oil or gas resources
and needs to import all that it uses, one would expect substantial losses from mov-
ing to autarky. If these resources are critical in the production of certain goods,
and if those goods are not easily substitutable for other goods, this could lead to a
demand for foreign factor services that becomes very inelastic as a country moves
closer to autarky or that is much less elastic than the (relative) demand for factor
services from different countries, as already discussed in footnote 14. Neither of
these channels is present in the models reviewed in Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare
(2014). In recent work, Fally and Sayre (2017) show that these considerations can
lead to much larger gains from trade, especially in countries that lack diversified
endowments of primary resources. For the United States, however, with its rea-
sonably extensive endowments of natural resources, the effects that they uncover
are small.


4      Growth, Distortions, and Redistribution

4.1     The Dynamic Gains from Trade
Many economists have a gut instinct that the gains from trade are much larger
than those presented in the previous section. Could it be that our static approach
misses important sources of “dynamic gains”? We briefly discuss a number of
channels through which dynamic considerations may affect the magnitude of the
gains from trade.
   Perhaps more than any other dynamic consideration, innovation is most re-
sponsible for the view that the dynamic gains from trade may be large. A useful

    19 The result for the gains from trade in the single-sector model is again computed using ε =
5, while for the multi-sector model with and without intermediate goods the sector-level trade
elasticities are those estimated in Caliendo and Parro (2015).

                                               20
way to start thinking about this issue is to interpret the creation of new good
varieties, or firm entry, in Krugman (1980) and Melitz (2003), as product innova-
tion. The fact that these models are covered by the ACR formula suggests that the
static model considered above includes an element of dynamic change. A simi-
lar insight holds for the growth model of Eaton and Kortum (2001). For dynamic
gains from trade to arise, trade must lower the relative cost of innovation rela-
tive to the cost of production, as in the lab-equipment model of Rivera-Batiz and
Romer (1991). Evidence on this connection is meager and contradictory. Bloom,
Draca and Reenen (2016) report evidence of a positive response of innovation to
Chinese import competition among European firms. In the United States, how-
ever, the results of Autor, Dorn, Hanson, Pisano and Shu (2016) point towards a
negative effect of the China trade shock on innovation.
    Another dynamic issue is related to frictions in the reallocation of factors of
production, as emphasized, for instance, by Artuc, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2010)
and Caliendo et al. (2015) in a labor market context. Intuitively, such frictions lead
the economy to adjust slowly to changes in trade costs, implying a lower trade
elasticity in the short run than in the long run. A sudden move to autarky would
then imply losses that are high in the short run, but then decline over time as
resources get reallocated. In this case, the discounted stream of losses would be
higher than the steady state losses computed disregarding frictions in the static
analysis of gains from trade.20
    Our static analysis also abstracts from capital accumulation. Because some
investment goods are tradable (like equipment goods), we expect capital accu-
mulation to raise the gains from trade, just like trade in intermediate goods does.
Consistent with this view, Ravikumar, Santacreu and Sposi (2017) find that the
welfare effects of trade liberalization, specifically a decline of 20 percent in all in-
ternational trade costs, are 23 percent higher when taking into account the impact
on capital accumulation than in a static model.
    More generally, very different welfare effects of trade may arise in the pres-

  20 Bursteinand Melitz (2013) and Alessandria, Choi and Ruhl (2015) make a related point in the
context of models with firm-level heterogeneity, sunk costs, and transitional dynamics.

                                              21
ence of markup distortions typical in growth models, or because of knowledge
spillovers within or across countries, as in some of the models covered in Gross-
man and Helpman (1991) as well as in more recent work by Sampson (2016),
Jesse Perla and Waugh (2015), and Buera and Oberfield (2016). As emphasized
by Young (1991), trade could either increase or decrease growth, with ambiguous
welfare consequences. The key force in these models, however, is not dynamics
per se, but the presence of distortions, to which we now turn.


4.2   Distortions and the Gains from Trade
In the earlier textbook analysis of gains from trade, the private and social marginal
benefits of importing foreign factor services are equalized. In the presence of dis-
tortions, they may not be, further complicating the measurement of the welfare
gains from trade.
    As a matter of theory, the gains from trade could be larger, if it alleviates dis-
tortions, or smaller, if it worsens them. In the extreme, domestic distortions could
even make autarky superior to trade. This insight is just a corollary of the theory
of the second best: in the presence of domestic distortions, imposing another dis-
tortion (in this, case imposing autarky through an infinite tariff) could in theory
make the economy better off.
    One recent area of research has focused on the pro-competitive effects of trade
and the extent to which opening up to trade may reduce markup distortions (for
example, Epifani and Gancia (2011); Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2011); Arko-
lakis, Costinot, Donaldson and Rodriguez-Clare (2012b)). Having calibrated their
model to the US economy, Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson and Rodriguez-Clare
(2012b) find only small differences between the overall welfare gains predicted by
models with and without variable markups, though their analysis relies on strong
functional-form assumptions.
    Another source of distortions that could affect the gains from trade is the pres-
ence of differential wage premia across firms or sectors (for example, Helpman,
Itskhoki and Redding (2010); Davis and Harrigan (2011); Swiecki (2017)). For


                                         22
instance, because wages for observably identical workers tend to be lower in agri-
culture than in manufacturing (and assuming that this pattern reflects differences
in wage premia rather than sorting on unobservable characteristics), the gains
from trade for countries that specialize in agriculture would be lower than those
predicted by the earlier ACR formula. Following this logic, Swiecki (2017) esti-
mates that the gains from trade in the United States are slightly lower than those
reported in the estimates in the previous section.


4.3   Redistribution
Our discussion has focused on the aggregate gains from trade: that is, the gains
that would accrue to a representative consumer. In practice, of course, trade tends
to create both winners and losers. How should one think about the overall gains
from trade in such a situation?
    This issue can of course be analyzed under the assumptions of a benevolent so-
cial planner and lump-sum transfers, but in practice, tax instruments are limited
and shaped by political-economy considerations. To shed light on the magnitude
of the gains from trade in such environments, Antras, de Gortari and Itskhoki
(2017) and Galle, Rodrı́guez-Clare and Yi (2017) propose to focus on an envi-
ronment with exogenous income taxes and posit a social welfare function that
displays constant inequality aversion. In the context of the United States, Galle,
Rodrı́guez-Clare and Yi (2017) focus on 1, 444 worker groups defined by commut-
ing zones and level of education. They find that 26 groups lose from trade, with
one of those groups experiencing losses equal to 3.2 percent, while the overall
gains are 1.5 percent. Poorer groups experience stronger degrees of import com-
petition and hence have lower gains from trade, so trade worsens between-group
inequality. In their preferred specification, when the gains from trade are adjusted
for an inequality-averse social welfare function, the gains for the United States re-
main positive and only slightly lower than the standard measure which ignores
inequality, 1.4 percent versus 1.5 percent, though this conclusion is clearly sensi-
tive to the assumed degree of inequality aversion and the level of aggregation at


                                         23
which gains and losses are considered.


5    Concluding Remarks
The share of US expenditure on imports is smaller than in most other countries. To
a large extent, this reflects the fact that for a large country like the United States,
a significant fraction of trade occurs intra- rather than internationally. This ba-
sic observation implies that that the welfare gains from international trade in the
United States are smaller than in most other countries. Although magnitudes vary
greatly depending on how one infers the shape of the US demand for foreign fac-
tor services, the estimates of gains from trade for the US economy that we review
range from 2 to 8 percent of GDP.
    Though such gains are nothing to spit at—they are an order of magnitude
larger than the estimated gains from eliminating business cycle fluctuations—they
may appear surprisingly small to some. It may be the case that if the United States
were to approach autarky, the US demand for foreign factor services would be-
come much less elastic, revealing the importance of some critical foreign inputs
and, in turn, much larger gains from trade. Both extrapolations based on the di-
rect estimation of demand and the predictions of computable general equilibrium
models may miss that. As mentioned in our introduction, the only direct evidence
of the cost autarky for the United States that we have comes from the Jeffersonian
trade embargo between December 1807 and March 1809. Irwin (2005) estimates
its welfare cost to be around 5 percent of US GNP in 1807. Interestingly, this is
similar in magnitude to the welfare gains from trade estimated by Bernhofen and
Brown (2005) in the context of Japan’s emergence from autarky after 1858.
    Needless to say, the previous numbers are not meant as a guide for future
economic policy. Current trade volumes are crucial for measuring the welfare cost
of autarky, not the potential gains from further trade expansion. If international
trade flows were to grow, so would the gains from international trade.




                                          24
References
Adao, Rodrigo, Arnaud Costinot, and Dave Donaldson, “Nonparametric Coun-
 terfactual Predictions in Neoclassical Models of International Trade,” American
 Economic Review, 2017, 107 (3), 633–689. 1, 2.2, 3, 5, 3.2, 15, 3.3, 18, 6

Alessandria, George, Horag Choi, and Kim Ruhl, “Trade Adjustment Dynamics
  and the Welfare Gains from Trade,” mimeo University of Rochester, 2015. 20

Alvarez, Fernando and Robert E. Lucas, “General Equilibrium Analysis of the
  Eaton-Kortum Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  2007, 54 (6), 1726–1768. 12

Anderson, James E., “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” The
 American Economic Review, 1979, 69 (1), 106–116. 2.3, 2.3

  , “The Gravity Model,” Annual Review of Economics, 2011, 3, 133–160. 13

Antras, Pol, Alonso de Gortari, and Oleg Itskhoki, “Globalization, Inequality
 and Welfare,” Journal of Intermational Economics, 2017, 108, 387–412. 4.3

  and , “On the Geography of Gloval Value Chains,” mimeo Harvard University,
  2017. 11

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andres Rodrı́guez-Clare, “New Trade
  Models, Same Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94–130. 1,
  2.3, 2.4

  ,  , Dave Donaldson, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “The Elusive Pro-
  Competitive Effects of Trade,” mimeo, 2012. 4.2

Artuc, E., S. Chaudhuri, and John McLaren, “Trade Shocks and Labor Adjust-
  ment: A Structural Empirical Approach,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100
  (3), 1008–1045. 4.1



                                       25
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, Gary Pisano, and Pian Shu,
 “Foreign Competition and Domestic Innovation: Evidence from U.S. Patents,”
 mimeo MIT, 2016. 4.1

Baldwin, Richard and James Harrigan, “Zeros, Quality and Space: Trade Theory
  and Trade Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2011, 3, 60–88.
  2.1

Bernhofen, Daniel M. and John C. Brown, “An Empirical Assessment of the
  Comparative Advantage Gains from Trade: Evidence from Japan,” American
  Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 208–225. 5

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “Automobile Prices in Market
  Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 1995, 63 (4), 841–890. 3.2

Bhagwati, Jagdish N., Arvind Panagariya, and T. N. Srinivasan, Lectures on In-
  ternational Trade, Boston, Massachussetts: The MIT Press, 1998. 1

Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, “Trade Induced Technical
  Change? The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 2016, 83 (1), 87–117. 4.1

Broda, Cristian and David Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains from Vari-
  ety,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (2), 541–585. 2.3

Buera, Francisco J. and Ezra Oberfield, “The Global Diffusion of Ideas,” 2016. 4.1

Burstein, Ariel and Marc J. Melitz, Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics, Vol. 2 of
  Advances in Economics and Econometrics Tenth World Congress. Applied Economics,
  Econometric Society Monographs, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
  2013. 20

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Ef-
  fects of NAFTA,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1–44. 3.2, 3.3, 19



                                         26
  , Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro, “Trade and Labor Market Dy-
  namics: General Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock,” 2015. 4.1

Costinot, Arnaud and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “Trade Theory with Numbers:
 Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization,” in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan
 Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4,
 North Holland, 2014, chapter 4. 10, 16, 3.3, 3.3

Davis, Donald R. and James Harrigan, “Good jobs, bad jobs, and trade liberal-
 ization,” Journal of Intermational Economics, 2011, 84, 26–36. 4.2

Dawkins, Christina, T.N. Srinivasan, and John Whalley, Calibration, Vol. 5 of
 Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier, 2001. 3.2

de Gortari, Alonso, “Disentangling Global Value Chains,” mimeo Harvard Univer-
  sity, 2017. 11

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Trade in Capital Goods,” European Eco-
  nomic Review, 2001, 45 (7), 1195–1235. 4.1

   and , “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (5), 1741–
  1779. 2.3, 2.3, 3.2, 3.3

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Xu, “Competition, Markups and
  the Gains from Trade,” mimeo, Duke and NYU, 2011. 4.2

Epifani, Paolo and Gino Gancia, “Trade, Markup Heterogeneity and Misalloca-
  tions,” Journal of Intermational Economics, 2011, 83 (1), 1–13. 4.2

Fally, Thibault and James Sayre, “Commodity Trade Matters,” mimeo UC Berke-
  ley, 2017. 3.3

Feenstra, Robert C., “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of Interna-
  tional Prices,” The American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (1), 157–177. 2.3




                                      27
  , Philip Luck, Maurice Obstfeld, and Katheryn N. Russ, “In Search of the Arm-
  ington Elasticity,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018, forthcoming. 14

Galle, Simon, Andres Rodrı́guez-Clare, and Moises Yi, “Slicing the Pie: Quan-
 tifying the Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Trade,” 2017. mimeo UC
 Berkeley. 4.3

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Econ-
 omy, Cambridge, Massachussets: MIT press, 1991. 4.1

Hausman, Jerry A., Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition
 The Economics of New Goods, University of Chicago Press, 1996. 1

Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, “Gravity Equations: Toolkit, Cookbook,
 Workhorse,” in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,
 Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, New York: Elsevier, 2013. 3.2, 3.3

Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri, “Assessing International Efficiency,” in
 Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of Inter-
 national Economics, Vol. 4, North Holland, 2014, chapter 9. 10

Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, and Stephen J. Redding, “Inequality and Un-
 employment in a Global Economy,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (4), 1239–1283. 4.2

Hertel, Thomas W., Robert A. McDougall, Badri G. Narayanan, and Angel H.
 Aguiar, “Behavioral Parameters,” in Badri G. Narayanan, Angel H. Aguiar, and
 Robert A. McDougall, eds., Global Trade, Assistance, and Production: The GTAP 8
 Data Base, Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University, 2012. 3.2

Irwin, Douglas A., “The Welfare Costs of Autarky: Evidence from the Jeffersonian
  Embargo, 1807-1809,” Review of International Economics, 2005, 13, 631–645. 5

Johnson, Robert C. and Guillermo Noguera, “Accounting for Intermediates: Pro-
  duction Sharing and Trade in Value Added,” Journal of International Economics,
  2012, 86 (2), 224–236. 3.1

                                        28
Krugman, Paul, “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of
  Trade,” The American Economic Review, 1980, 70 (5), 950–959. 2.3, 2.3, 5, 4.1

Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggre-
 gate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725. 2.3, 2.3, 5,
 4.1

Nevo, Aviv, “New Products, Quality Changes, and Welfare Measures Computed
 from Estimated Demand Systems,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85
 (2), 266–275. 1

Ossa, Ralph, “Why Trade Matters After All,” mimeo, 2012. 16

P., Dietzenbacher E. Los B. Stehrer R. Timmer M. and G. J. de Vries, “An Il-
   lustrated User Guide to the World Input–Output Database: the Case of Global
   Automotive Production,” Review of International Economics, 2015, 23, 575–605. 9

Perla, Christopher Tonetti Jesse and Michael E. Waugh, “EQuilibrium Technol-
  ogy Diffusion, Trade and Growth,” 2015. 4.1

Petrin, Amil, “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Mini-
  van,” Journal of political Economy, 2002, 110, 705–729. 1

Ravikumar, B., Ana Maria Santacreu, and Michael Sposi, “Capital Accumula-
  tion and Dynamic Gains from Trade,” Saint Louis Fed Working Paper, 2017. 4.1

Rivera-Batiz, Luis A. and Paul M. Romer, “Economic Integration and Endoge-
  nous Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1991, Vol. CVI (No. 425), pp.
  531–555. 4.1

Sampson, Thomas, “Dynamic Selection: An Idea Flows Theory of Entry, Trade,
  and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016. 4.1

Shapiro, Joseph S., “Trade Costs, CO2, and the Environment,” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 2016, 8 (4), 220–54. 3.2


                                       29
Swiecki, Tomasz, “Intersectoral distortions and welfare gains from trade,” Journal
 of Intermational Economics, 2017, 104, 138–156. 4.2

Tinbergen, Jan, Shaping the World Economy, New York: The Twentieth Century
  Fund, 1962. 13

Young, Alwyn, “Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International
  Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106, 396–406. 4.1




                                       30
