NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN THE CYCLICAL BEHAVIOR OF
INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTION SERIES

Christina Romer

Working Paper No. 2440

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1987

Support from the Olin Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. I thank Ben Bernanke,
N. Gregory Mankiw, and David Romer for helpful discussions, Phillip Swagel for
research assistance, and the National Science Foundation for financial support.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2440
November 1987

Changes in the Cyclical Behavior of Individual Production Series

ABSTRACT

This paper uses simple time series techniques to analyze changes in
the short-run behavior of 38 physical production series for 1889-1984.
The main finding is that fluctuations in these output series in the periods
1889-1914 and 1947-1984 are very similar, while those in the period 1922-

1939 are anomalous. Relative to the prewar era, the postwar era exhibits
only a slight damping of fluctuations and no increase in the persistence of

short-run movements. At the same time, the correlation between the growth
rates of the 38 goods is very low in both the prewar and postwar eras and
has declined slightly over time.

Christina D. Romer
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617)868-3900

INTRODUCTION
Burns and Mitchell's study Measuring Business Cycles (1947) is

considered by many to be the pioneering study in the identification and

measurement of economic fluctuations. Among the most outstanding and least
controversial attributes of this work is its use of disaggregate data in

the analysis of short-run movements in economic activity. In their
analysis, Burns and Mitchell examine the short-run behavior of over 200
production series as well as a plethora of other disaggregate economic

indicators. This detailed analysis of individual series allows them to
both examine common elements in the behavior of all series and to pinpoint
important differences in the behavior of series representing different
sectors of the economy.

Though widely praised, the use of disaggregate data has been largely

abandoned by modern macroeconomists. Aggregate measures such as real CNP
or the index of industrial production are typically used in place of

individual output series in the analysis of short-run fluctuations. While
this reliance on aggregate data is characteristic of most empirical work on
business cycles, it is especially prevalent in studies of changes in

cyclical behavior over long time periods. Of the several studies in recent
years that have analyzed changes in the nature of economic fluctuations
between the prewar and postwar eras, nearly all of them have relied
exclusively on aggregate measures of production (see, for example, Baily
(1978), DeLong and Summers (1986), Taylor (1986), and Zarnowitz and Moore
(1986)).

This paper breaks with current practice and revives the use of

disaggregate production data in macroeconomic analysis. It examines the

2

short-run behavior of 38 individual production series for 1889-1984. The
series analyzed all measure the physical production of a particular good
and appear to be consistent from the earliest years to the present. The
data set covers a wide variety of commodities and is equally divided among
manufactured goods, the output of mines and refineries, and raw
agricultural products.

The main focus of the analysis is on possible changes in the cyclical

behavior of production. Two of the most important changes that are
examined concern the volatility and persistence of short-run movements in

real output. The disaggregate data are used to analyze whether short-run
fluctuations have become less extreme or erratic over time and whether
the tendency of shocks to have permanent or transitory effects has changed
between the prewar and postwar eras.

Using good disaggregate data to analyze these possible changes is
crucially important because traditional aggregate measures of production

are not consistent over time. Romer (l986a and l986b) shows that prewar
estimates of GNP and industrial production exaggerate the size of short-run

fluctuations. As a result, using such measures may lead one to mistake
changes in the quality of the data for genuine changes in cyclical

behavior. In contrast, the individual production series appear to be very
consistent over time. Hence, they may provide an alternative way of
assessing whether the volatility and persistence of fluctuations have
changed between the prewar and postwar eras.

An additional change in cyclical behavior that is examined in the

paper concerns the correlation of short-term changes across sectors. Does
the production of various goods move together and have there been changes

in the size and sign of the correlations over time? This is obviously a

3

change that can only be analyzed using disaggregate data.
Though the paper focuses on changes in the volatility, persistence,

and correlation of short-run fluctuations in the individual production
series, an important byproduct of the analysis is a description of the
short-run behavior of these series within various eras.

This is useful

because there has been so little analysis of the behavior of disaggregate

production series even within the postwar era. As a result, the analysis
is able to provide new evidence on such topics as the relative importance
of aggregate and industry-specific shocks in causing fluctuations in the
output of individual goods, and the degree to which such fluctuations are
permanent or transitory within a given period.

While the data used in the paper are similar to those used by Burns
and Mitchell, the techniques used to identify changes in cyclical behavior

are quite different. Burns and Mitchell use measures such as the mean
cyclical amplitude and the length of cycles to identify changes in the

short-run behavior of output. In contrast, I use simple time series
analysis of the standard deviations, autocorrelations, and cross-

correlations of the first differences of individual production series to
identify possible changes in short-run fluctuations.

The data set and the time series framework used to analyze changes in
the short-run behavior of output are discussed in Sections I and II. The
findings concerning changes in the volatility, serial correlation, and
cross-correlation of the 38 production series are analyzed in Sections III,

IV, and V, respectively. The importance and implications of the changes
identified are discussed in the conclusion.

4
I.

DATA
Because much of what is unique about the analysis of cyclical changes

presented in this paper stems from the use of good disaggregate production

data, it is crucial to discuss the data set thoroughly. The data set
consists of 38 individual production series that span the entire period

1889-1984. Most of the series reflect the physical production of
individual goods such as raw steel, pig iron, coal, corn, and wheat. A few
of the series, such as cotton consumed and silk imported, reflect the
consumption of raw materials in the production of manufactured goods.

As the above examples indicate, the 38 series included in the data

set cover a wide range of goods. Approximately one-third are conventional

manufactured goods. Another third are the products of mines and
refineries. Some of these goods are quite processed (such as pig iron and
coke) and are conventionally included in indexes of industrial production.
The remaining third are agricultural products.

With two exceptions (pig iron and cotton consumed) the individual
production data are available through 1970 in Historical Statistics of the

United States (1975). My contribution has been to sift through the
hundreds of production series given in this volume to determine which ones

are reasonably accurate and consistent over time. The series that appeared
to be consistent were then checked more thoroughly and revised when

necessary. They were then extended through 1984 on the basis of more
recent primary and secondary publications.

Three criteria were used to choose the series to be included in the

data set. The first criterion was that the series represent the physical
production of a mineral, agricultural, or manufactured good. That is, the
series should represent such things as the tons of steel or the bushels of

5

corn produced, rather than the value of this production. This requirement

was designed to eliminate the measurement error that might result from
trying to convert a nominal series into a real series. The second
criterion was that the series exist back to at least 1889 and still be
available today from standard reference publications.

The desire for long

time series was obviously a very restrictive requirement

and eliminated at

least half of the physical production series in Historical Statistics.
The third and most fundamental criterion was that the series be

reasonably consistent over time. To establish consistency I looked for
several characteristics in the data. One was that the production estimates
were and still are based on contemporaneous annual censuses or surveys of

producers. This requirement was designed to eliminate those prewar series
that have been constructed in the postwar era using data that is much less
complete than those underlying modern estimates.

Another characteristic

that I looked for was that the definition of the good being measured was

the same over time. This requirement made sure that a series did not, for
example, cover shipments in one period and production in another or include
some by-products in one period and exclude them in another.
The application of the consistency criterion eliminated many series

from Historical Statistics. For example, the commonly used wheat flour
series was not used because early estimates are simply interpolated by
population rather than derived from actual survey data.

In some cases it

was possible to improve faulty series given in Historical Statistics rather

than to eliminate them altogether. For example, while the pig iron series
given in Historical Statistics uses shipments and production data
interchangeably, the source publications from the American Iron and Steel
Institute can be used to form a series that consistently represents

6

production.

A complete listing of the 38 series that were eventually chosen is

given in Table Al of the data appendix. The

appendix also discusses the

sources of the data and any changes that were made to the series given in
Historical Statistics to improve consistency.

II. FRAMEWORK OF ANALYSIS
In order to examine changes in

cyclical behavior, it is useful to

describe the individual production series

as following a very general

time series process. This time series process provides a framework for
motivating and interpreting various measures of the nature of short-run
fluctuations in the individual series in different time periods.

Model. The logarithm of each series can be described as following an
integrated moving average process with drift.

(1)

That is,

= B. +

u. = A(L)e.t,
where AJL) is a polynomial in the lag operator and
This representation

is white noise.

says that the first differences of the logarithms of

each production series

are

equal to a series specific mean (B.) plus

a random disturbance (u.). The random term of each series may be serially
correlated which is represented by the size and sign of the coefficients
A.(L).

This description of the data is particularly useful because it allows

one to remain agnostic about whether there is indeed a deterministic trend
to which the individual production

series revert. For the model given in

7

equation (1) sufficiently large negative values for some

combination of the

coefficients of A.(L) would suggest that the series does tend to- revert to

a trend growth path when it is shocked away. Coefficients that are small
or positive indicate that shocks have permanent effects.
Given this framework for describing the individual production series,

it is clear that simple statistical measures can be used to describe the

nature of economic fluctuations. First, an obvious measure of the
volatility of each series is the standard deviation of the random

component, u. This measure shows the dispersion of the first differences
of a production series around the mean growth rate. Second, the
autocorrelations of the u.fl's provide a convenient way of assessing the

persistence of short-run fluctuations. Cochrane (1986) and Campbell and
Mankiw (1987a,b,c) show that a weighted average of the first several sample
autocorrelations can be used to indicate if movements in production are

primarily transitory or permanent. Finally, the cross-correlations of the
u.fl's provide a way of evaluating the interactions between the individual

production series.

Sample Periods. These statistical measures describe the nature of
cycles over whatever sample of data is used in the calculation. By
dividing the last century into subperiods and estimating the standard
deviations, autocorrelations, and cross-correlations for each series for
each period, one can analyze whether the nature of short-run movements in

output has changed over time. The particular subperiods chosen for
comparison are 1889-1914, 1922-1939, and 1947-1984. In what follows these
periods are referred to as the prewar, interwar, and postwar eras,
respectively.

While these periods are reasonably standard (they are, for example,

8

similar to those used in Taylor (1986) and Schultze (1986)), it is useful

to explain why they were chosen. First, the prewar sample does not begin
until 1889 because of data limitations. While many of the important series
exist back to 1869, several interesting series such as refined sugar,
canned vegetables, cement, and refined lead are not available on a

consistent basis until 1889. Second, the two World Wars and the immediate
postwar depressions are excluded because it is likely that wartime
expansion and the subsequent demobilization do not provide a useful
indication of the typical short-run behavior of the macroeconomy.
Finally, the period before World War I is evaluated separately from
the period between World War I and World War II because it is not at all
clear whether the interwar period should be grouped with the prewar era or

with the postwar era. For example, if one is interested in comparing a
period before activist government intervention and with one after

intervention, the correct break is arguably World War 1.1 A further
reason for evaluating the interwar period separately is to see whether the
behavior of the economy in this era is fundamentally different from that in

other periods. This analysis may provide evidence about whether the Great
Depression was a unique event or merely a more extreme version of earlier
economic downturns.

III. VOLATILITY
Of all the changes in short-run behavior that may have occurred over
time, the one that has received the most attention is the possible decline

in the volatility of the economy. This possible stabilization of the
postwar economy is of tremendous interest because it is perceived as being
the likely effect of activist government stabilization

policy. Therefore,

9

it is very useful to see what the sample of 38 consistent production series
shows about changes in volatility between the prewar and postwar eras.

As discussed in Section II, a simple measure of the volatility of
each production series in the various time periods is the square root of

the variance of log first differences. In terms of the time series process
described in (1), this is simply

.JVar(u.).

This measure shows the dispersion of the first differences of a production

series around the mean growth rate. Since each series has been expressed
in logarithms, this measure is essentially the same as the simple standard

deviation of percentage changes. If this standard deviation is large, then
either the deviations from trend of a series with a trend are large or the

shocks to a series without a trend are large. Both of these conditions
correspond to what economists mean when they describe a series as volatile.

Changes in Volatility. When this measure is calculated for each
series in each period, the main finding is that the volatility of the

series in the prewar and postwar eras is quite similar. This can be seen
in Table 1, which reports the standard deviations of each series in each

sample period. A more convenient way to examine how much stabilization has
occurred in each series is to examine the ratio of the prewar standard

deviation to the postwar standard deviation. Figure 1 shows histograms of
the prewar to postwar stabilization ratios for agricultural goods, mineral
products, manufactured commodities, and all 38 goods, respectively.

The most obvious feature evident from the histograms is that the
stabilization ratios for nearly all of the goods are surprisingly close to

1.0. For the total sample, over 85% of the goods had ratios lower than

10

1.75 and over half had ratios lower than 1.25. The median stabilization
ratio is 1.11 and the mean stabilization ratio is 1.24.2 Of the four goods
that show stabilization ratios over 2.0, three are the reasonably minor

commodities of cigarettes, Irish potatoes, and hay. The only major
commodity that shows an obvious stabilization is crude petroleum.

The histograms for the commodities broken down by sector reveal some
interesting differences in the amount of stabilization shown by goods in

each sector. Agricultural goods show by far the least stabilization.
Eighty percent of these goods have stabilization ratios less than 1.25 and
over 30 percent of the goods have ratios substantially below 1.0,

indicating destabilization. This absence of stabilization in agriculture
is particularly surprising given the technological advances of the modern
era, such as pesticides and widespread irrigation, which one would have
expected to counteract some of the destabilizing shocks to farm production.

The stabilization ratios for mineral products are distributed fairly

evenly over the range .25 to 1.75. This indicates that there is a
substantial amount of variation in the behavior of the output of mines;
indeed, about as many mineral products have become less volatile as have

become more volatile. Finally, for manufacturing, the stabilization ratios
are clustered in the range 1.25 to 1.75. This indicates that a majority of
manufactured goods have shown a small decline in volatility over time.

However, it is useful to note that 40 percent of manufactured goods have
stabilization ratios below 1.25.

Despite this variation across commodities, the main finding of the
analysis is that most of the 38 commodities in the sample have

stabilization ratios between .75 and 1.25. More importantly, nearly all of
the major goods included in the sample show stabilization ratios in this

11

range. This can be seen if one examines the stabilization ratios for six
goods that would commonly be considered among the most important goods

produced in the United States: corn, wheat, bituminous coal, pig iron,
cotton textiles, and raw steel.3 Of these six goods, only pig iron and
steel production show even a slight stabilization. All of the rest have
ratios that are indistinguishable from 1.0. This indicates that there has
been very little change in volatility between the prewar and postwar eras.

While the similarity of the standard deviations of each series in the
prewar and postwar eras is one obvious feature of the data, an equally
obvious characteristic is that the standard deviation of each series is
substantially higher in the interwar period than in either of the other

eras. Using the data in Table 1, the interwar standard deviations are
typically 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 times as large as the standard deviations of the

prewar or postwar eras. This indicates that economic activity was
significantly more volatile in the l920s and 1930s than in the several
decades on either side of this period.

Comparison to Aggregate Findings. To put the changes in volatility
shown by the individual production series into perspective, it is useful to
compare the preceding results with those for various aggregate indicators

of production. The standard deviations of the percentage changes for
various aggregate series in different time periods are given in Table 2a.
The resulting prewar to postwar stabilization ratios indicate that the
traditional estimates of both GNP and industrial production (IP) show a

substantial damping of cyclical fluctuations over time. However, as
discussed previously, Romer (l986a and 1986b) demonstrates that the
traditional prewar measures of CNP and industrial production overstate the
size of short-term fluctuations and hence exaggerate the amount of

12

stabilization that has occurred over time. These studies find that when
consistent estimates are analyzed, the ratio of prewar to postwar standard
deviation is approximately 1.3 for both GNP and industrial production.

The amount of stabilization shown by the individual production series
is much more similar to that shown by the consistent aggregate series than
to that shown by traditional measures of GNP and industrial production.

Indeed, the amount of stabilization shown by the traditional aggregate
series is substantially larger than that shown by over 90 percent of the

individual production series examined in this paper.4 On the other hand,
the stabilization ratios of the consistent aggregate series are roughly
equal to those of the majority of individual commodities.

It is important to note that the similarity in the volatility of the
individual production series and the consistent aggregate series genuinely
provides new information on stabilization and is in no way present by

construction. For industrial production, the consistent series is formed
by continuing a prewar index of manufacturing production, which is based
almost exclusively on data on inputs, with the postwar Federal Reserve

Board (FRB) index of materials production. Because the FRB index contains
data on many goods not present in the prewar era, a comparison of this
series with the available prewar series only provides information on

changes in the general behavior of materials. It does not do what this
study does, which is to see if particular goods or even a particular basket

of goods has stabilized over time. Furthermore, while both the prewar and
postwar indexes of materials production includes some of the 13
manufactured goods analyzed in this paper (such as refined iigar and pig
iron), they obviously do not include any agricultural goods and very few

mineral products. Hence, the analysis of the agricultural and mineral

13

products included in this paper provides completely new information on how
much stabilization has occurred over time.
For CNP, the consistent series is formed by extrapolating modern GNP

estimates back to the prewar era using available prewar estimates of

commodity output.5 While the data on commodity output does include
agricultural and mineral products, these data cover goods that are

typically much more processed than those included in the sample analyzed in
this paper and are derived from nominal value series that are then deflated

rather than from physical production data. As a result, the data set
analyzed in this paper and that used in deriving consistent estimates of
GNP are very different and thus provide independent estimates of the amount
of stabilization that has occurred over time.

Possible Biases. While the behavior of the individual production
series certainly appears to confirm the finding that there has been little
damping of business cycles over time when consistent data are compared, one
might worry that the analysis of individual production series is biased

toward finding little stabilization. First, because of the necessity of
including only those goods for which data exist for at least 95 years, the
disaggregate data set tends to include many industries that have changed
from high growth to low growth industries between the prewar and postwar

eras. If such industries tend to become more volatile as they decline,
this could explain why the disaggregate production series have not
stabilized over time.

To see if this bias in the sample of individual production series is
an important source of the lack of stabilization in these series, it is

useful to exploit the cross-sectional nature of the data set. Since the
sample includes a fair number of goods that have continued to expand over

14

time as well as the many that have declined, it is possible to test
explicitly whether the degree of stabilization shown by various series is

systematically related to the pattern of growth in those industries. To do
this one can examine the correlation between the stabilization ratios for
each series and the change in the mean growth rate of each series between

the prewar and postwar eras. A negative correlation would indicate that
those industries that have not stabilized are precisely those industries
that have shown a large decline in the rate of expansion.
The relevant correlation coefficients by sector are - . 17 for

agriculture, .42 for minerals, and .06 for manufacturing.6 As can be seen,
only agriculture shows the suspected negative relationship and the

correlation coefficient is very small. Both manufacturing and mining show
a positive correlation between the stabilization ratios and the change in

the growth rates of the various commodities. This suggests that for these
sectors, goods that move from a phase of high growth in the prewar era to
low or negative growth in the postwar era are more likely to show

stabilization than those industries that have not declined. This somewhat
anomalous finding actually makes sense when one considers how volatile an

industry may be in the very early phases of development. If there is
lumpiness in investment, the production of a good may grow very little for
several years and then grow tremendously in the year that a new plant
opens.

Overall, the low and positive correlation coefficients suggest that
for the economy as a whole there is not a consistent relationship between
the degree of stabilization shown by a commodity and the change in the
average growth rate of the commodity between the prewar and postwar eras.
This indicates that the overrepresentation of declining industries in the

15

sample of 38 individual production series cannot account for the lack of
stabilization shown by these series.

Another feature of the data that one might fear could bias the
results is that the postwar sample period is 12 years longer than the

prewar sample period. If one believes that the mean growth rate of a
series is more likely to change over a longer sample period, then it is
possible that the standard deviation around a constant mean may overstate

the volatility of the postwar era relative to the prewar era. The reason
for this is that a larger fraction of the deviations around the mean may be
due to changes in the drift term rather than to changes in the variance of
the disturbance ternis in the postwar era than in the shorter prewar era.

Two pieces of evidence suggest that this possible bias is not

significant. First, since several of the individual series exist back to
1869, it is possible to compare prewar and postwar eras that are of more

equal length. When this is done, the ratio of prewar to postwar standard
deviations are very similar to those reported in Table

Second, one can

also break the postwar sample into two equal periods and see if the mean
growth rates of the individual series have changed between the first and

second halves of the postwar era. The result of this test is that the mean
growth rates have often changed by 1 or 2 percentage points between the

early and late postwar eras. However, the standard deviations around the
two different means are very similar in both periods and are consistently

10 to 15 times as large as the change in the mean growth rate. As a
result, the standard deviation around a single mean in the postwar era is
indistinguishable from that around two different means corresponding to the
first and second halves of the period.

16
IV.

PERSISTENCE
While a decline in the volatility of production has been the most

widely analyzed change in short-run economic activity, there are many other
changes that can and should be analyzed using disaggregate production data.

One of these deals with the persistence of short-term fluctuations. It is
useful to know if movements in real output tend to be permanent or

transitory and if the persistence of shocks has changed over time. This
information is crucial for determining whether there is a business cycle
around a deterministic trend in either the prewar or postwar eras. This
fact in turn is important for determining the nature of shocks and the
appropriate model of short-term fluctuations in the prewar and postwar
eras.

Measure of Persistence. To analyze whether shocks to the production
of individual commodities have permanent or transitory effects, it is

necessary to derive a measure of persistence. To do this it is useful to
consider the simple time series representation of each series given in

equation (1). Recall that the growth rate of series i can be represented
as a moving average with drift. That is

—

+ A.,(L)e.

where B. is the industry-specific mean growth rate and

A. L2 +
i2

... + A.inLn.

A(L)

1 +

A1L

From this representation it is clear that the sum

+

of

the coefficients of A.(L) (represented by A(l)) indicates whether a shock
to the growth rate is counteracted or not in subsequent periods. If A(l)
0, then a shock to the growth rate is completely undone in later periods.
As a result, the level of output returns to its trend growth path and is

17

not permanently changed.8 On the other hand, if A.(l) > 0, then a shock to
the growth rate is not completely undone and hence the level of output is

permanently altered (even though the growth rate may

eventually return to

its average level.) In the extreme case that the growth rate of output is
white noise (which corresponds to the level of output following a random
walk)

A.(l)

1.

From this description, it is clear that an estimate of A(l) provides
an obvious measure of the persistence of short-run movements in the

production of individual commodities. In the recent literature on
persistence, a way of estimating A.(l) that does not require specifying and
estimating a particular ARMA model for each series has been developed by
Cochrane suggests

Cochrane (1986) and Campbell and Mankiw (l987a,b,c).

that the two-sided infinite sum of the autocorrelationS of a series (in log
first differences) provides one indicator of persistence.

If the series

reverts to a deterministic trend, this sum (denoted as V.) is 0; if the
series is a random walk, this sum is 1.

Cochrane shows that a consistent

estimate of this two-sided infinite sum of autocorrelations is

(2)

V. = 1 + 2

k
E (1 -

j=1
where

A

k+l

-

is the th sample autocorrelation of the first differences of

series i, and k is large relative to the sample size.
Campbell and Mankiw show that because there is a one-to-one

relationship between the coefficients of the moving average representation
of a series and the autocorrelations, there is also a unique relationship

between Cochrane's V. and A.(l). In particular,

(3)

A.(1) =

______

18

where

is the fraction of the variance of a series that is predictable

from a knowledge of the past history of the process. Given this

relationship, Campbell and Mankiw suggest that a nonparametric estimate of
A.(l)
can be calculated as
1

/

(4)

A

/ V.1

A

A.(1) =
1

/

/
v (1

-

A2

p11)

where the square of the first sample autocorrelation of the series is used

as a conservative estimate of R.
In applying this nonparametrjc approach I use k

7 as the number of

sample autocorrelations to include in the estimate of V.. This level of k
relative to the size of the various sample periods is approximately the

level the Campbell and Mankiw (1987a and l987c) suggest is necessary to
distinguish between a deterministic and a non-deterministic process in

Monte Carlo simulations. More intuitively, k

7 should satisfy the

requirement that k be fairly large in order to capture any reversion to
trend that occurs only after a fairly long lag. At the same time, k =
7 is

still small relative to the sample size of 25 observations in the
prewar
era and 37 in the postwar

era. Hence, it should not introduce the downward bias in A1(l) that
results when k is very large relative

to the sample size (see Campbell and

Mankiw, l987a).

Changes in Persistence. The nonparametric estimates of A1(1) are

given in Table 3. The first characteristic to note about these estimates
is that they indicate that for most goods there has been no change in the

persistence of short-term fluctuations between the
A simple indicator of this fact is that

prewar and postwar eras.

the average A.(l) is .68 in the

prewar era and .70 in the postwar era. A comparison of the estimates for

19

each good in the prewar and postwar eras shows that this similarity in the
means is due to similarity in the results for individual goods, not to
offsetting movements among different commodities.

The similarity in the amount of persistence shown by these individual
commodities between the prewar and postwar eras suggests that the notions
of cyclical fluctuations and deviations from trend are as appropriate or

inappropriate for the prewar era as they are for the postwar era. More
fundamentally, it suggests that the many changes that have occurred in the
behavior and structure of the economy over time, have not altered the way
that the production of these individual goods responds to shocks.

While the degree of persistence shown by individual commodities is
very similar in the prewar and postwar eras, the level of persistence is

noticeably higher in the interwar era. The average A(l) is .76 in the
1920s and 1930s. Furthermore, the increase in persistence in the interwar
era is probably larger than that suggested by the estimates of A(l)
because for the interwar era, k — 7 may be fairly large relative to the

sample size of 17. As a result, A(l) may be biased downward in a way that
is not true in the longer prewar and postwar eras.

This increase in the persistence of short-term movements for the
individual production series in the l920s and 1930s is in complete accord

with common perceptions of the interwar period. If there ever was a time
when shocks to output are thought to have had very persistent effects it
was during the boom of the l920s and the Great Depression of the l930s.
The increased persistence of short-run movements in the interwar era is

also further evidence that this period is anomalous. Whereas the prewar
and postwar eras show basically the same degree of volatility and the same
tendency to revert to trend, the interwar era shows much greater volatility

20

and much less tendency to revert to trend. This suggests that short-run
fluctuations in the period between the wars should be viewed as a different
phenomenon from those on either side of this era.

Level of Persistence. While changes in persistence over time is
obviously an important topic, an equally important topic is the absolute
level of persistence in both the prewar and postwar eras. Do the estimates
of A.(l) suggest that fluctuations in the production of the individual
commodities analyzed in this paper were and still are mainly transitory or
mainly permanent?

To answer this question, it is first useful to note that there is a
substantial difference in the level of persistence shown by agricultural

and nonagricultural goods. The average A(l) is roughly .50 for
agricultural goods in both the prewar and postwar eras and .75 for

nonagricultural goods. This indicates that movements in the production of
agricultural goods are substantially less persistent than those in the
production of nonagricultural goods.
The average level of the estimates of A.(l) suggest that at least

half of the effect of a shock to agricultural production is undone in

subsequent years. This suggests that a large fraction of the short-run
movements in the production of farm commodities is transitory. At the same
time, there is clearly a permanent component as well; shocks to
agricultural production have at least a small effect on the long-run level
of production.

For mining and manufactured goods, the permanent effect of a shock is

larger than that for agricultural goods. The estimates of

A(l) indicate

that approximately 75 percent of a shock remains after several years.
While this indicates a substantial amount of persistence, it is important

21

to note that this is less persistence than one would find if the production
of these goods actually followed a random walk.

It is also likely that the nonparametric estimate of A(l)
overestimates the persistence of short run movements in production.
Including only seven lagged autocorrelations means that the measure will

miss any trend reversion that occurs after seven years. Because of this

possible upward bias on A(l) it is reasonable to conclude that slightly
less than half of the effect of a shock to the production of mineral and
manufactured goods is transitory and slightly more than half of the effect
is permanent in both the prewar and postwar eras.

This finding that individual production series show at least some
trend reversion in both the prewar and postwar eras takes on added
importance when one considers the correlation between goods.

I show in

Section V below that movements in different production series in the prewar
and postwar eras are largely uncorrelated and thus that movements in
individual series are primarily the result of industry-specific shocks.

This finding combined with the results concerning trend-reversion suggests
that industry-specific shocks are at least partly transitory in both the

prewar and postwar eras. This in turn may suggest that either industryspecific supply shocks are partly transitory or that there exist transitory
industry-specific shocks to demand.

The presence of transitory industry-specific supply shocks may also
explain why agricultural production is less persistent than nonagricultural

production. In addition to the many productivity and demand shocks
affecting other commodities, agricultural goods are also buffeted by

frequent changes in weather and disease. Since these additional shocks are
likely to be transitory, a larger fraction of shocks hitting the

22

agricultural sector is also likely to be transitory. Hence, it is not
surprising that short-run movements in agricultural production tend to be

less persistent than those in other sectors.
cQiiiparison to Aggregate Indicators. As was the case with the

volatility properties, it is interesting to compare the change in the
persistence characteristics of the consistent disaggregate data with that
for both traditional and improved

measures of aggregate production. The

nonparametric estimates of A.(l) for the various aggregate series in
different time periods are given in Table 2b.

The first thing that one

notices from Table 2b is that the traditional and consistent aggregate
series yield very similar estimates of persistence. This similarity makes
sense because while prewar movements are exaggerated in the traditional
series, there is no reason to suspect that this

exaggeration should affect

the timing of short-run fluctuations.

While the traditional and consistent estimates of GNP and industrial
production tell a story similar to each other, they tell a story that is
slightly different from that of the individual production series. In
particular, the aggregate series show slightly more change in persistence

between the prewar and postwar eras than do most of the good individual

production series. This is especially true of GNP which shows an increase
in the estimate of persistence of 20 percent.
In addition to showing a noticeable increase in persistence between
the prewar and postwar

eras, all of the aggregate series show a substantial

increase in persistence in the interwar era. As can be seen from Table 2b,
this change is more extreme for GNP than for industrial production. In

this characteristic the aggregate series echo the behavior of the
individual production series which also show an increase in the persistence

23

of short-run movements in the interwar era.

In terms of the actual level of persistence, industrial production
shows slightly less persistence than do the individual series on average in
the prewar era and about the same amount as the individual series in the

postwar era. GNP shows about the same level of persistence as do the
individual series in the prewar era and somewhat more persistence in the

postwar era. In general, the measures of persistence for the aggregate
series indicate that some of the effect of a shock is permanent and some of
the effect of a shock is transitory and that the permanent component has

been rising over time. However, the estimates of A.(l) do not indicate
that movements in GNP or industrial production are completely permanent,
even in the postwar era.

V. THE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG GOODS
A final change in cyclical behavior that can be examined using good

disaggregate production data concerns the correlation between goods. It is
important to discover if short-run movements in various goods are highly
correlated as traditional business-cycle theory would suggest and whether

the relationships among goods have changed over time. This analysis is
useful in identifying what type of models are appropriate for analyzing

short-run fluctuations in production in both periods. It is also important
for evaluating whether the volatility and persistence characteristics of
the individual production series provide information about aggregate
stabilization and trend reversion.

To examine changes in the relationships between the 38 individual
production series, it is useful to examine the cross-correlations of the
percentage changes of each series with those of each of the other series.

24

In terms of the simple time series model given in (1), the measure
calculated is simply

Cov(u., uj)

aU.aU.

13

where

a

U.

it

indicates the standard deviation of the u. 's. These cross-

1

correlations

can be calculated for the prewar, interwar, and postwar sample

periods to see if the size and sign of the correlations have changed over
time.

Because it is difficult to analyze the resulting 38 by 38 matrix of
cross-correlations, Table 4 reports the average pairwise correlation for
each good with all of the other goods in the prewar, interwar, and postwar

eras. These average correlations are calculated separately for
agricultural, mineral, and manufactured goods. This allows one to examine
whether the average correlation of a particular good with agricultural
goods is different from the average correlation of that good with mineral
or manufactured goods.

Level of Cross-Correlation. Several features of the crosscorrelations are evident from Table 4. The most striking feature of the
average cross-correlations is that they are very low in both the prewar and

postwar eras.9 For most goods the average within-sector and across-sector
correlations are indistinguishable from zero. An analysis of the
individual cross-correlations shows that in nearly all cases these low
average correlations result from low pairwise correlations, not from large
positive and negative correlations cancelling each other out.

While the average cross-correlations for most goods are very low in
both the prewar and postwar eras, there are exceptions to this pattern.
One of these is that the correlations between major manufactured and

25

mineral goods are typically quite high. This can be seen in Table 5 which
shows the cross-correlations for corn, wheat, coal, pig iron, cotton

consumed, and steel in the prewar, interwar, and postwar eras. Though
wheat and corn are only weakly correlated with each other or with other
goods, the major mineral and manufactured products have cross-correlations
that range between .4 and .9 and average around .7.

Changes in Cross-Correlation. Though the low level of correlation
shown by most goods is an obvious feature of the estimates, Tables 4 and 5
indicate that there have also been some changes in the pattern of cross-

correlation over time. One such change is that the cross-correlations of
goods within the manufacturing and mining sectors and between goods in
these two sectors are much higher in the interwar era than in either the

prewar or postwar eras. Average pairwise correlations of .6 or .7 are not
unusual even for minor goods in these sectors during the l920s and l930s.
This pattern, however, does not carry over to agricultural goods.

While agricultural goods are somewhat more correlated with themselves in
the interwar era than in other periods, their correlation with
nonagricultural goods is if anything lower in this period than in the

prewar era. Indeed, beginning in the interwar era, agricultural goods
switch from having a vaguely positive correlation with mineral and
manufactured goods to having a small but decidedly negative correlation

with these products. This change can be seen by the fact that in the
prewar era only 3 of the agricultural goods have an average pairwise
correlation with mining and manufactured goods that is negative, while 8
-

agricultural goods have a negative correlation in the interwar era. This

change continues into the postwar era where 10 of the 11 agricultural goods
have a negative average pairwise correlation with nonagricultural goods.

28

correlation between goods and the change in the correlation among goods
between the prewar and postwar eras have implications for the usefulness of

the individual production series for indicating aggregate behavior. First,
the low level of correlation between goods in both the prewar and postwar
eras suggests that the level of volatility and persistence shown by the
individual series does not represent the level of volatility and

persistence in the economy accurately. Because the movements in the
individual series are largely independent, an aggregate series constructed
using these series would certainly be less volatile than the individual

series. Similarly, because aggregate shocks have so little effect on the
behavior of individual commodities, the short-run movements in aggregate
output could be more or less persistent than those in the individual
series. The fact that aggregate series will behave differently from, the
individual series in any given time period is confirmed by Table 2 which
shows that even good aggregate series have standard deviations and sums of
autocorrelations that are quite different from those of the individual
series.

On the other hand, the fact that the changes that have occurred in
the correlation among goods over time have been fairly small suggests that
the behavior of the individual series does provide a good indication of

changes in volatility and persistence over time. If the relationship
between goods has not changed significantly and if individual goods have
shown little change in volatility or persistence over time, then it is
unlikely that an accurate aggregate indicator could show much change

either. And indeed, consistent aggregate series do not show significant
changes in either volatility or persistence over time.

The small changes that good aggregate series do show between the

29

prewar and postwar eras can probably be explained by the decline in the
correlation among major commodities and the switch from a small positive

correlation to a small negative correlation shown by agricultural and

nonagricultural goods between the prewar and postwar eras. As discussed in
Section III, most individual commodities show little decline in volatility

between the prewar and postwar eras while consistent estimates of CNP and

industrial production do show a slight stabilization over time. This could
be due to the fact that short-run movements in various goods may be
offsetting each other more in the postwar era than they did in the prewar
era.

Similarly, as discussed in Section IV, the individual production
series show little change in the persistence of short-run fluctuations

between the prewar and postwar eras, while GNP and industrial production

shows a moderate increase in persistence over time. The changing degree of
correlation between individual commodities may help to explain this

finding. Because goods move together somewhat less in the postwar era, it
is possible that aggregate output may stay away from trend longer in the

postwar era even though the persistence of individual commodities has not
changed.

CONCLUS ION

To examine changes in the cyclical behavior of production, this study

has eschewed the use of aggregate measures of output. Rather, it has
analyzed the short-run behavior of 38 individual production series that

appear to be consistent over the last century. This analysis indicates
that there has been remarkably little change in the short-run behavior of
these 38 commodities between the prewar and postwar eras.

30

First, the volatility of short-run movements does not appear to have

declined noticeably over time. While short-run movements were clearly more
extreme in the interwar era, the ratio of the prewar to postwar standard
deviation of percentage changes is on average 1.2 for the 38 individual

goods. This slight amount of stabilization is somewhat smaller than that
shown by even consistent estimates of industrial production or CNP.

Second, there has been little change in the persistence of short-run

fluctuations in these 38 goods between the prewar and postwar eras. Shocks
to the output of these goods were approximately half temporary and half

permanent in both periods. However, shocks were typically much more
persistent in the interwar era. The persistence properties of the 38 goods
are roughly similar to those of CNP and industrial production, though both
aggregate measures show some increase in persistence over time.

Third, there has been little change in the correlation among

commodities over time. The correlation between the growth rates of the

various goods is very low in both the prewar and postwar eras. It is,
however, somewhat higher in the interwar period. The only significant
change in correlation between the prewar and postwar eras is that
agricultural goods switch from having a small positive correlation with
nonagricultural goods in the prewar era to having a small negative
correlation in the postwar era.

The implications of the changes, or more precisely the lack of
changes, in the short-run behavior of the individual production series is

obviously a topic for much further research. However, it is possible to
suggest some of the questions raised by the results. First, the lack of
stabilization shown by the individual production series between the prewar
and postwar eras raises the possibility that stabilization policy has not

31

been effective. Because policy was not used in the prewar era and was used
in the postwar era, one might have expected to see a stabilization of

production in the postwar era. That this has not happened for most of the
38 commodities examined suggests that policy has not been as obviously

successful as many economists might have believed. However, in order to
argue that policy has genuinely not worked at an aggregate level many
additional issues such as the relative size of shocks in the two periods or
the possible presence of destabilizing institutional changes in the postwar
era will have to be examined.

A second question raised by the results concerns what type of model
is appropriate for analyzing short-term fluctuations in output in the

prewar and postwar eras. The persistence properties of the disaggregate
series suggest that shocks to the production of individual goods tend to be
partly transitory, but with a definite permanent component in both the

prewar and postwar eras. At the same time, the correlation between the
various commodities is surprisingly low in both periods. Only the major
commodities tend to be highly correlated and this correlation has been
declining over time.

These findings indicate that both permanent and transitory industryspecific shocks are an important source of short-term fluctuations in the
production of individual commodities in both periods, and especially in the

postwar era. Therefore, it is important that models of the behavior of
aggregate production allow an important role for industry-specific shocks
and pay careful attention to the individual variation that may be masked by
aggregation.

Finally, a third issue raised by this analysis of the behavior of the
individual production series involves possible explanations for the Great

36

more difficult to discern. In all Census Bureau documes the source of
data before 1903 is given as Latham, Alexander, and Co.
Latham and Co.
was a New York banking firm that published an extensive book annual of
cotton statistics called Cotton Movement and Fluctuations. However, the
data in this book appear to have been collected by correspondents of the
Commercial and Financial Chronicle of New York. The Chronicle's annual
report "Cotton Crop of the United States" is reprinted in each edition of
the Latham book and describes Chronicle correspondents surveying all major
consumers of cotton. Judging from the fact that the Chronicle reports very
detailed information on such things as how many spindles came in and went
out of use in each region, it appears that the survey conducted by its
correspondents was indeed quite extensive and exact.

Coffee and Silk. Like cotton consumed, coffee imported and
unmanufactured silk imports for consumption are input series that are used
to proxy for the production of manufactured commodities. The ultimate
source of the prewar data on coffee and silk imports are the monthly and
annual reports from the collectors of customs duties. Customs agents, in
addition to collecting revenue, received and checked reports from every
ship entering the U.S. on the quantity and the value of the goods unloaded.
From the tremendous amount of specific data on imports by port that are
provided in early publications such as the Treasury Department's Monthly
Report of the Chief of the Bureau of Statistics, it is clear that this data
is based on a contemporaneous enumeration of producers, or in this case,
importers. Modern data on imports are still based on the reports of
customs agents and ultimately on the quantities declared by importers.
Refined Sugar. The ultimate source of early estimates of refined
sugar production is the Weekly Statistical Sugar Trade Journal. This trade
publication was put out by Willett and Gray whom Frickey (1947) describes
as "sugar statisticians of New York." The data on both cane sugar meltings
and refined beet sugar production appear to be based on a contemporaneous
canvass of major producers. Modern data on refined sugar production are
now compiled by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. While procedures of
the USDA are no doubt different from those of Willett and Gray, modern
numbers are still derived from a survey of major producers.
Canned Corn and Canned Tomatoes. Beginning in 1907 the data on
canned vegetables are compiled by the National Canner's Association. The
Canner's Association is a professional organization that surveys producers
of canne7goods about the quantity and market value of the goods they
The canvass made by the Canner's Association from its earliest
produce.
days appears to be quite complete and is still the source of modern figures
on canned goods production.
According to Department of Agriculture documents, data on canned corn
and canned tomatoes before 1907 are available from the trade publication
The American Grocer. While it is unclear how extensive a canvass was made
by The American Grocer, the data appear to be very detailed and were
certainly collected contemporaneously. Furthermore, estimates made by the
early trade presses were typically quite accurate because such publications
often had a close relationship with producers and because accurate
estimates were crucial to retaining readers.
Beer, Distilled Spirits, Tobacco. Cigars, and Cigarettes. The

37

ultimate source of both the prewar and postwar series on alcohol and
tobacco products are the tax records of the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue and later of the Internal Revenue Service. Because alcohol and
tobacco products have been subject to excise taxes over the entire period
1889-1984, tax collectors have continuous records of how many goods have
ben reported as being produced and hence subject to tax. Early issues of
the Annual Report of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue contain very
detailed information on the number of producers and the success of Treasury
Department agents in enforcing the excise tax laws. This suggests that
early tax data probably do provide an extensive census of the actual
production of alcohol and tobacco products.
Modern data on the production of these goods are still derived from
tax records. While the methods of data collection have not changed
radically between the prewar and postwar eras, it seems likely that
enforcement may have improved over time. However, as long as prewar tax
evasion was not systematically related to the cycle, this difference should
not jeopardize the accuracy of the series for analyzing changes in the
representation of short-run fluctuations.

Raw Steel. Rails, and Pig Iron. The ultimate source of both prewar
and postwar data on raw steel, rails, and pig iron produced is the American
Iron and Steel Institute (AISI). The AISI is the research wing1f the
From the
professional trade organization of producers of iron and steel.
mid-l9th century on the AISI has surveyed producers of iron and steel
concerning production of various products. According to the 1890 Annual
Statistical Report, "all the iron and steel manufacturers in the country,
with scarcely an exception, cordially respond to our calls for statistical
information" (AISA, 1891, p. 8). This indicates that the data on iron and
steel in both the prewar and postwar eras satisfy the requirement that the
series be based on a contemporaneous survey of producers.

Updates
Continuations for the 13 manufacturing series come from a variety of
sources. Modern data on coffee imported, silk imported, cotton consumed,
beer, tobacco, cigars, cigarettes, and steel are available in various
issues of the Statistical Abstract. Data for the most recent years for
coffee imported and cotton consumed are taken from Business Statistics
because sies consistent with earlier estimates have been dropped from the
As discussed before, the most recent numbers available are
Abstract.
used back to 1971, but the data before 1970 given in Historical Statistics
are generally not revised.
Modern data on canned corn and canned tomatoes are taken from
Agricultural Statistics. 1985. The continuation for the series on
distilled spirits is from Alcohol. Tobacco, and Firearms Summary
Statistics. 1982 published by the Treasury Department. Modern data on
shipments of steel rails are from various issues of the Annual Statistical
Report of the American Iron and Steel Institute.
Notes on Individual Series

Cotton consumed. The series on cotton consumed given in Historical
Statistics is inconsistent with data available for recent years because the
early series includes linters (the fuzz of short fibers that adheres to

38

cottonseed after ginning) while recent data do not. To deal with this I
put together an alternative series using data from various issues of the
Statistil Abstract. These data are described as being exclusive of
linters.

Canned Tomatoes. The series in Historical Statistics uses different
sources for 1899 and 1904 than for the rest of the prewar era. These two
observations appear to come from the Census of Manufactures while those for
other years come from industry trade reports. The effect of this
inconsistency is that the series takes a radical jump in both 1899 and 1904
because the Census enumeration is more complete. To form a more consistent
series I replace the observations for 1899 and 1904 in Historical
Statistics with those from Burns (1934) which is the intermediate source
for the rest of the prewar series in Historical Statistics.
Steel Rails. The series on steel rails in Historical Statistics uses
production data until 1967 and shipments data thereafter. Because
shipments data are all that is available, I also continue the series with
shipments data. While this difference clearly yields an inconsistency, the
bias should be in the direction of causing the data to show a stabilization
over time. Because inventories tend to be procyclical in the postwar era,
a shipments series is likely to be smoother than a production series.

39

FOOTNOTES

1.

For example, Barro (1986, p. 376) suggests that "the process for

generating deficits in the interwar period, 1920-40,. .

. is broadly similar

to that in the post-World War II period, 1948-82. . .

2.

It is important to note that the mean is not a useful summary of the

data because it gives more weight to a ratio of 2.0 than to a ratio of .5,
even though the two are equally far from 1.0 in percentage terms.
3.

Direct data on cotton textiles do not exist. However, Census Bureau

estimates of raw cotton consumed is considered to be a good measure of the
production of basic cotton cloth.

4. At the same time, it is useful to note that the stabilization ratios of
the traditional aggregate series reported here are smaller than those found

in many other studies. The reason for this is that most studies do not
examine the prewar and interwar eras separately. As is true for the
individual production series, the aggregate output measures are much more
volatile in the l920s and l930s than in the preceding or proceeding three decades.

5. In the extrapolation process the postwar relationship between GNP and
commodity output is used to transform the more extreme short-run movements
in commodity output into reasonable movements for a GNP series.

6. For this calculation the periods compared are 1889-1914 and 1947-1984.
The change in the average growth rates is calculated by subtracting the
postwar figure from the prewar figure, and hence is usually positive.

7. For example, the stabilization ratio using the extended prewar sample
period is 1.00 for corn, 1.20 for wheat, .84 for bituminous coal, 1.18 for

pig iron, 1.06 for cotton consumed, and 1.65 for steel. The respective
ratios for the shorter prewar sample from Table 1 are 1.09, 1.12, .89,

40
1.33, 1.08, and 1.54.

8. As written in (1), the trend level of output is defined as output that
grows as the constant rate B. per year.
9.

This result is similar to that found by Long and Plosser (1987) using

monthly sectoral output data for the postwar era.

10. The 1905 Yearbook of the USDA provides a good description of the crop
reporting procedures.

11. For a description of current crop reporting procedures see the USDA

publication Statistical Series the U.S. Department of Agriculture: How
they are Constructed and Used (1971).

12. The Geological Survey actually began operations in 1879, but did not
collect data systematically until 1882.

13. The descriptive notes about the pig iron series in Historical
Statistics also contain some inaccuracies.

14. This series is in fact identical to that given in Historical
Statistics for these two decades.

15. The thoroughness of the canvasses is evident from the 1913 Census
Bureau pamphlet Instructions to Special Agents: Cotton Statistics.
16. The source before 1895 is often given as the U.S. Department of

Agriculture. However, the 1899 Yearbook of the USDA says their data on
cotton consumed are from Latham and Co.

17. A useful description of the Canner's Association's activities is
provided in their publication The Canning Industry (1971).

18. In the mid-nineteenth century statistical reports were put out
directly by the American Iron and Steel Association.

19. The cotton consumed series in Business Statistics is ratio spliced to
that from the Statistical Abstract in 1978.

41

20. The notes to the tables in the Statistical Abstract for some years are
ambiguous. It is possible that the series before 1909 includes linters.
However, the data for 1889-1908 taken from the 1916 Statistical Abstract
are identical to those in Historical Statistics, which are described as
being exclusive of linters.

42

REFERENCES

The American Grocer. Various issues.
American Iron and Steel Institute, (Before 1912, American Iron and Steel
Association.) Annual Statistical Report. Various issues.
Philadelphia.
Baily, Martin Neil. "Stabilization Policy and Private Economic Behavior."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1978: 1): 11-50.

Barro, Robert J. "The Behavior of United States Deficits." In Th
American Business Cycle, edited by Robert J. Gordon. NBER Studies in
Business Cycles, vol. 25. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1986, pp. 361-387.

Burns, Arthur F. Production Trends in the United States since 1870. New
York: NBER, 1934.
__________ and Wesley C. Mitchell. Measuring Business Cycles. New York:
NBER, 1947.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw. "Are Output Fluctuations
Transitory?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming, 1987. (a)

"International Evidence on the Persistence of Economic
__________
Fluctuations." Xerox, Princeton University, 1987. (b)
"Permanent and Transitory Components in Macroeconomic
__________
Fluctuations." AEA Papers and Proceedings 77 (May 1987): 111-117.
(c)

Cochrane, John H. "How Big is the Random Walk in GNP?" Xerox, University
of Chicago, 1986.
The Commercial and Financial Chronicle. Various issues. New York.
DeLong, J. Bradford and Lawrence 1-I. Summers. "The Changing Cyclical
Variability of Economic Activity in the United States." In Ih
American Business Cycle, edited by Robert J. Gordon. NBER Studies in
Business Cycles, vol. 25. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1986, pp. 679-719.

Frickey, Edwin. Production in the United States, 1860-1914. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1947.

Kendrick, John W. Productivity Trends in the United States. NBER General
Series No. 71. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961.
Latham, Alexander, and Co. Cotton Movement and Fluctuations. Various
issues. New York: Latham, Alexander, and Co.
Long, John B. and Charles I. Plosser. "Sectoral vs. Aggregate Shocks in

43

the Business Cycle." AEA Papers and Proceedings 77 (May 1987): 333336.

National Canner's Association. The Canning Industry. Washington, D.C.:
NCA, 1971.
Romer, Christina D. "Is the Stabilization of the Postwar Economy a Figment
of the Data?" American Economic Review 76 (June 1986): 314-334. (a)

"The Prewar Business Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates of
Gross National Product, 1869-1918." NEER Working Paper No. 1969.
July 1986. (b)

___________

Schultze, Charles L. "A Century of U.S. Economic Fluctuations: Why Has
Performance Improved?" In Other Times. Other Places by Charles L.
Schultze. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1986, pp. 5779.

Taylor, John B. "Improvements in Macroeconomic Stability: The Role of
Wages and Prices." In The American Business Cycle, edited by Robert
J. Gordon. NBER Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 25. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1986, pp. 639-659.

U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Industrial
Production. 1986. Washington, D.C., 1987.
U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (Department of the Treasury).
Alcohol. Tobacco, and Firearms Summary Statistics. 1982. Washington,
D.C., 1983.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (Department of Commerce). Business
Statistics. 1984. 24th Edition. A Supplement to The Survey of
Current Business. Washington, D.C., 1985.

The National Income and Product Accounts of the United States,
1929-82. Washington, D.C., 1986.

_________

U.S. Bureau of Mines (Department of Commerce). Minerals Yearbook. Various
issues. Washington, D.C.
U.S. Bureau of Statistics (Department of the Treasury). Monthly Report of
the Director of the Bureau of Statistics. Various issues.
Washington, D.C.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (Department of Commerce). Historical Statistics
of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970. Washington, D.C.,
1975.

Instructions to Special Agents: Cotton Statistics.
__________
Washington, D.C., 1913.
_________

Statistical

Washington, D.C.

Abstract of the United States. Various issues.

44

U.S. Commissioner of Internal Revenue (Department of the Treasury). Annual
Report. Various issues. Washington, D.C.

U.S. Department of Agriculture. Agricultural Statistics. Various issues.
Washington, D.C.
__________
Major Statistical Series of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture: How they are Constructed and Used. Vol. 8. Crop and
Livestock Estimates. Agriculture Handbook No. 365. Washington,
D.C., 1971.

Yearbook. Various issues. Washington, D.C.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (Department of Energy). Coal
Production. 1984. Washington, D.C., 1985.
U.S. Geological Survey (Department of the Interior). (After 1924, U.S.
Bureau of Mines.) Mineral Resources of the United States. Various
issues. Washington, D.C.

Willett and Gray. Weekly Statistical Sugar Trade Journal. Various issues.
New York.

Zarnowitz, Victor and Geoffrey H. Moore. "Major Changes in Cyclical
Behavior." In The American Business Cycle, edited by Robert J.
Gordon. NBER Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 25. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1986, pp. 519-572.

Table 1
Standard Deviations of Percentage Changes

Standard Deviations

Series

1889-1914

1922-1939

1947-1984

Ratio
of Prewar
to Postwar

Corn
Wheat
Oats
Barley
Flaxseed
Rye
Irish Potatoes
Sweetpotatoes
Hay
Cotton
Tobacco

.219
.157
.194
.165
.355
.085
.224
.075
.121
.188
.114

.278
.174
.311
.403
.536
.517
.137
.189
.173
.235
.208

.201
.140
.148
.151
.340
.253
.095
.152
.055
.251
.121

1.09
1.12
1.31
1.09
1.04
0.34
2.36
0.49
2.20
0.75
0.94

Bituminous Coal
Coke
Anthracite Coal
Petroleum
Cement
Pyrites
Phosphate Rock
Iron Ore
Pig Iron
Copper
Lead
Zinc
Gold
Silver

.086
.202
.171
.099
.091
.157
.103
.219
.210
.076
.081
.099
.088
.072

.149
.270
.199
.102
.189
.222
.202
.508
.384
.347
.197
.195
.074
.219

.097
.136
.098
.044
.068

0.89
1.49
1.74
2.25
1.34
0.84
1.26
0.97
1.33
0.51
0.56
1.02
0.77
0.68

Coffee Imported
Cotton Consumed
Silk Consumed
Refined Sugar
Canned Corn
Canned Tomatoes
Beer
Distilled Spirits
Tobacco
Cigars
Cigarettes
Rails

.173
.107
.321
.066
.339
.296
.046
.157
.052
.060
.100
.287

.089
.157
.113

.111
.099
.483

a
.408

342b
•455b
.252
.020
.071
.068
.499

.lSSc
.082

226d
.158
.149
.145
.097
.115
.106

°62d

81d
.179
.027
.l23c
.030
.109
.036
.247

1.56
1.08
0.66
1.06
1.87
1.65
1.70
1.28
1.73
0.55
2.78
1.16

Data on refined sugar production are not available for the interwar era.
The volatility of alcohol production is clearly related to the end of
Prohibition in 1933-34.
Data are only available through 1982.
Data are only available through 1983.

Table 2

Cyclical Characteristics of Aggregate Series

a. Standard Deviations of Percentage Changes
Standard Deviations

Ratio

of Prewar
Series

1889-1914

1922-1939

1947-1984

to Postwar

Traditional CN?

.058

.078

.028

2.07

Consistent GNPb

.037

.078

.028

1.32

Traditional 1pC

.106

.159

.063

1.68

Consistent 1d

.106

NA

.077

1.38

b. Measure of Persistence
A (1)

Series

1889-1914

e

1922-1939

1947-1984

Traditional GNP

.66

1.15

.89

Consistent GNP

.72

1.15

.89

Traditional IP

.49

.69

.62

Consistent IP

.49

NA

.63

aThe traditional estimates of GNP are the Kendrick (1961) estimates for
1889-1928 and the Commerce Department (1986) estimates for 1929-1984. The
Kendrick series in 1929 dollars is ratio spliced to the Commerce Department
series in 1982 dollars in 1929.

bThe Romer (1986b) estimates of prewar GNP are used as the consistent
extension of the modern Commerce Department estimates.
CThe traditional industrial production series is the Frickey (1947) index
of manufacturing production for 1889-1914 and the Federal Reserve Board
(1986) index of manufacturing production for 1919-1984.
dThe postwar FRB materials index is used as the consistent extension of

Frickey's index. See Romer (1986a) for further details on forming
consistent estimates of industrial production.

eA(l) is Campbell and Mankiw's nonparametric estimate of the infinite sum
of moving average coefficients.

Table 3

Measure of Persistence

Series

Corn
Wheat
Oats
Barley
Flaxseed

Rye
Irish Potatoes
Sweetpotatoes

Hay
Cotton
Tobacco
Bituminous Coal
Coke
Anthracite Coal
Petroleum
Cement
Pyrites
Phosphate Rock
Iron Ore
Pig Iron
Copper
Lead
Zinc
Gold
Silver

Coffee Imported
Cotton Consumed
Silk Imported
Sugar
Canned Corn
Canned Tomatoes
Beer
Distilled Spirits
Tobacco
Cigars
Cigarettes
Rails
Steel

1889-1914

1922-1939

1947-1984

.46
.49
.45
.53
.61
.80
.36
.75
.49
.38
.58

.48

.43
.61

.67
.47
.62
.64

.50
.44
.40

.80
.64
.43
.91

.72
.66
.68
.74

.89
.77
.62

1.32

1.11

.62
.80
.67
.58
.86
.65

.38
.65
.64
.71

.50
.42
.52

.78
.55
.07

1.03
1.26

.54
.65
.47
.66
.42

.46

1.09
.97
.49
.88
.53
.82
.53
.74
.88

.47

.93

1.06

2.13
1.30

1.18

.48
.49

.51

.39
.50
.56
.39
.77
.68
.65

1.17

.71
.50
.45

.51

.63

.41

.66
.74
.38
.48

1.26

1.55

.72
.93

1.21

1.05
2.00
.70

1.01
1.19

.96
.88

.66

.59

.64

.80
.67

NA
.46

.61

aA(l) is Campbell and Mankiw's nonparametric estimate of the infinite sum
of moving average coefficients.

Table 4

Average Pairwise Cross Correlationa

MIN MAN

Series

AG

Co rn

.26
.25
.34
.28
.16

.10

.11

.08
.11
.13
.12
.08

.24

.09
.09

.02
.13

.04

-.03

Wheat
Oats
Barley
Flaxseed
Rye
Irish
Sweet
Hay

Cotton
Tobacco
Bituminous
Coke
Anthracite
Petroleum
Cement
Pyrites
Phosphates
Iron ore
Pig iron
Copper
Lead
Zinc

Gold

-

.06
.11
.07

.30
.03
.13

-

.12

-

.17

.14

.01

.33
.35

.26
.24

-

.21

-

-

.01

-

.03
.02

-

.04

.07

.23

.01
.23

.08

.08

.07

.08

.04
.21
.24
.05
.03
.32

.09
.06
.09
.13
.14
.20

-

.33

.35
.10
-

.02
.27

-.06 -.08 -.13

MAN

- .05
- .02
- .06

.14 -.02

.01
.01

-

. 11

.16
- .15

-

.15 -.32

-

. 10
. 17
. 15

.17

-

.46

.46
.34
.49
.13
.44
.09
.10

.02
.26
.10

-

.23

.13
.53
.05

NA

NA

NA

-

.22

.28
.15

.25
.05
.17

-.12
-.06
-.08
-.05
-.05
.11
-.01
-.05
.01
.06

.00

.02

.10

.29
.07

.17
.09
.13

-.04

.11
.27

.08
-

.02
.08

-

.02

.11
.16
-.07

.36
.36

.12
.19

.03
-.22
-.01

-.18
-.04
-.11
-.18
-

.12

.26
.66

.05

.08

.72

.31
.54
.32
.74
.70
.69
.72

.34
.26
.47
.45
.43
.45

.12

-

.07

-

.00

-

.21 -.02

-

.21
.11

-

.05
.18

-

.15
.18

.10

-

-

.48
.50
.22
.36
.40
.43
.45
.52
.52
.49
.48
.51
.17
.47

-

Coffee
Cotton
Silk
Sugar

.09

00

.07
-

.71
.73
.41
.56
.57
.50
.61
.74
.75
.69
.70

.10
.09
- .10
-

.10

-

.13

-

.04
.27
.22

-

.15

Tobacco
Cigars
Cigarettes
Rails
Steel

-

AG

20
.33

.10

.17 -.01
- .05
Canned Corn .09
.03
Tomatoes
.06 -.10
.04
Beer
-.04 -.02 -.06
- .05
.16
.02
Spirits

.10

MAN

.23
.45

Silver

.11

-

.33 -.01
.50 -.08

.09

.21

.07

-

-

MIN

MIN

AG

.00 -.01

.25

1947-1984

1922-1939

1889-1914

-

.05
.15

.06

.06
-

-

.01

-

.11

-.03

.01
- .03
- .16
-

.01

-

. 10

.03
.03

-

.07

.33

.11

.04

-.13
.18
.19
-

-.10
.07

.08
-

.11
.02

.14
-

.11
.12

-

.08
.00

.01

-

.12
.11
.00
-.05

.11

.03
.03
- .12
.10
-.01 -.04

-

.22

.02

-

-

.16
.08
.09
.21

.26
.19
.09

-.05 -.09

.02
.00

.16,

.11
.38
.33
.06
.17
.10
.23

.06

.13
.22
.12

.06

-.02

.09

17
.01

.03

.00

-

.05
.04
- .08

.28
.35
.08
.21
.14

-.06

. 14
. 10

.07
.12
.31
.42

-

.03

.00
.04
-.05
.06
.08
.13
.22

aEach entry shows the average cross-correlation between a particular
and all the other goods in a given sector.
AG denotes agriculture; MIN denotes mining; MAN denotes manufacturing.

Table 5

Sample Cross-Correlations of Percentage Changes

a. 1889-1914
Corn

Wheat

Coal

Pig Iron

Cotton

Steel

1.00
.08
.14
.09
.27

- .03

1.00

- .10

1.00

.13
.32
.18

.83
.58
.74

1.00
.74
.96

1.00
.70

1.00

Corn
Wheat
Coal
Pig Iron
Cotton
Steel

b. 1922-1939
Corn

Wheat

Coal

Pig Iron

Cotton

Steel

1.00
.28

1.00

- .11
- .07

- .21
- .16
- .24
- .24

.12

- .10

1.00
.91
.73
.85

1.00
.78
.98

1.00
.77

1.00

Corn
Wheat
Coal
Pig Iron
Cotton
Steel

c. 1947-1983
Corn

Wheat

Coal

Pig Iron

Cotton

Steel

Corn
Wheat
Coal
Pig Iron
Cotton

1.00
.31
.06

1.00
.00

1.00

- .10
- .23
- .09

- .28
- .24
- .30

.41
.42
.41

1.00
.48
.99

1.00
.51

1.00

Steel

Table Al
Individual Production Series

Name

Number in Historical Statistics

Corn Production
Wheat Production
Oats Production
Barley Production
Flaxseed Production
Rye Production
Irish Potatoes Production
Sweetpotatoes Production
Hay Production
Cotton Production
Tobacco Production

K503
K507
K512
K515
K5l8
K527
K533
K536
K551

Bituminous Coal Production
Coke Production
Pennsylvanian Anthracite Coal Production
Crude Petroleum Production
Cement Shipments
Pyrites Production
Phosphate Rock (sold or used by producers)
Iron Ore Production
Pig Iron Production
Copper Production (Mine (recoverable content))
Lead Production (Primary, refined)
Zinc Production (Mine (recoverable content))
Gold Production
Silver Production

M93
M122
M123
M138
M188
M198
M203
M205

1(554.

1(562

Coffee Imported
Cotton Consumed
Unmanufactured Silk Imports for Consumption
Refined Sugar Produced
Canned Corn Produced
Canned Tomatoes Produced
Beer Produced
Distilled Spirits Produced (total)
Manufactured Tobacco and Snuff Produced
Cigars Produced
Cigaretees Produced
Rails Produced
Raw Steel (total) Produced

M235

M243b
M249
M268
M269
P227
P230
P232
P233
P234
P235
P236
P239
P240
P241
P262
P265

aCorresponding series in Historical Statistics abandoned in favor of
other estimates. See text.

bsi M25O used until 1907. See

text.

Figure 1

Distribution of Stabilization Ratiosa

(a) Agriculture

(b) Mining

6.
6

No. of
Series

No. of
Series

4.

4.

2

2

LI 1
I

I

I

I

1

—

.25 .75 1.25 1.75 2.25 2.75 3.25

.25 .75 1.25 1.75 2.25 2.75 3.25

Stabilization Ratiob

Stabilization Ratio

Cc) Manufacturing

(d) All Commodities
14

6
No. of
Series

No. of
Series 10

4.
6

2
2

1
I

.25

1
I

.75 1.25 1.75 2.25 2.75 3.25

Stabilization Ratio

.25 .75 1.25 1.75 2.25 2.75 3.25
Stabilization Ratio

aThe stabilization ratio is the ratio of the prewar standard deviation of
the growth rate of each series to the postwar standard deviation.
bRatios on the border are included with the lower group.

