NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REACH FOR YIELD AND FICKLE CAPITAL FLOWS
Ricardo J. Caballero
Alp Simsek
Working Paper 24400
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24400

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018

Simsek acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Number
SES-1455319. Prepared for the AEA Session on International Finance and Emerging Markets,
ASSA January 2018. We thank Olivier Jeanne for his discussion and comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Reach for Yield and Fickle Capital Flows
Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 24400
March 2018
JEL No. F3,F34,F4,G15
ABSTRACT
In Caballero and Simsek (2018), we develop a model of fickle capital flows and show that, when
countries are similar, international flows create global liquidity and mitigate crises despite their
fickleness. In this paper, we focus on the asymmetric situation of Emerging Markets (EM)
exchanging flows with Developed Markets (DM) that feature lower returns but less frequent
crises. Relatively high DM returns help to mitigate EM crises, by reducing fickle inflows, and by
providing greater liquidity. The situation dramatically changes as the DM returns fall, as this
increases the fickle inflows driven by reach for yield and exacerbates EM crises.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics, E52-528
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Ma. 02139
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu

Reach for yield has a bad connotation. It is often associated to investments perceived
to be motivated not by the investor's deep conviction or knowledge of the receiving market
but by the depressed returns in the investor's natural market. The main concern with
investment ows supported by this motivation is that they tend to be ckle and exit at the
rst sight of trouble in local markets. Nowhere is this concern more prevalent than with the
capital in ows experienced by Emerging Markets (EM) in response to very accommodative
monetary policy in Developed Markets (DM).1
In Caballero and Simsek (2018) we develop a model of ckle capital ows and show that
as long as countries are su ciently similar, gross capital ows create global liquidity despite
their ckleness, but that local policymakers underestimate the value of this global liquidity.
However we also show that when returns are higher in an (in nitesimal) EM country than
in other countries, then ckle in ows can be destabilizing. In this paper we follow on the
latter lead and analyze the situation of a block of EM economies facing ckle foreign ows.

1

The EM Block

Consider a model with three periods, t 2 f0; 1; 2g. There is a mass one of EM countries
denoted by j each of which produces the same consumption good. Each country is associated
with a new investment technology|a risky asset that is supplied elastically in period 0. This
asset always pays R units of the consumption good, but the timing of the payo depends
on the local state ! j 2 fg; bg that is realized in period 1. State ! j = g represents the
case without a liquidity shock in which the asset pays o early in period 1. State ! j = b
represents the case with a liquidity shock in which the payo is delayed to period 2. In the
latter case, the asset is traded in period 1 at a price pj that will be endogenously determined.
The liquidity shocks are i.i.d. across countries with Pr (! j = b) = , where

2 (0; 1) denotes

the probability of the shock.
1

See, e.g., Broner et al. (2013) for widespread evidence that foreigners tend to exit during domestic
turmoil (while domestic investors often retrench into domestic markets), and IMF (2012) for a summary of
the domestic nancial instability concerns caused by these ckle ows.

2

In each country j, there are two types of agents, \distressed sellers" and \banks." There
is a mass one of distressed sellers that are born in period 1 with preferences given by E [~
c2 ].
They are endowed with e units of the risky asset in period 1, and they have access to an
in nitely pro table project that delivers (nonpledgeable) payo s in period 2. Thus, they
sell their endowment in period 1 to invest in the project. These distressed sellers are largely
passive: their main role is to capture asset sales driven by liquidity needs.
The main agents are banks (with mass one), which are denoted by the superscript j of
their locality. They are endowed with 1 unit of the consumption good in period 0. They have
preferences given by E [c1 + c2 ]. In period 0, banks in each country j choose how much to
0

invest in the local risky asset, xloc;j , and how much to invest in foreign risky assets, xj ;j

j0

for j 0 6= j. When they invest in foreign assets, these (foreign) banks are ckle as in Caballero
and Simsek (2018): If the foreign country j 0 6= j is hit by a liquidity shock in period 1, then
these banks sell all of their risky asset holdings in this country regardless of the price. In
contrast, local banks in country j 0 are willing to increase their position in local risky assets.
We focus on a symmetric equilibrium in which all EMs invest the same amount in other
0

EMs, xj ;j = x for each j and j 0 6= j (this is without loss of generality). This also leads
to symmetric asset prices, pj = p for each j country that experiences a liquidity shock in
period 1. In view of linear utility, the equilibrium price in period 1 cannot exceed the risky
asset payo in period 2, p

R. However, the price can fall below this level, p < R, which

we refer to as re sales. As we will see, this situation is brought about by liquidity-driven
sales by local distressed sellers and ckleness-driven sales by foreign banks, and a shortage
of liquidity in the hands of local banks that could arbitrage these re sales. We assume
e > 1, which will ensure that there will be re sales in equilibrium in all the scenarios we
will consider.

3

With these assumptions, in period 0, local banks solve the following problem,

max xloc R + xRM ,

xloc ;x

R = (1

)R + p

M =1

+

(1)

R
p

1 = xloc + x

If they invest in the local asset, they hold it until maturity, which yields R units of consumption (either in period 1 or period 2). If instead they invest in foreign assets, they obtain
consumption goods in period 1, either because there is no shock in the foreign market, or
there is a shock and they sell in view of ckleness. The variable, R, denotes the (certain)
payo in period 1 from investing abroad in a fully diversi ed manner. The nal return from
foreign investment also depends on whether there is a local shock, as the domestic shock
generates a reinvestment opportunity to purchase local assets at re-sale prices, p < R. The
variable, M , denotes the bank's expected marginal utility from reinvestment, which combines a marginal utility of 1 in case there is no domestic shock and a marginal utility of R=p
in case there is a shock.
Problem (1) illustrates that foreign investment represents a trade-o . On the one hand,
the prevalence of foreign crises, combined with ckleness, reduces banks' one-period return,
R < R. On the other hand, the prevalence of local crises increases the expected marginal
utility, M > 1. We resolve this tension in Caballero and Simsek (2018) and show that
RM > R (when p < R). Thus, in period 0, banks prefer to invest in foreign assets as
opposed to the local asset, xloc = 0 and x = 1. Hence, the model features international
capital ows (despite ckleness) because foreign assets provide liquidity during local crises
to retrenching local banks.
In period 1, the market clearing condition for the risky asset in a country experiencing a

4

liquidity shock can be written as,

p=

Rxout
, where xin = xout = x.
e + xin

(2)

The denominator captures the ( re) sales from distressed sellers and ckle foreign banks.
The numerator captures the total amount of cash in the market, which comes from the
local banks' foreign asset positions that are determined by the past out ows. Eq. (2)
illustrates that ckleness of in ows is indeed destabilizing (p drops as xin rises). However,
past out ows provide a stabilizing counterforce (p increases as xout rises) due to retrenchment
by local banks. In Caballero and Simsek (2018), we show that p rises with x. That is, gross
capital ows are on net stabilizing (in a symmetric environment) since the retrenchment
e ect dominates the ckleness e ect.
Substituting x = 1 and R = (1

) R + p into Eq. (2), we solve for the equilibrium

price:
pEM

p=

1
e+1

R.

It is useful to contrast this with the autarky equilibrium in which banks are allowed to hold
only local risky assets, xloc = 1; x = 0. This would lead to zero re-sale prices, pautarky = 0,
because local risky assets do not provide any liquidity during a domestic liquidity shock (as
their price also falls to the re-sale level). Hence, relative to autarky, equilibrium with capital
ows features greater global liquidity and higher re-sale prices. This raises local investment
by distressed sellers in countries that experience liquidity shocks.
Finally, we nd the EM block equilibrium payo from investing abroad, which will serve
as an important reference for the next section:

R

EM

(1

) R + pEM =

5

(e + 1) (1
e+1

)

R:

(3)

2

Reach for Yield

Suppose now that we add a large DM block to the model, with two di erences from the EM
block. First, the countries in the DM block do not experience a liquidity shock. Second,
the payo from the assets is lower and given by Rf < R. Speci cally, investing one unit in
DM countries' assets in period 0 delivers Rf units of the consumption good in period 1 with
certainty.
Like EM banks, DM banks have preferences E [c1 + c2 ]. In period 0, they choose to invest
locally (in DM assets) or in EM risky assets. As before, DM banks are ckle with respect
to EM investments: that is, in period 1 they sell their risky asset holdings in countries that
experience liquidity shocks. To simplify the analysis, we also assume that DM banks have
in nite wealth.
In this setting, we need to consider the possibility of additional ( ckle) in ows into EM
economies from DM, as well as the possibility of out ows from EM to DM. We assume that
DM banks invest an equal amount in each EM country denoted by xD!E . We also assume
that banks in each EM country invest an equal amount into DM assets denoted by xE!D .
As before, we use x to denote the symmetric in ows and out ows within the EM block. We
also use xin = x + xD!E and xout = x + xE!D to denote, respectively, the total amount of
in ows into and out ows from an EM country.
EM banks solve a version of problem (1) with the di erence that they can also invest
in DM assets. At an optimum, they invest their one unit of endowment in the assets that
yield the highest one-period payo . Likewise, DM banks optimally invest their wealth in the
assets with the highest return. Combining the two optimality conditions, we obtain,
8
>
>
x = 0; xE!D = 1 and
>
>
<
x; xE!D 2 [0; 1] and
>
>
>
>
: x = 1; xE!D = 0 and

xD!E = 0

if Rf > R

xD!E 2 [0; 1) if Rf = R .
xD!E = 1

6

if Rf < R

(4)

We also have the following market clearing condition for an EM country that experiences a
liquidity shock,
p=

max R; Rf
Rx + Rf xE!D
=
.
e + x + xD!E
e + xin

(5)

The second equality substitutes the de nition of in ows, xin = x + xD!E . It also uses the
observation that out ows are equal to one, xout = x + xE!D = 1, and they are invested
in the asset with the highest return. The equilibrium prices and ows are characterized by
Eqs. (4) and (5). Depending on the return on DM assets, Rf , one of four di erent types of
equilibria can obtain.
Region I. First consider a scenario where the return in DM is relatively high, with

Rf >

1
1

=e

R

(6)

In this region, it can be checked that all foreign investment is directed to the DM: x =
0; xE!D = 1; xD!E = 0, which also implies xin = 0. Thus, EM to EM ows stop and all
the liquidity hoarding by EM banks is done in DM assets. This reduces period 0 investment
in EM (as highlighted by Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2006) but signi cantly reduces the
severity of re sales. Speci cally, we have,
Rf
e
EM
R
>
e
EM
R
>
= pEM .
e+1

pI =

Here, the rst line uses Eq. (5), the second line uses Rf > R

EM

(in view of condition (6)

and Eq. (3)), and the last line uses the observation that pEM is determined by Eq. (2) after
setting in ows and out ows equal to one.
In this region, trading

ows with DM is a stabilizing force for the EM block, both
7

because it mitigates ckle in ows (the third line), and because it enables EM countries to
obtain greater liquidity to arbitrage local re sales (the second line). Note that a decline in
Rf reduces re-sale prices in this region, however the reason is not ckleness but a decline
in the return on the local banks' savings abroad.
Region II. Next suppose Rf continues to fall and enters the region [cf. Eq. (3)]:

R

EM

Rf <

1
1

=e

R.

(7)

In this region, there are in ows into the EM, xin > 0. Thus, the returns from investing in a
diversi ed EM portfolio are equated to Rf ,

(1

) R + pII = Rf :

(8)

Note that this equation implicitly de nes pII . The in ows can then be solved from the
market clearing condition (5),2
pII =

Rf
.
e + xin

(9)

In this region, ckleness reemerges as captured by the positive in ows into the EM. These
ckle in ows represent reach for yield since they are driven by relatively low returns in the
DM block. To see this, consider a further decline in Rf . This would temporarily violate Eq.
(8) and induce banks to direct foreign ows into the EM. This increases xin , which in turn
reduces the re-sale price according to Eq. (9). This process continues until the re-sale
price is su ciently low so that the indi erence condition (8) is reestablished. In particular,
a decline in Rf reduces the re-sale price at a faster rate than the previous case, since in
addition to reducing the local banks' savings, it also increases the ckle in ows into the
country. The ip side of the increasingly severe re sales is the rise in investment in period
2

Using condition (7), it can be veri ed that the solution satis es xin > 0. In this equilibrium,
x; x
; xE!D are not uniquely determined (although the total in ows and out ows, xin ; xout , are determined) since banks are indi erent between EM and DM assets.
D!E

8

0 (which raises one to one with xin ).
Nonetheless, in this region, the re-sale prices are still higher than in the isolated EM
environment of the previous section. Speci cally, combining the lower bound on Rf in (7)
with Eq. (8), we have pII

pEM .

Region III. This benign conclusion changes once Rf continues to drop and enters the
region,
(1

)R

Rf < R

EM

.

(10)

Here, the equilibrium is the same as in the previous case with the di erence that the resulting
re-sale price satis es, pIII < pEM . Intuitively, in ows from DM are large enough that they
begin to drag the price below that of the EM block in isolation. In fact, using condition (10),
it can be checked that the solution also satis es xin > 1 and R

III

= Rf < R

EM

. Hence,

trading ows with DM increases the ckle in ows into the EM (which used to be one), which
in turn exacerbates the re sales in EMs, and reduces the expected return below the level
which the EMs could obtain in isolation.
Region IV. Finally, suppose Rf falls further so that, Rf < (1

) R. In this region, all

foreign ows are directed to the EM: that is, x = 1; xE!D = 0; and xD!E = 1 (which also
implies xin = 1). Eq. (5) then implies pIV = 0. In particular, in ows from DM into EM
are so massive that the price is the same as the autarky price. Figure 1 portrays all of these
regions.

3

Taxing Capital In ows

Since it is hard for the authorities to determine ex-ante whether capital in ows will be steady
or ckle, barriers to capital ows often take the form of a tax on capital out ows (if these
happen too soon or suddenly). We capture the core element of this policy by imposing a
tax

on out ows during a liquidity shock. We assume the revenues from taxes are spent on
9

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.9

Figure 1: The solid lines plot the equilibrium re-sale price and in ows in the EM, (p; xin ),
as a function of the return in the DM, Rf . The dashed lines illustrate the price and in ows
that would obtain in the EM block isolation (without any DM-EM ows).

10

unmodeled government projects (in particular, they do not contribute to liquidity in the risky
asset markets). The tension is that while taxation discourages destabilizing reach-for-yield
ows, in symmetric equilibrium it also discourages liquidity-creation ows.
In this context, the expected return from investing in a foreign EM country for a ckle
bank is:
R = (1

) R + p(1

).

First consider the case without DM, in which all ows are for liquidity purposes. Suppose
taxes are low enough that banks still prefer to invest in foreign assets. Then, following
similar steps as in Section 1, the re-sale price can be calculated as:

pEM; =

1
e+1

(1

)

R < pEM .

Hence, absent any interaction with DM, taxing capital in ows is counterproductive for the
EM block as a whole. However, as we show in Caballero and Simsek (2018), a single EM
country with the objective of raising its re-sale prices might still nd it useful to restrict
capital in ows. The reason for this discrepancy is that in ows into a country are part of global
liquidity that provides nancial stability bene ts in other countries. A local policymaker
fully internalizes the negative ckleness e ect of in ows but does not internalize the positive
e ects on global liquidity.
Next consider the case with DM, so that there is also reach for yield. Consider regions II
or III in which the returns in EM and DM are equated. With positive but su ciently small
taxes, the equilibrium is determined by [cf. Eqs. (8) and (9)]:

(1

) R + (1

)pII;
pII;

= Rf
=

Rf
.
e + xin;

The rst equality implies that taxes increase re-sale prices in the EM block, pII; > pII . The

11

second equality shows that they do so by reducing ckle in ows, xin; < xin . Hence, unlike
the case without DM, taxes are potentially bene cial for the EM block as a whole. Intuitively,
taxes discourage ckle in ows driven by reach for yield, without having an adverse impact
on the liquidity available to local banks. In our model with DM, the latter (liquidity) e ect
is in fact zero due to the extreme feature that there is an in nitely elastic supply of liquid
assets at return Rf . This suggests that taxing capital ows can be e ective in equilibrium,
when the reach for yield is strong and the global liquidity supply is relatively elastic, so that
the loss of liquidity from capital taxation is relatively small.

4

References
Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio L. Schmukler (2013), \Gross
Capital Flows: Dynamics and Crises," Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(1), p.113133.
Caballero Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2006), \Bubbles and Capital Flow
Volatility," Journal of Monetary Economics 53(1), p.35-53.
Caballero Ricardo J. and Alp Simsek (2018), \A Model of Fickle Capital Flows and
Retrenchment," NBER Working Paper, no. 22751.
IMF (2012), \The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An Institutional
View," Technical Report, IMF Sta Review.

12

