                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE RETIREMENT-CONSUMPTION PUZZLE:
                     NEW EVIDENCE FROM PERSONAL FINANCES

                                        Arna Olafsson
                                        Michaela Pagel

                                     Working Paper 24405
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24405


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




We are grateful for the financial financial support of the Pension Research Center (PeRCent) at
Copenhagen Business School, and we thank Andrew Caplin, Rachel Kranton, Jawad Addoum,
Jon Parker, Matthew Rabin, Botond Koszegi, David Laibson, Steve Zeldes, Emi Nakamura, Jon
Zinman, Jennifer La'O, Emir Kamenica and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, University of Queensland, PerCent 2017 Conference, University of Minnesota,
Columbia University, and ECWFC at the WFA 2017 for a range of insightful comments. We are
also indebted to August Schweitz Eriksson and Meniga for providing the Icelandic data and to
Steffen Meyer for replicating our results in German bank data. We also thank Belinda Chen for
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Arna Olafsson and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle: New Evidence from Personal Finances
Arna Olafsson and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 24405
March 2018
JEL No. D12,D14,E21,J26,J32

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses a detailed panel of individual spending, income, account balances, and credit
limits from a personal finance management software provider to investigate how expenditures,
liquid savings, and consumer debt change around retirement. The longitudinal nature of our data
allows us to estimate individual fixed-effects regressions and thereby control for all selection on
time-invariant (un)observables. We provide new evidence on the retirement-consumption puzzle
and on whether individuals save adequately for retirement. We find that, upon retirement,
individuals reduce their spending in both work-related and leisure categories. However, we feel
that it is difficult to tell conclusively whether expenses are work related or not, even with the best
data. We thus look at household finances and find that individuals delever upon retirement by
reducing consumer debt and increasing liquid savings. We argue that these findings are difficult
to rationalize via, for example, work-related expenses. A rational agent would save before
retirement because of the expected fall in income, and dissave after retirement, rather than the
exact opposite


Arna Olafsson
Copenhagen Business School
Department of Finance
Solbjerg Plads 3
2000 Frederiksberg
Denmark
Denmark
ao.fi@cbs.dk

Michaela Pagel
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mpagel@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
A large literature analyzes changes in household consumption upon retirement. After all,
household consumption is the most important part of aggregate demand and the increase in
the share of the workforce that will be approaching or past retirement age in the coming years
puts this topic at centerstage for both policy-makers and researchers. This paper uses new
data from a personal finance management software to shed additional light on the effects of
retirement on individual spending, income, and personal finances, that is, liquid savings and
consumer debt.
     A central implication of Modigliani’s (1954) life-cycle model, the standard model for ana-
lyzing consumption-savings decisions by households, is that consumption should be smoothed
across periods of predictably high and low income. Retirement is arguably among the most
predictable and important income changes individuals encounter in their lives, and consump-
tion should therefore not be affected by its onset. However, a number of empirical studies (e.g.,
Banks et al., 1998; Bernheim et al., 2001; Haider and Stephens, 2007; Schwerdt, 2005) find a
sharp decline in consumption during the first years of retirement, a phenomenon referred to as
the retirement-consumption puzzle.1
     But other studies argue that a drop in consumption at retirement is actually not puzzling.
Aguiar and Hurst (2005, 2013) and Hurst (2008) strongly question the claim that there is a
decline in actual consumption utility at retirement. They argue that spending, rather than con-
sumption, decreases on the grounds that individuals reduce their work-related expenses and
overall spending through more efficient shopping and household production, as a result of
changes in the opportunity cost of time after retirement.2 So the mechanism for the drop in
spending upon retirement is still debated, as is the broader question whether individuals save
adequately for retirement and whether Modigliani’s (1954) life-cycle model is applicable.
     This paper revisits the retirement-consumption puzzle with new, accurate, and comprehen-
sive data on spending, income, consumer debt, and liquid savings from personal finance man-
agement software. The accurate spending data, covering more than six years, offers a unique
opportunity to reevaluate the puzzle. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, this paper is the
first to document changes in personal finances, that is, liquid savings and consumer debt, around
retirement. The data allow us to analyze changes in individual spending, interest payments, and
financial account balances upon retirement using individual fixed-effects regressions. We find
    1
      The first study to document a clear decline in consumption at the onset of retirement was conducted by Banks
et al. (1998), using a pseudo panel constructed from 25 years of the Family Expenditure Survey (FES) in the UK.
Bernheim et al. (2001) also found a drop in consumption at retirement using longitudinal data from the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The drop in consumption at retirement is theoretically rationalized by Pagel
(2017) and Huang and Caliendo (2011), among others. Moreover, Ameriks et al. (2007) and Haider and Stephens
(2007) provide evidence that the drop is expected.
    2
      While some additional studies provide evidence supporting this hypothesis (see, e.g., Hurd and Rohwed-
der, 2003; Battistin et al., 2009), others argue against it (such as Stephens Jr and Toohey, 2017). However, all
these studies are based on survey data. Analyzing the puzzle using transaction-level data from personal finance
management software, as introduced by Gelman et al. (2014), is a natural next step.


                                                        1
evidence of reductions in both work-related and leisure spending categories. However, we note
that it is difficult to tell conclusively which expenses are work related, even when we consider
very fine categories. Additionally, we look at personal finances and document that individuals
delever around retirement by reducing their consumer debt and increasing their liquid savings.
Our findings about personal finances are very interesting because they are difficult to rational-
ize via, for example, theories about work-related expenses. Any rational agent who expects a
fall in income at retirement will save before retirement and dissave after retirement, rather than
the other way around.
     Unless the reduction in work-related expenses is larger than the fall in income, agents
should always save before retirement and dissave after. If the reduction in work-related ex-
penses is larger than the fall in income, they should retire early. However, the average individ-
ual in our sample continues to work voluntarily some time after reaching the age thresholds at
which disincentives to retire no longer apply. Thus, our finding that individuals increase their
savings after retiring is difficult to explain by work-related expenses or any other theory that
reduces consumption needs around retirement, such as by reference to the opportunity costs of
time. Our findings could be explained by individuals liquidating retirement accounts or other
illiquid assets, such as houses, around retirement. To address this concern, we make sure our
findings are robust to controlling for income from all sources. Furthermore, we find that invest-
ment transactions and all other sources of income are unaffected by retirement status. Overall,
we carefully discuss a number of theories consistent with rational planning: work-related ex-
penses, opportunity costs of time, wealth shocks and liquidation of assets, health shocks, and
intra-household bargaining. We conclude, however, that they all have difficulty explaining our
findings.
     We thus argue that we cannot retire the consumption puzzle just yet. After all, the retirement-
consumption puzzle is about individuals not being able to plan for an expected, large, and
salient reduction in income. Our finding that consumption and consumer debt drop while liquid
savings increase can be explained by undersaving before retirement and adjusting consumption
patterns afterward, which requires a time-inconsistent overconsumption problem such as hyper-
bolic discounting (as in Laibson et al., 1998) that is corrected after retirement, as we show in a
fully-fledged life-cycle model. Alternatively, Pagel (2017) shows that a model of expectations-
based loss aversion, as developed by Kőszegi and Rabin (2009), predicts that individuals will
correct their overconsumption problem upon retiring. The intuition is the following: when in-
come is uncertain, individuals overconsume in the present and hope for a better realization of
income in the future. But when income is certain, as it is after retirement, overspending results
in a sure reduction in future spending, and because the agent dislikes this sure loss, she corrects
her overconsumption problem after retirement. We thus rationalize a simultaneous decrease
in consumption and increase in savings upon retirement in a realistically calibrated life-cycle
model.
     Reassuringly, we find the same empirical pattern in two commonly used US consump-

                                                 2
tion survey data sets, the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) and the Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF). In the CEX data, we find that retirement results in an increase in savings (mea-
sured as income minus spending), checking account balances, and savings account balances.
In the SCF data, we find that retirement results in reductions in leverage and debt and in in-
creases in checking, savings, and call account balances. We control for cohort, age, and year
effects, although one has to keep in mind that these results suffer from selection bias and mea-
surement error. Beyond the CEX and SCF data, we thus replicate our results in individual-
and transaction-level bank account data from Germany by running fixed-effects regressions.
Finally, we use two more US survey data sets to replicate our results: the PSID and the HRS.
Because these surveys poll households consecutively, we can also include individual fixed ef-
fects in our regressions. In all these data sets, we find that consumption and debt holdings
decrease but savings and checking account balances increase along with other measures of
wealth.
     In this paper, we explore the retirement-consumption puzzle using a very accurate panel of
individual spending and income. The data were captured in the course of business by Meniga,
a provider of personal finance management software in Iceland. This data set has already
proven useful for studying, among other things, the spending responses of individuals to in-
come arrivals (Olafsson and Pagel, forthcoming) and the drivers of individuals’ attention to
their personal finances (Olafsson and Pagel, 2018). We are aware of only one previous study
to use transaction-level data to investigate the consumption drop upon retirement: Agarwal et
al. (2015) use debit and credit card spending data from Singapore. Our data set has five advan-
tages: (1) In Iceland, consumers use electronic means of payments almost exclusively, which
eliminates one limitation of the data from Singapore, where a significant fraction of expen-
ditures in certain shops, such as fresh markets and small grocery stores, are paid with cash.
(2) We observe the incomes and expenditures of individuals over a long period of time around
retirement. Thus, we have sufficient power to estimate individual fixed-effects regressions,
controlling for all selection on observable and unobservable time-invariant characteristics. (3)
We can identify individual spending and income because all financial accounts are personal in
Iceland. At the same time, we can identify individuals within a household, which allows us
to control for household income. (4) We can see how individuals spend within certain cate-
gories of spending, which gives us the opportunity to test whether consumers substitute toward
cheaper but more time consuming goods when they retire. In addition, our categorization is
very accurate and comprehensive. (5) Because we have detailed information on all account
balances, credit limits, and financial fees, we are able to document the changes in personal
finances at the onset of retirement.
     With respect to changes in household finances upon retirement, the only related paper we
are aware of is Addoum (2016), which analyzes changes in household portfolios upon retire-
ment using PSID data. The author shows that portfolios become less risky when male spouses
retire as women gain bargaining power and are more risk averse. Moreover, our findings are

                                               3
related to recent work documenting that mean and median cohort wealth, for either singles or
couples, can be stationary or rising for many years after retirement (Poterba et al., 2011a,b)
even though the standard Modigliani’s (1954) life-cycle model predicts that individuals should
decumulate assets. This empirical finding has been termed the ”retirement-savings puzzle” and
is theoretically explained by DeNardi et al. (2010) and Laitner et al. (2017), among others.
     The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the Icelandic
pension system, describes our data, and reports summary statistics. Section 3 presents our
empirical approach and findings. Section 4 discusses how our findings can be theoretically
rationalized. Finally, Section 5 offers some concluding remarks.


2       Background, data, and summary statistics

2.1     Background and Icelandic pension system
A long working life is more common in Iceland than in most other countries. Figure 1 com-
pares the average effective retirement ages of men and women in Iceland, Germany, and the
United States. This data is obtained from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and De-
velopment (OECD). In our data, we label individuals above age 60 as retired when we observe
pension payments above a certain limit for several months and salary income below a certain
limit for several months.3 Figure 2 displays the share of retired individuals at each age and Fig-
ure 3 displays the distribution of retirement ages. Our inferred time of retirement is consistent
with the information from the OECD on effective retirement age in Iceland displayed in Figure
1.
    The Icelandic pension system consists of three pillars: a tax-financed public pension (i.e.,
social security benefits), compulsory occupational pension funds (i.e., defined benefit/contribution
plans), which are the dominant feature of the system, and voluntary private pensions with tax
incentives (i.e., tax-deductible savings). The age thresholds at which individuals are no longer
punished for retiring early are the following: the public pension, which is need-based, is paid
from age 67 on. The occupational pension is paid from age 67 on, but it is possible to start
withdrawing it as early as 65 with a reduced benefit, or as late as 70 with additional benefits.
This pension is paid as an annuity and depends partly on individual contributions. The occupa-
tional pension system is very transparent, and individuals can easily acquire all the necessary
information about their annuitized retirement income. Finally, private pension savings can be
withdrawn from age 60 on. Appendix A contains a more detailed review of the key features of
the pension system in Iceland.
    3
     More specifically, individuals older than 60 are labeled as retired if (1) we see them receiving at least
1,000,000 ISK (9,770 USD) in pension payments over the sample period, (2) the pension payment in the cur-
rent month is at least 30,000 ISK (293 USD), and (3) we do not see a salary payment higher than 150,000 ISK
(1,466 USD) in the current month or the three months before and after.



                                                      4
2.2    Data
In this paper, we exploit new data from Iceland generated by Meniga, a financial aggregation
software provider to European banks and financial institutions. Meniga was founded in 2009
and is the European market leader of white-label Personal Finance Management (PFM) and
next-generation online banking solutions, reaching more than 50 million users in 20 countries.
Meniga’s account-aggregation platform lets users view all their accounts and credit cards from
multiple banks in one place.
    In January 2017, Iceland’s population was 338,349 individuals, of whom 262,846 were
older than 16. At that time, Meniga had 50,573 users, or about 20 percent of the population
above age 16. Because their service is marketed through banks, the sample of users is fairly
representative. Each day, the software automatically records all the bank and credit card trans-
actions, including descriptions and the balances, overdrafts, and credit limits. The software also
collects demographic information such as age, gender, marital status, and postal code. Figure 4
displays screenshots of the app’s user interface. The first shows background characteristics that
the user provides, the second shows transactions, and the third shows bank account information.
    We use the entire de-identified population of active users in Iceland and the data derived
from their records. The data on spending, income (including interest income from savings
account balances), overdraft interest, and financial fees runs from 2011 to 2017 and the data
on balances and limits spans 2014 to 2017. We restrict the sample to individuals above the
age 60 who receive at least one salary transaction (before receiving their pension payments)
and engage in at least one grocery store transaction per month. We perform the analysis on
user-level data aggregated at a monthly level for different income sources, spending categories,
and measures of household finances. Individuals in the same household can link each other, in
which case we obtain information on both individual and total household spending and income.
All accounts in Iceland are personal; thus, we know each individual’s spending, salary and
pension income, balances, and credit limits.

Spending data

Spending is categorized, and each category is aggregated at both the individual and the house-
hold level. The panel thus provides individual- and household-level expenditure information
for disaggregated categories. We consider ten fairly broad spending categories: groceries, fuel,
alcohol, ready-made food, home improvement, transportation, clothing and accessories, sports
and activities, and pharmacies.4 We also have more disaggregated categories. For instance, for
ready-made food, we know the type of restaurant, such as bakery, canteen, or fine dining.
   4
   We can observe expenditures on alcohol that is not bought at bars and restaurants because a state-owned
company, the State Alcohol and Tobacco Company, has a monopoly on the sale of alcoholic beverages in Iceland.




                                                     5
Income data

When the data are extracted from the PFM system, they have already been categorized by a
three-tiered approach: system, user, and community rules. The system rules are applied when
codes from the transaction system clearly indicate the type of transaction being categorized.
For example, when transactions in the Icelandic banking system contain the value “04” in a
field named “Text key,” the payer has indicated payment of salary. User rules apply when no
system rules are in place but a user persistently categorizes transactions with certain text or
code attributes to a specific category, so that the system automatically creates a rule that is
applied to all further such transactions. If neither system rules nor user rules apply, the system
detects identical categorization rules from multiple users, which allows for the generation of
a community rule applying the categorization across the whole community. The PFM system
has already detected first-party transactions, such as between two accounts belonging to the
same household, and excluded them. Thus, multiple steps were taken to achieve an accurate
categorization of transactions based on banking system codes, transaction texts, amounts, and
payer profiles.
    Payers identity and NACE category (The Statistical Classification of Economic Activities
in the European Community)5 are also added to each income transfer whenever possible.6 The
system sorts income into 23 categories. Regular income categories are child support, benefits,
child benefits, interest income, invalidity benefits, parental leave, pension, housing benefits,
rental benefits, rental income, salary, student loans, and unemployment benefits. The irregular
income categories are damages, grant, other income, insurance claims, investment transactions,
reimbursements, tax rebates, and travel allowances.

Bank data

The amount of savings and overdrafts that individuals hold can be inferred from information on
balances, interest income from savings accounts, and interest paid on overdrafts. An overdraft
occurs when withdrawals from a current account exceed its available balance. This means that
the balance is negative and the bank is providing credit to the account holder, with interest being
charged at the agreed rate. Virtually all current accounts in Iceland offer a pre-agreed overdraft
facility, the size of which is based on individual credit scores and histories. Customers can use
this overdraft facility at any time without consulting the bank, and it can be maintained indefi-
nitely. Although an overdraft facility may be authorized, technically the money is repayable on
demand by the bank. In reality, this is a rare occurrence, as the overdrafts are profitable for the
   5
    This is is the industry classification system used in the European Union.
   6
    Payer identity can be hard or impossible to identify because of limited information in transaction data, such
as generic transaction texts. In specific cases where the payer could not be identified, a proxy id was created to
enable the binding of payments from single sources even though the true source id is unknown. In some cases, no
attempts could be made to bind transactions by origin via a proxy id. Some payments without actual payer identity
may have a proxy id, but never a NACE category, as the real id of the payer is unknown. All such transactions are
categorized as other income.


                                                        6
bank and expensive for the customer.
    In addition, we have information on three types of financial penalties: late-payment interest,
non-sufficient-funds fees, and late fees. Credit card companies charge late-payment interest
daily from the date a payment is due and payable to the date it is paid in full. Non-sufficient-
funds fees occur when the overdraft limit is exceeded in a consumer’s current account. In
the event of attempted debit card transactions, the bank charges the account with these fees.
Finally, late fees are fees assessed for paying bills after their due dates.


2.3    Summary statistics
Table 1 displays summary statistics of the user population, including income and spending in
US dollars and demographic statistics. We can see that the average user is 41 years old and 49
percent of users are female. For comparison, Statistics Iceland reports the average age in the
population to be 37 years, with 49.5 percent being female. Thus, our demographic statistics
are very similar to those of the overall population. This is reassuring because of the concern
when using app data that the user population may be young, well-situated, male, and tech-
savvy relative to the overall population. The representative national household expenditure
survey conducted by Statistics Iceland also reports income and spending statistics. In the table,
parentheses indicate when spending categories did not match perfectly with the data. We can
see that the income and spending figures are very similar for those categories that match well.
Our sample is fairly representative because individuals are offered to sign up for the software
automatically by the bank when they access their accounts online and the internet penetration
is 97% in Iceland.
    Table 2 displays summary statistics for individuals who are eligible for retirement, i.e.,
have reached age 60, whether or not they are retired. We can see in the raw data that on average
retired individuals have lower incomes, spend less (in both individual spending and household
spending), have more savings, hold less consumer debt, have more access to credit (liquidity),
and incur fewer bank fees and penalty payments.7
    Figure 5 summarizes the salary, pension-payment, and expenditure trajectories of men and
women using binned averages by age. The figure shows how salary payments decrease and
pension payments increase between the ages of 60 and 70. Labor income and spending are
both hump-shaped over the life cycle.
   7
    Liquidity is defined as access to credit and thus current account balance plus savings account balance plus
overdraft limits plus credit card limits minus overdrafts and credit card balances.




                                                      7
3     Analyses

3.1    Life-cycle profiles of spending and income
We start our analysis by investigating whether we can replicate the familiar hump-shaped pro-
file of spending over the life cycle in our data. Following Aguiar and Hurst (2013) and Agar-
wal et al. (2015), we obtain the age profile of consumption by regressing log total spending
on age, controlling for month-by-year and individual fixed effects. We also estimate separate
regressions for log spending in our ten broad consumption categories. Figure 6 plots the age
coefficients for log total monthly spending. The expenditure profiles do indeed exhibit the con-
ventional hump-shaped patterns, in which spending peaks in the late thirties, at a bit less than
40 log points higher than the level for twenty year olds, and spending declines by about the
same amount from the individual’s late fifties until retirement age.
     Aguiar and Hurst (2013), Agarwal et al. (2015), and Figure 6 document considerable het-
erogeneity in life-cycle patterns of spending across different consumption categories. Spending
in grocery stores and supermarkets is the largest part of household total spending (excluding
expenditure commitments like housing and utilities) and it does exhibit the hump-shaped pat-
tern, but other spending categories do not. For instance, ready-made food expenditures rise in
the individual’s twenties and then stay more or less constant until declining in the sixties. Al-
cohol expenditure is constantly rising, while spending on clothes and accessories is constantly
falling.
     As shown in Figure 6, we also find considerable heterogeneity in the life-cycle patterns
of spending in more refined categories. For instance, grocery stores are categorized as either
budget or expensive stores. Spending in budget supermarkets exhibits a much greater hump
than spending in more expensive grocery stores. Furthermore, the share of expenditures in
expensive grocery stores falls during the twenties, reaches its bottom around age 30, and stays
constant until the early forties, when it starts rising again.
     We also find different patterns among more refined ready-made food categories. Expendi-
tures on fast food increase in the individual’s twenties and stay more or less constant until they
start falling during the sixties. This is consistent with fast food being a work-related expense
or a substitute for home production that increases as individuals enter the labor market and
decreases as they retire. The same applies to casual dining. Expenditure on fine dining, on
the other hand, increases gradually and then stays pretty much constant. This pattern appears
reasonable for a kind of expense that is unlikely to be a work related or a substitute for home
production and thus to be relatively unaffected by labor-market status.
     Taken together, these figures suggest that individuals shift toward more time-consuming
food expenditures as they retire from the labor market, which is perfectly consistent with the
findings in the literature (e.g., Aguiar and Hurst, 2013).




                                                8
3.2     The effects of retirement on spending and personal finances
To examine the effects of retirement on spending and personal finances we run the following
regression:

                       log(Cit ) = α
                                   b + βRetired
                                       b       it + γ
                                                    b log(Yit ) + φmy + ηi + it                                (1)

where Cit is the dependent variable of interest and Yit is income of individual i at time t. φmy
is a month-by-year fixed effect, and ηi is an individual fixed effect. Controlling for individ-
ual fixed effects allows us to compare individuals to themselves before and after retirement.
Retiredit is an indicator equal to 1 if individual i has retired at time t and the βb coefficient thus
measures the effect of retirement on the outcome variable under consideration.

Spending by category

Table 3 shows the estimated effect of retirement on spending based on the individual fixed
effects model, Equation (1), with and without controlling for total income.8 We can control
either for individual income or for total household income when individuals link each other.
These results show that spending drops significantly upon retirement. When we control for
income, the drop is about 70% of the reduction without controlling for income, which suggests
that individuals change their spending habits not only because income drops at retirement.
    In turn, we find results consistent with a reduction in work-related expenses: spending on
fuel, ready-made food, and clothing drops substantially. Grocery spending falls as well, which
might be attributed to more efficient shopping and home production, as individuals have more
time at their disposal after retirement. However, leisure-related expenses (for instance, sports
and activities) also decrease substantially, suggesting that individuals are correcting an over-
consumption problem. Other spending that can hardly be attributed to work, such as alcohol
bought in stores and pharmacy spending, also falls upon retirement.
    Nevertheless, we feel that the results on spending in such broad categories do not paint a
conclusive picture of whether or not work-related expenses explain the retirement-consumption
puzzle. We thus turn to a finer categorization and, following the literature, examine spending
on food more closely.

Spending by grocery store and type of restaurant

In the previous section, we showed that consumers substitute across different types of grocery
stores and of ready-made food places over their life cycles. We know the type of grocery
store (budget or expensive) and the types of restaurant (such as bakery or fine dining). We can
   8
     Because individual spending categories include many zeros, we replace the log of all values between zero and
one Icelandic krona with zero to avoid losing these observations. Our estimates are not qualitatively or quantita-
tively affected by winsorizing to address outliers instead of taking the log of the outcome variables. Moreover, our
results are not affected by controlling for winsorized income as opposed to log income.


                                                         9
also distinguish between individual trips and overall daily spending. Previous studies, even
those using transaction-level data, may have failed to capture some patterns. The reason is that
consumers in countries where card payments are not as widely accepted as in Iceland typically
use different payment instruments in different types of stores. For instance, cash payments are
much more common in fresh markets and smaller grocery stores and, as Figure 6 shows, older
cohorts exhaust a larger share of their grocery spending in such stores. This would suggest
that the spending of older cohorts is underestimated in countries where cash is among the most
common payment instruments. These results are consistent with findings by Agarwal et al.
(2015) using the shopping scanner data. However, given that almost all purchases in Iceland
are made with non-cash instruments (and we can control for cash withdrawals), this cannot
be part of the explanation for the drop in consumption at retirement in Iceland. In fact, it
suggests that the numbers on groceries and ready-made food shown in Table 3 underestimate
the reduction in the amount of grocery spending as consumers spend a larger share in more
expensive supermarkets at later ages but still reduce their overall spending.
     Figure 7 shows the life-cycle profiles of (1) restaurant spending and visits, (2) expenditure
in different types of restaurants, such as bars or fine dining, and (3) visits to different types of
restaurants. We can clearly see humps for all the life-cycle profiles of both spending and trips
and for all the categories of restaurants.
     Moreover, we can look at the effects of retirement on these categories. We can see in Table
4 that individuals exhibit a drop in spending for all categories of restaurants, including bars
and fine dining. This result is more consistent with a reduction in overconsumption around
retirement than with a reduction in work-related expenses.
     Nevertheless, we again feel that the results on spending, even with the most accurate and
comprehensive data and a very fine categorization, do not paint a conclusive picture of whether
or not work-related expenses, home production, and efficient shopping explain the retirement-
consumption puzzle. After all, one could easily construct a theory of how fine dining or other
activities are work related and thus bound to fall around retirement without affecting consump-
tion utility and without concluding that individuals do not save properly for retirement. Over-
all, we thus conclude that whether a puzzle exists cannot be decided conclusively even with the
most comprehensive and accurate spending data.

Personal finances

Using the same estimation approach, we can investigate the effects of retirement on bank ac-
count balances, overdrafts, credit limits, and bank fees. Table 5 displays the estimated effects
of retirement on household finances based on the individual fixed effects model, Equation (1),
with and without controlling for total income. The most interesting result is that individuals
delever. When we measure consumer debt via interest expenses, we find a 13.2% reduction.
Thus, individuals not only cut their consumption, but they also reduce their consumer debt


                                                10
considerably. This deleveraging cannot easily be rationalized by a reduction in work-related
expenditures, as we discuss in detail below. When rational agents expect a substantial reduction
in income, they will optimally save before and dissave after retirement rather than the other way
around. So instead, it seems sensible to suggest that individuals decide to correct their over-
consumption and debt holdings by delevering. Figure 8 shows the life-cycle profile of interest
payments on consumer debt holdings. Consumer debt features a pronounced hump similar to
those of consumption and income. Obviously, if consumer debt were to smooth consumption
and income over the life cycle, it would be U-shaped, not hump-shaped.
    We find that households not only delever, they also increase their liquid savings (measured
by interest income on bank account balances) substantially, between 5.5% and 12.1% depend-
ing on whether income is controlled for. This again hints at individuals rethinking their financial
plans at the onset of retirement. Figure 9 displays the life-cycle profile of interest income from
savings accounts and shows a clear increase around the time of retirement. Moreover, we find
that individuals increase their current account balances and decrease their overdraft holdings
and credit card balances. Finally, individuals also reduce total and late fee payments.


3.3    Replicating the analysis in other data sets
In this section, we show that we can replicate our results in commonly used survey data sets
from the US and in another individual- and transaction-level data set from Germany. It is
reassuring that we can document the same results in survey consumption data most commonly
used in the literature, the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) and the Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF). However, these data sets suffer from selection bias and measurement error,
so to bolster the credibility of our findings we replicate our analysis using additional data sets
from the US as well as Germany where we can employ individual fixed effects and conclude
that our results are not specific to Iceland.

CEX data

We use data from the CEX for 1980 to 2002. Following Aguiar and Hurst (2013), we use the
NBER extraction files by John Sabelhaus and Ed Harris of the Congressional Budget Office.
The data set links four quarterly interviews for each respondent household and collapses all
the spending, income, and wealth categories into a consistent set of categories covering all the
years. The CEX is conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and surveys a large sample of
the US population to collect data on consumption expenditures, demographics, income, and as-
sets. Following Harris and Sebelhaus (2000) suggest, consumption expenditures include food,
tobacco, alcohol, amusement, clothing, personal care, housing, house operations (such as furni-
ture and house supplies), personal business, transportation (such as autos and gas), recreational
activities (such as books and sports), and charity expenditures. Alternatively, we could consider
non-durable or discretionary consumption only. Income consists of wages, business income,

                                                11
farm income, rents, dividends, interest, pension, social security, supplemental security, unem-
ployment benefits, worker’s compensation, public assistance, food stamps, and scholarships.
    We regress savings, measured simply as income minus overall consumption, on a full set
of age, year, and cohort fixed effects. In addition to the retirement and age effects of interest,
the data are contaminated by potential time and cohort effects, which constitutes an identifica-
tion problem, as time minus age equals cohort. In the portfolio-choice literature, it is standard
practice to solve the identification problem by acknowledging age and time effects (as tradable
and non-tradable wealth varies with age, and contemporaneous stock market happenings are
likely to affect participation and shares) while omitting cohort effects (Campbell and Viceira,
2002). By contrast, in the consumption literature it is standard to omit time effects but acknowl-
edge cohort effects (Gourinchas and Parker, 2002). By including the full set of fixed effects,
we identify the regression simply by an arbitrary trend assumption (we find the same results
when omitting the year fixed effects while including the region’s unemployment rate, following
Gourinchas and Parker (2002)). Instead of age dummies, we can use a polynomial in age to
the fifth power, and we can control for family size and number of earners in the same way.
In addition to measuring savings as income minus consumption, we use checking and savings
account balances as outcome variables.
    Table 7 shows the regression results for savings (measured as income minus consumption),
checking account balances, and savings account balances. The effect of retirement is positive,
significant, and economically large in all specifications. But, given that we cannot control for
household fixed effects, this result may be driven by selection: richer households are retiring
earlier. However, all the results hold even when we control for income.

SCF data

The SCF is a statistical survey of income, balance sheets, pensions, and other demographic
characteristics of families in the United States, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board in
cooperation with the Treasury Department. We use the data from six waves from 1992 to 2007.
However, as in the case of the CEX data, the SCF does not survey households consecutively
and we can therefore not employ household fixed effects. As before, we estimate the effect of
retirement jointly controlling for age, time, and cohort fixed effects and identify the model with
a random assumption about its trend. We control for family size in the same manner as for the
CEX data.
    Table 8 shows the regression results for leverage, debt, and savings account balances. The
effect of retirement is negative, significant, and economically meaningful for the SCF measures
of leverage and debt both when controlling for income or not. For savings account balances, the
effect of retirement is positive, significant, and large once we control for income. We also find
very similar results for related variables, such as overdraft debt, credit card, checking, current,




                                                12
and call account balances.9
    The results of both the CEX and SCF data are prone to an obvious selection bias. Clearly,
individuals with large savings and little consumer debt may choose to retire earlier. Therefore,
we also replicate our results in data sets that allow us to control for individual fixed effects
and thus for all selection on time-invariant observable or unobservable characteristics. In such
specifications, we only identify an effect off of households transitioning into retirement.

German bank account data

We replicate our results in a data set that includes information on income, spending, and check-
ing, credit, and portfolio accounts from a German bank covering approximately 5,000 individ-
uals who transitioned into retirement in the period from 1998 to 2010. The results can be found
in Table 9. We find that savings (measured as income minus consumption) increases when
individuals retire, and we see increases in current account balances and portfolio values and
decreases in credit account balances.

PSID data

We also use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data from 1968 to 2015. The PSID is a
nationally representative survey of households in the United States conducted by the University
of Michigan. It was administered annually from 1968 to 1997 and then biennially post 1997.
Furthermore, it included questions that relate to specific consumption and savings measures
post 1997. Following the literature, we use the consumption and savings data post 1997 (Li
et al., 2010) and consumption is measured as expenditure on food, housing, transportation,
education, childcare, and healthcare. Because the PSID surveys households consecutively, we
can also include individual fixed effects in our regressions. The results of the PSID analysis are
consistent with our other results. The coefficients on consumption are negative and significant,
indicating that individuals consume less after retirement. Moreover, retired individuals increase
their balances in savings and checking accounts, which corroborates our previous findings.
Finally, individuals also hold less debt, and their overall wealth increases with and without
accounting for equity.10 These results can be found in Table 10.

HRS data

Finally, we replicate our results using the Health and Retirement survey (HRS) conducted by
the University of Michigan. This survey asks individuals and their spouses who are over 50
   9
      A call deposit account is a bank account for investment funds that provides instant access to funds and interest
accrual.
   10
      Because about one-third of the wealth observations in the PSID data are negative, we winsorize the wealth
variables rather than logging them. If we log the variables, the results are qualitatively similar but only marginally
significant.



                                                         13
years old about their health, employment, quality of life, and wealth. It was conducted bien-
nially from 1992 to 2014. In 2001, the HRS sent a consumption-and-activities mail survey
(CAMS) to a subsample of the initial HRS population, and it has tracked consumption for
these households biennially ever since. The RAND Center for the Study of Aging provides
clean versions of each wave of HRS data, which we merged with the CAMS data set to extract
information on individuals’ consumption and wealth. We construct the savings variable as the
sum of the values of CDs, government savings bonds, checking, savings, and money market
accounts, stocks, mutual funds, investment trusts, bonds, bond funds, and all other savings.
The results of the HRS analysis are consistent with our previous results. When they retire,
individuals consume less but increase their savings, IRA assets, and overall wealth. The results
can be found in Table 11.


4     Potential theoretical explanations of our findings
We loosely categorize potential theoretical explanations for our findings as follows: We first
consider explanations that are in one way or another based on rational planning for retirement
and do not feature an obvious irrational component, such as limitations to planning or cogni-
tion, or behavioral component, such as non-standard preferences or beliefs. We then move on
to explanations that have an irrational or behavioral component. In turn, we discuss a fully-
fledged life-cycle model that features non-standard preferences, either present bias that is cor-
rected at retirement or expectations-based loss aversion, and generates a drop in consumption
at retirement and an increase in savings simultaneously.


4.1    Explanations based on rational planning
Overall, our results on liquid savings and consumer debt suggest that we should not yet retire
the consumption puzzle. Any rational agent will save before retirement, given that she expects
a fall in income, and dissave after. However, we observe that individuals do the opposite:
they dissave before and save after retirement. Thus, the joint observations of a fall in income,
a fall in consumption, a decrease in consumer debt, and an increase in savings are hard to
reconcile with a rational model of consumption smoothing. We next discuss some more specific
potential explanations, but we conclude that work-related expenses, opportunity costs of time,
wealth shocks and liquidation of assets, health shocks, and intra-household bargaining all have
difficulty explaining our findings.

Work-related expenses

In what situation would a sudden reduction in work-related expenses upon retirement cause an
increase in savings? To answer that question, we outline five scenarios for individuals’ income
and pension profiles. (1) A flat income profile before retirement and a lower, flat pension profile

                                                14
after retirement. Any patient agent in this situation would smooth consumption by accumulat-
ing liquid savings before retirement and decreasing savings after. (2) A flat income profile
before retirement and a lower but increasing pension profile after retirement. In this case, a
patient agent would again smooth consumption by saving before retirement and potentially
by increasing debt at the start of retirement but decreasing debt thereafter. (3) A flat income
profile before retirement and a lower, decreasing pension profile after retirement. Again, any
patient agent would smooth consumption by accumulating savings before retirement and de-
creasing savings after. (4) A flat income profile before retirement and a pension profile that is
just marginally lower than income (by less than work-related expenses) after retirement, and
decreasing. In this scenario, a patient agent might increase savings at the start of retirement.
However, we observe a substantial reduction in income at the start of retirement. Furthermore,
the pension profile is increasing after retirement, as can be seen in Figure 5. (5) A flat income
profile before retirement and a pension profile that is higher than income after retirement. A
patient agent in this case might accumulate debt and then decrease it at the start of retirement.
However, we see that pensions are lower than labor income in Figure 5, and we can thus rule out
this scenario. Furthermore, work-related expenses cannot be larger than the difference between
pension and labor income, as individuals would simply retire early in that case.
    More systematically, we can think about the following calculations. If income decreases,
then savings must decrease or debt must increase, other things being equal. However, if work-
related expenses decrease, then savings must increase or debt must decrease. Moreover, if the
agent is very impatient then the consumption path may be steeply decreasing, which in any
period will cause savings to increase or debt to decrease. Therefore, to explain our findings,
the decrease in work-related expenses plus the decrease in spending from the period before
retirement to after (the latter decrease can be assumed to be zero for monthly to annual horizons
if individuals are reasonably patient) must exceed the drop in income at retirement. While
this is a theoretical possibility, work-related expenses are unlikely to be as large as the drop
in income upon retirement that we find in Icelandic and US data. Furthermore, as we have
already mentioned, individuals would simply retire early in such a case. We could also look at
individuals with very large drops in income to reject that theory. Moreover, the theory does not
square with a known comparative static (see Bernheim et al., 2001, among others): when the
drop in income is larger, we also see a larger drop in consumption, so the reason here cannot
be work-related expenses being too large or households being too impatient.
    Our argument is illustrated in Figure 10. In a rational model, if an agent expects a fall in
income and expenditure then savings will increase as long as the fall in expenditure is smaller
than the fall in income. If the fall in expenditure is larger than the fall in income, then savings
will increase. In that case, however, the agent gains on net by retiring early. It is thus very hard
to explain, in any rational model, the joint observation that savings increase after retirement
and individuals who are eligible do not retire immediately.
    As Figure 2 shows, there are no discontinuities in the fraction of individuals retiring at the

                                                15
retirement age thresholds of 60, 65, 67, and 70. A mass of individuals retires at 60, but this is
a mechanical effect, as we start defining individuals as retired from age 60. Since we restrict
the analysis to individuals over 60 and include individual fixed effects, we do not identify our
effects off of this mass. Furthermore, there is no discontinuous increase at age 65 or 67; if
anything, the mass is larger at ages 64 and 69. Finally, there is no discontinuous increase from
age 69 to 70. Overall, the spikes are fairly different for men and women, suggesting a lot of
heterogeneity, but across the whole population the distribution looks fairly normal. We thus
conclude that individuals do not immediately retire at the benefits thresholds. On average,
individuals appear to retire voluntarily at least a couple months after the age thresholds and
sometimes years after.

Opportunity costs of time

Retirement puts additional time at the individual’s disposal that can be spent on leisure, used
to find bargains and otherwise shop less expensively, or used for home production. While it
is unclear whether additional leisure time results in an increase or a decrease of the marginal
utility of consumption, it can be reasonably assumed that home production increases the value
of expenditures, as argued by Aguiar and Hurst (2005). In principle, however, more time spent
on home production can simply be reinterpreted as a reduction in work-related expenses, and
then the above arguments apply directly and cast doubt on this explanation. If expenses drop by
more than income, whether due to additional disposable time or for other reasons, individuals
could gain in life-time resources by retiring early.

Wealth shocks and liquidation of assets

Banks et al. (1998) and Bernheim et al. (2001) argue that the drop in consumption is brought
about by the systematic arrival of adverse information. In this case, however, the drop in con-
sumption would always be accompanied by a decrease rather than an increase in savings, as
retirement comes with a negative wealth shock. The same is true for the model by Blau (2008)
who argues that uncertainty about one’s retirement date can generate a drop in consumption at
retirement. In the author’s model, either individuals retire as planned and smooth their con-
sumption, or retirement is triggered by a negative wealth shock that also causes a drop in
consumption. In principle, however, to generate an increase in savings, one needs a positive
wealth shock.
    A positive wealth shock may be brought about by selling one’s house or other assets upon
retirement. However, our findings are robust to controlling for all income which includes other
income (other income contains, e.g., housing transactions and uncategorized investment trans-
actions). Furthermore, we can more directly address the concern that housing transactions and
liquidation of assets are driving our results by estimating the effect of retirement on investment
income and uncategorized income. Investment transactions can be identified because of the


                                               16
NACE categorization, and income that cannot be classified is listed as ”uncategorized” income
and could be due, for example, to the sale of real estate. We therefore estimate the effect of
retirement on these two income categories, and the results can be found in Table 6. The fact that
we do not find an effect on investment related income and a negative effect on uncategorized
income should relieve concerns about liquidation of assets or housing transactions explaining
why individuals increase their savings and delever upon retirement. We also ensure that our
results are not affected when we control for individual as opposed to total household income.
    Another concern related to housing is that individuals wait to retire until they have paid off
their mortgages, in which case their increase in savings and decrease in consumer debt is only
a consequence of the reduced debt burden after making the final mortgage payment. However,
we do not see a sharp decline in mortgage debt by individuals who have reached the official
retirement age, as can be seen in Figure 11. A large fraction of mortgage debt is paid off before
individuals reach age 60, and the remainder declines smoothly as individuals reach average
retirement age.

Health shocks

Individuals may choose to retire in response to an adverse health shock. While it is again un-
clear whether health results in an increase or a decrease in the marginal utility of consumption,
it can reasonably be assumed that an adverse health shock implies an adverse wealth shock,
which should decrease and not increase savings. As we discussed, any negative shocks will
have trouble explaining our findings of an increase in savings and a reduction in debt holdings.
It could be that a health shock makes spending less enjoyable or increases a precautionary
savings motive, which then increases savings by reducing consumption and, at the same time,
explains why the individual retires. However, we find that pharmacy spending falls upon re-
tirement and is about 7.3% lower afterward, which strongly suggests that health shocks are not
the reason the average individual in our sample retires (when individuals buy medical supplies,
they do so in pharmacies and must make a copayment).

Intra-household bargaining

Lundberg et al. (2003), among others, argues that the drop in consumption is caused by the
fact that the retirement of male spouses generates a shift in the distribution of bargaining power
within households. On average, wives gain bargaining power and use this to exert their pref-
erences for increased savings, because women have on average higher life expectancies than
men. Furthermore, Addoum (2016) and Olafsson and Thörnqvist (2018) provide evidence of
intra-household bargaining affecting household portfolio choice.
    Our findings on spending, liquid savings, and consumer debt are broadly consistent with
this mechanism. However, we find very similar results for both men and women when we split
the sample by gender, which seems inconsistent with household bargaining being first-order


                                               17
important. Olafsson and Pagel (2016) shed further light on how spending and debt holdings at
the household level are influenced by differences in preferences over spending and consumer
debt displayed by the members of the household.


4.2    Explanations based on insufficient planning and overconsumption
Insufficient planning

One possible theoretical explanation is the following: the freeing up of cognitive resources al-
lows individuals to reconsider their savings and consumption plans upon retirement. However,
that theory would not predict a systematic reduction in debt and increase in savings unless in-
sufficient time for planning always results in overconsumption. Haider and Stephens (2007)
and Ameriks et al. (2007) argue that insufficient planning and overconsumption are the reason
for the drop in consumption, and such a systematic effect is suggested by work on cognitive
resources and decision making, as in Mullainathan et al. (2007), although their findings are not
confirmed by Carvalho et al. (2016). In fact, we observe reductions in total financial fees paid
as well as late fees paid. Thus, individuals may be better at planning, but they also have more
time to pay all their bills on schedule.
    The insufficient-planning life-cycle models, such as those of Huang and Caliendo (2011)
and Caliendo and Aadland (2007), generate a drop in consumption at retirement but not a simul-
taneous increase in savings. For instance, the model in Huang and Caliendo (2011) generates
a drop in consumption at retirement because individuals consume all their income and never
save. Thus, the moment income drops, consumption must drop. Clearly, however, savings
would not increase in this case: if individuals consume their entire income when it is high, they
will also do so when it is low. The same is true for the models by Reis (2006) and by Campbell
and Mankiw (1989). With respect to poverty and cognitive resources, a widely-applied model
does not exist at this point, which makes writing down a corresponding theory feel reverse-
engineered.

Overconsumption and present bias

An alternative theoretical explanation for undersaving before retirement is quasi-hyperbolic
discounting preferences, as in Laibson et al. (1998) and Laibson et al. (2007). Hyperbolic
discounting preferences cannot generate a drop in consumption at retirement per se because the
agent is equally impatient before and after retirement and can smooth consumption perfectly. If
a liquidity constraint would bind, a fall in income might cause a fall in consumption. In such a
situation, however, we have to assume that individuals hit their liquidity constraints before and
after retirement, but empirically, we see individuals having substantial liquidity. Furthermore,
the same critique applies as for the insufficient-planning models, if individuals hit their liquidity
constraint, their savings are zero before retirement. If income falls at retirement, their savings


                                                 18
should be zero as well.
    To rationalize a drop in consumption and an increase in savings after retirement, one needs
to assume that the hyperbolic discount factor changes when the individual retires. Although this
appears plausible, it again feels somewhat reverse-engineered. Nevertheless, in the following
section, we theoretically analyze how far a change in the exponential or hyperbolic discount
factor, and thus in the agent’s degree of present bias, can generate a drop in consumption at
the same time as an increase in savings at retirement in a fully-fledged life-cycle model that is
calibrated realistically in line with the literature.

Expectations-based loss aversion

As we will show, a theoretical explanation for our findings requires a different degree of
present bias before and after retirement. Kőszegi and Rabin (2009) and Pagel (2017) show
that expectations-based reference-dependent preferences predict that the degree of present bias
depends on the level of income uncertainty, which is arguably lower after retirement. In this
model, individuals reduce their overconsumption after the start of retirement and thus may
simultaneously decrease their consumption and increase their savings.
     Expectations-based loss aversion, as developed by Kőszegi and Rabin (2009) and applied in
a life-cycle model by Pagel (2017), predicts a drop in consumption at retirement. The intuition
is that expectations-based reference dependence introduces an overconsumption problem when
income is uncertain. After retirement, however, income uncertainty is absent in a standard life-
cycle model, which ends time-inconsistent overconsumption. The agent stops overconsuming
because he is allocating certain retirement income instead of uncertain labor income. Certainty
means that overconsumption today yields a sure loss in future consumption, and this loss would
hurt more than today’s overconsumption would give pleasure, as the agent is loss averse. Thus,
the agent suddenly begins controlling his time-inconsistent desire to overconsume, and his
consumption drops at retirement. The assumption of no uncertainty during retirement is made
in all standard life-cycle consumption models, as these are abstracted from portfolio choice.
The drop in consumption at retirement is thus a necessary artifact of news-utility preferences in
the standard environment. However, the drop is robust to three alternative assumptions: small
income uncertainty during retirement (for instance, inflation and pension risk), potentially large
discrete income uncertainty (for instance, health shocks), and mortality risk (refer to Pagel,
2017, for a more detailed discussion). This change in the agent’s degree of present bias may
cause a simultaneous increase in savings, which we now examine in a fully-fledged life-cycle
model.
     We consider Kőszegi and Rabin (2009) preferences in a discrete-time life-cycle model with
periods indexed by t ∈ 1, ..., T . The preferences reduce to standard preferences (Carroll, 1997)
or hyperbolic-discounting preferences (Laibson et al., 1998) for certain parameter combina-
tions. We also discuss temptation-disutility preferences (Gul and Pesendorfer, 2004) as another


                                               19
alternative. In period t, the utility function consists of consumption utility, contemporaneous
news utility about current consumption Ct , and prospective news utility about the entire stream
of future consumption {Ct+τ }Tτ=1 . Thus, lifetime utility in each period t ∈ 0, ..., T is


              T −t
              X                                                     T −t
                                                                    X                                T −t
                                                                                                     X
       Et [          β τ Ut+τ ] = u(Ct ) + n(Ct , FCt−1
                                                     t
                                                        )+γ                 β τ n(FCt,t−1
                                                                                      t+τ
                                                                                          ) + Et [          β τ Ut+τ ],   (2)
              τ =0                                                  τ =1                             τ =1


where β ∈ [0, 1) is an exponential discount factor. The first term on the right-hand side of
Equation (2), u(Ct ), corresponds to the consumption utility in period t. The other terms de-
pend on consumption and beliefs. The second term, n(Ct , FCt−1    t
                                                                     ), corresponds to news utility
over contemporaneous consumption; here, the agent compares his present consumption Ct
with his beliefs FCt−1
                    t
                       . The agent’s beliefs, FCt−1
                                                 t
                                                    , correspond to the conditional distribution of
consumption in period t, given the information available in period t−1. Thus, the agent experi-
ences news utility over “news” about contemporaneous consumption by evaluating his current
consumption Ct relative to his previous beliefs FCt−1 t




                                 Z   Ct                                          Z   ∞
      n(Ct , FCt−1
                t
                   )     =η               (u(Ct ) −   u(c))dFCt−1
                                                               t
                                                                  (c)   + ηλ             (u(Ct ) − u(c))dFCt−1
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                               (c).       (3)
                                 −∞                                                Ct


The parameter η > 0 thus weights the news-utility component relative to the consumption-
utility component, and the coefficient of loss aversion λ > 1 implies that losses outweigh
                                            P −t τ
gains. The third term in Equation (2), γ Tτ =1     β n(FCt,t−1
                                                             t+τ
                                                                 ), corresponds to the news utility
experienced in period t over the entire stream of future consumption. Prospective news utility
about period t + τ consumption depends on FCt−1  t+τ
                                                     , the beliefs with which the agent entered the
                 t
period, and on FCt+τ , the agent’s updated beliefs about consumption in period t + τ . The agent
experiences news utility over news about future consumption by evaluating his updated beliefs
about future consumption FCt t+τ relative to his previous beliefs FCt−1t+τ
                                                                           as follows

                             Z   ∞        Z   c                         Z    ∞
        n(FCt,t−1
              t+τ
                  )      =           (η           (u(c) − u(r)) + ηλ             (u(c) − u(r)))dFCt,t−1
                                                                                                    t+τ
                                                                                                        (c, r).           (4)
                              −∞            −∞                           c


As can be seen in Equation (2), the agent discounts exponentially prospective news utility
by β ∈ [0, 1]. Moreover, he discounts prospective news utility relative to contemporaneous
news utility by a factor γ ∈ [0, 1]. Thus, he puts a weight γβ τ < 1 on prospective news
utility regarding consumption in period t + τ . For certain parameter combinations, the Kőszegi
and Rabin (2009) preferences reduce to well-known specifications. For η = 0 or λ = 1
and γ = 1, they reduce to standard preferences (Carroll, 2001; Gourinchas and Parker, 2002;
Deaton, 1991). For η > 0, λ = 1, and γ < 1, the preferences correspond to hyperbolic-
discounting preferences, with the hyperbolic-discount factor given by 1+γη
                                                                         1+η
                                                                              (Angeletos et al.,

                                                              20
2001; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999). More specifically, the hyperbolic agent’s lifetime utility
                  P −t τ
is u(Ctb ) + bEt [ τT=1        b
                        β u(Ct+τ  )] where b ∈ [0, 1] is the hyperbolic-discount factor.
     In the following, we describe the news-utility agent’s consumption and time-inconsistency
problems before and after retirement following Kőszegi and Rabin (2009) and Pagel (2017).
Suppose that in periods t ∈ {T − R, ..., T }, the agent earns income without uncertainty. If
uncertainty is absent, the personal equilibrium of the news-utility agent corresponds to the
standard agent’s equilibrium if the discount factor on prospective versus contemporaneous news
utility is weakly larger than the inverse of the coefficient of loss aversion γ ≥ λ1 . If γ < λ1 ,
then the monotone-personal equilibrium of the news-utility agent corresponds to a hyperbolic-
discounting agent’s monotone-personal equilibrium, with the hyperbolic-discount factor given
by 1+γηλ
      1+η
           .
     The news-utility agent is likely to follow the standard agent’s path if uncertainty is absent
and the agent’s prospective news discount factor is high enough. The basic intuition is that
when the agent decides to increase his present consumption, he also considers a certain loss
in future consumption, which is very painful. Thus, unless the agent discounts prospective
news utility significantly, he decides not to increase his present consumption. More formally,
suppose that the agent allocates his deterministic cash-on-hand between present consumption
CT −1 and future consumption CT . Under rational expectations, he cannot fool himself, hence
he cannot experience actual news utility in equilibrium in a deterministic model. Accordingly,
his expected utility maximization problem corresponds to the standard agent’s maximization
problem (determined by setting present and future marginal consumption utilities equal, with
the discount factor and interest rate). Suppose that the agent’s beliefs about consumption in
both periods correspond to this equilibrium path. Taking his beliefs as given, the agent deviates
if the gain from consuming more exceeds the discounted loss from consuming less in the future;
that is,
                         u0 (CT −1 )(1 + η) > β(1 + r)u0 (CT )(1 + γηλ).

Thus, he follows the standard agent’s path iff the discount factor on prospective versus con-
temporaneous news utility is weakly larger than the inverse of the coefficient of loss aversion,
γ ≥ λ1 . In this case, the pain associated with a certain loss in future consumption is larger than
the pleasure gained from present consumption. However, if γ < λ1 , the agent deviates and must
choose a consumption path that just meets the consistency constraint, thereby behaving as a
hyperbolic-discounting agent, with a hyperbolic discount factor of 1+γηλ   1+η
                                                                                 < 1. Thus, during
retirement, the implications of the agent’s prospective news discount factor γ are simple: it
must be high enough to keep the news-utility agent on the standard agent’s track.
    After retirement, the agent is less inclined to overconsume. The basic intuition for overcon-
sumption before retirement is that the agent consumes house money–that is, labor income that
he was not certain to receive. Such uncertain income wants to be consumed before his expecta-
tions catch up iff the prospective news discount factor is less than one, i.e., γ < 1. In the period


                                                21
just before retirement, the agent finds the loss in future consumption merely as painful as a
slightly less favorable realization of his labor income, YT −1 ∼ FY ; that is, the agent trades off
being somewhere in the gain domain today against being somewhere in the gain domain in the
future. By contrast, after retirement the agent associates a certain loss in future consumption
with an increase in present consumption–that is, he trades off a current gain against a sure loss
in the future. For example, suppose the agent’s retirement period is period T only. The agent’s
first-order condition in period T − 1, absent uncertainty in period T , is given by

 u0 (CT −1 )(1+η(λ−(λ−1)FY (YT −1 ))) = β(1+r)u0 (CT )(1+γη(λ−(λ−1)FY (YT −1 ))). (5)

In Equation (5), it can be seen that, iff the prospective news discount factor equals one, i.e.,
γ = 1, contemporaneous and prospective marginal news utility cancel each other out. How-
ever, iff γ < 1, the agent reduces the weight on future utility relative to present utility by a
factor of 1+γηλ
            1+ηλ
                  < 1+γη
                      1+η
                            < 1. After retirement, the news-utility agent follows the standard
agent’s consumption path if the prospective news discount factor γ is sufficiently high, and
otherwise follows a hyperbolic agent’s consumption path with discount factor b = 1+γηλ     1+η
                                                                                                . Be-
              1+γηλ         1+γη
cause min{ 1+η , 1} > 1+η iff γ < 1, the agent’s factor for reducing the weight on future
utility is necessarily lower in the period just before retirement than afterward–implying that
consumption drops at retirement. This drop is thus brought about by a change in the agent’s
effective time-inconsistency problem, which is necessary for observing a drop in consumption
at the same time as an increase in savings.
    In the following, we assess whether the model’s quantitative predictions about the drop in
consumption at retirement match the empirical evidence. We also assess whether the model can
generate a simultaneous increase in savings. In addition to the standard and news-utility agents,
we show results for quasi-hyperbolic preferences, as in Laibson et al. (2012), and temptation-
disutility preferences, as developed by Gul and Pesendorfer (2004) and assumed in Bucciol
(2012). For the standard, hyperbolic, and tempted agents, we assume that the effective discount
factor changes to generate a drop in consumption at retirement and possibly a simultaneous
increase in savings. For hyperbolic-discounting preferences, we assume that the agent is subject
to present bias before retirement but not after; that is, his hyperbolic discount factor is less than
one before retirement but equal to one after. For the temptation-disutility preferences, we
also assume that the agent experiences temptation disutility only before retirement, not after.
In addition, we assume for comparison that the standard agent’s exponential discount factor
increases to one after retirement, so that he becomes more patient as well.
    We choose the model environment in line with the life-cycle consumption literature and
                                                                                 1−θ
present the numerical results of a power-utility model; that is, u(C) = C1−θ , with θ being
the coefficient of constant relative risk aversion.11 We follow Carroll (1997) and Gourinchas
  11
    The model cannot be solved analytically, but it can be solved by numerical backward induction (see Gour-
inchas and Parker, 2002; Carroll, 2001, among others). The numerical solution is illustrated in greater detail in
Appendix B.


                                                       22
and Parker (2002), who specify income Yt as log-normal and characterized by deterministic
permanent income growth Gt , permanent shocks NtP , and transitory shocks NtT , which allow
for a low probability p of unemployment or illness

                                     Yt = Pt NtT = Pt−1 Gt NtP NtT
         (     T
                                                                      )
             est   with probability 1 − p and sTt ∼ N (µT , σT2 )                   P
 NtT =                                                                    NtP = est sPt ∼ N (µP , σP2 ).
              0                with probability p
Labor income is stochastic up until period T − R, when the agent enters retirement and his
income is deterministic. The life-cycle literature suggests fairly tight ranges for the parameters
of the log-normal income process, which are approximately µT = µP = 0, σT = σP = 0.1, and
p = 0.01. The deterministic profile Gt is estimated from the CEX data.12 The agent has access
to a simple savings account that pays net interest r = 0.01. For the preference parameters, we
use calibrations that are standard in the literature, as displayed in Table 12 and discussed by
Pagel (2017) among others.
    Figure 12 contrasts the four agents’ consumption paths with the empirical consumption and
income profiles from the CEX data. Hyperbolic-discounting preferences push the consumption
profile upward at the beginning and downward at the end of life. Temptation disutility also
causes overconsumption at the beginning of life, which decreases when consumption oppor-
tunities are depleted. Standard, hyperbolic-discounting, news-utility, and temptation-disutility
preferences all generate a hump-shaped consumption profile in line with the evidence (refer
to Ameriks and Zeldes, 2004, for instance). Moreover, Figure 12 shows a large drop in con-
sumption at retirement, period T − R, for the news-utility and hyperbolic agents’ consumption
profiles as well as the CEX consumption data. The tempted agent’s profile features a very small
drop, and the standard agent’s profile only features a kink. Thus, one needs a change in the de-
gree of present bias or time inconsistency, not only the discount rate, to generate a sizable drop
in consumption at retirement (temptation-disutility preferences are time-consistent preferences,
as are standard preferences). Note, however, that for the standard, hyperbolic, and temptation-
disutility agents, the change in consumption around retirement is only brought about by the
preference parameters and thus the effective discount rate changing. If the preference param-
eters were constant, the standard, hyperbolic, and temptation-disutility agents would smooth
consumption around retirement and only the news-utility agent’s consumption profile would
feature a drop at retirement.
    Let us now demonstrate the drop in a regression using simulated data. For 200 agents,
indexed by i, we simulate four years of consumption and income data points, indexed by t,
  12
    Following Gourinchas and Parker (2002), we choose 25 as the beginning of working life and then Ret ˆ = 11
years of retirement and T̂ = 78 in accordance with the average retirement age in the US according to the OECD
and the average life expectancy in the US according to the UN.




                                                     23
around the retirement date and run the regression

                         log(Cit ) = α
                                     b + βRetired
                                         b       it + γ
                                                      b log(Yit ) + εit .

We thus run exactly the equivalent regression in our simulated data as in our empirical analysis.
We look at logged consumption as the outcome variable, control for income, and consider the
coefficient of a retirement dummy Retiredit . The coefficient βb will then determine the per-
centage drop in consumption at retirement. To theoretically illustrate our statistical power, we
intentionally choose a much lower quantity for the number of simulated agents. Moreover, we
run the same regression but with savings, log(Xit − Cit ), on the left-hand side. The results are
shown in Table 13. In the news-utility and hyperbolic-discounting models, we obtain a nega-
tive and significant drop in consumption, while the standard and tempted agents’ coefficients
are basically zero. The news-utility agent’s drop in consumption is larger than the hyperbolic
agent’s, even though the preference parameters generating the degree of present bias, γ and b,
are equal before retirement, and both agents become perfectly time-consistent after retirement,
as b is equal to one after retirement and γ > λ1 .
    Moreover, for the news-utility and hyperbolic agents the coefficient for savings is positive
and significant, but it is negative for the other agents. Clearly, the news-utility and hyperbolic
agents will also decumulate their savings after retirement. However, there is another force, the
change in the degree of present bias, that can temporarily increase their savings upon retirement.
For the news-utility agent, the fall in consumption is large enough to generate a temporary
increase in savings roughly in line with what we see empirically. For the hyperbolic agent,
we can also observe an increase in savings, although it is somewhat smaller. The savings
coefficient of the hyperbolic agent is thus closer to those of the standard and tempted agents.
    In turn, we can introduce work-related expenses into the model. We simply assume that
consumption is ten percent higher before retirement because of work-related expenses. We
then run the regressions measuring the drop in consumption at retirement, which now trivially
indicate a ten percent larger drop for all agents. However, the results for savings growth are
unchanged and thus constitute another phenomenon that any model of spending around re-
tirement should be able to rationalize. The results for savings growth are unchanged because
we can simply treat work-related expenses as a reduction in income. A somewhat lower in-
come profile before retirement will not cause an increase in savings after retirement, as long as
income before retirement is higher than income after.


5    Conclusion
We document how spending, liquid savings, and consumer debt change in response to retire-
ment using a large proprietary data set on income, spending, account balances, and credit lim-
its. We show that the overall decline in spending post retirement is only partially attributable to


                                                24
work-related expenses. In addition to lower spending on ready-made food and clothes (which
is consistent with a reduction in work-related expenses), we also observe reductions in leisure
goods, suggesting the presence of an overconsumption problem before retirement and an ad-
justment after. Nevertheless, we note that even the most accurate and comprehensive spending
data cannot conclusively decide whether spending alone or actual consumption utility drops at
retirement. Thus, whether or not the drop in consumption is puzzling and more broadly whether
or not individuals save adequately for retirement, is a difficult question to answer using spend-
ing data alone.
    We thus analyze changes in liquid savings and consumer debt around retirement, and we
find that individuals reduce consumer debt substantially and increase liquid savings. The find-
ings about debt and savings are very difficult to reconcile in a rational model and thus imply
that we cannot ”retire the consumption puzzle” just yet. After all, the retirement-consumption
puzzle says that individuals do not plan rationally for an expected reduction in income at re-
tirement. However, any rational plan for a reduction in income would involve saving before
and dissaving after retirement. Our empirical findings that individuals decrease their consumer
debt and increase their liquid savings is thus the opposite of what a rational agent would do.




                                               25
References
Addoum, Jawad M, “Household portfolio choice and retirement,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2016, (0).
Agarwal, Sumit, Jessica Pan, and Wenlan Qian, “The Composition Effect of Consumption
  around Retirement: Evidence from Singapore,” American Economic Review Papers & Pro-
  ceedings, 2015, 105 (5), 426–431.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, “Consumption vs Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy,
  October 2005, 113 (5), 919–948.
   and , “Deconstructing Life Cycle Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121
  (3), 437–492.
Ameriks, J. and S. Zeldes, “How do Household Portfolio Shares vary with Age?,” Working
  Paper Columbia Business School, 2004.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy, “Retirement Consumption: Insights from
  a Survey,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2007, 89 (2), 265–274.
Angeletos, G. M., D. Laibson, A. Repetto, and S. Weinberg, “The Hyperbolic Consumption
  Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives, 2001, 15 (3), 47.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Sarah Tanner, “Is There a Retirement-Savings Puz-
  zle?,” The American Economic Review, 1998, 88 (4), 769–788.
Battistin, Erich, Agar Brugiavini, Enrico Rettore, and Guglielmo Weber, “The Retirement
  Consumption Puzzle: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Approach,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2009, 99 (5), 2209–26.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg, “What Accounts for the
  Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?,” American Economic Review,
  September 2001, 91 (4), 832–857.
Blau, David M, “Retirement and consumption in a life cycle model,” Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 2008, 26 (1), 35–71.
Brumberg, Richard and Franco Modigliani, “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Func-
  tion: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data,” in Kenneth Kurihara, ed., Post-Keynesian
  Economics, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1954, pp. 388–436.
Bucciol, A., “Measuring Self-Control Problems: A Structural Estimation,” Journal of the Eu-
  ropean Economic Association, 2012.
Caliendo, Frank and David Aadland, “Short-term planning and the life-cycle consumption
  puzzle,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2007, 31 (4), 1392–1415.
Campbell, John Y and Luis M Viceira, Strategic asset allocation: portfolio choice for long-
  term investors, Oxford University Press, USA, 2002.
   and N Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, income, and interest rates: Reinterpreting the
  time series evidence,” NBER macroeconomics annual, 1989, 4, 185–216.
Carroll, C., “Theoretical Foundations of Buffer Stock Saving,” Working Paper Johns Hopkins
  University, 2001.
Carroll, C. D., “Buffer Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 1997, CXII, 1–56.
Carvalho, Leandro S., Stephan Meier, and Stephanie W. Wang, “Poverty and Economic
  Decision-Making: Evidence from Changes in Financial Resources at Payday,” American
  Economic Review, February 2016, 106 (2), 260–84.
Deaton, A., “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 1991, 59, 1221–1248.
DeNardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones, “Why Do the Elderly Save?


                                            26
   The Role of Medical Expenses,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118, 39–75.
Gelman, Michael, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and Steven
   Tadelis, “Harnessing naturally occurring data to measure the response of spending to in-
   come,” Science, 2014, 345 (6193), 212–215.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan A. Parker, “Consumption Over the Life Cycle,”
   Econometrica, January 2002, 70 (1), 47–89.
Gul, F. and W. Pesendorfer, “Self-Control and the Theory of Consumption,” Econometrica,
   2004, 72 (4), 119–158.
Haider, Steven J. and Melvin Stephens, “Is There a Retirement-Consumption Puzzle? Evi-
   dence Using Subjective Retirement Expectations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
   May 2007, 89 (2), 247–264.
Harris, Ed and John Sebelhaus, “Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Congressional Budget Of-
   fice, 2000.
Huang, Kevin XD and Frank Caliendo, “Rationalizing multiple consumption-saving puzzles
   in a unified framework,” Frontiers of Economics in China, 2011, 6 (3), 359.
Hurd, Michael and Susann Rohwedder, “The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle: Anticipated
   and Actual Declines in Spending at Retirement,” NBER Working Papers 9586, National
   Bureau of Economic Research, Inc March 2003.
Hurst, Erik, “Understanding Consumption in Retirement: Recent Developments,” in John
   Ameriks and Olivia Mitchell, eds., Recalibrating Retirement Spending and Saving, Oxford
   University Press, September 2008, chapter Understanding Consumption in Retirement: Re-
   cent Developments.
Jr, Melvin Stephens and Desmond Toohey, “Changes in Measured Food Intake at Retire-
   ment: Implications for the Retirement-Consumption Puzzle,” 2017.
Kőszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin, “Reference-Dependent Consumption Plans,” Ameri-
   can Economic Review, June 2009, 99 (3), 909–36.
Laibson, D., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman, “Self-Control and Saving for Retirement,” Brook-
   ings Papers on Economic Activity, 1998, 1, 91–196.
   , , and , “Estimating Discount Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle,”
   American Economic Review, 2012.
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, “Estimating discount functions
   with consumption choices over the lifecycle,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Eco-
   nomic Research 2007.
Laitner, John, Dan Silverman, and Dmitriy Stolyarov, “The Role of Annuitized Wealth in
   Post-Retirement Behavior,” 2017.
Li, Geng, Robert F Schoeni, Sheldon Danziger, and Kerwin Kofi Charles, “New Expen-
   diture Data in the PSID: Comparisons with the CE,” Monthly Labor Review, 2010, 133 (2),
   29–39.
Lundberg, Shelly, Richard Startz, and Steven Stillman, “The Retirement-Consumption Puz-
   zle: A Marital Bargaining Approach,” Journal of Public Economics, 2003, 87 (5-6), 1199 –
   1218.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Bindu Ananth, and Dean Karlan, “Microentrepreneurs and Their
   Money: Three Anomalies,” Technical Report, Working Paper, Financial Access Initiative
   2007.
O’Donoghue, T. and M. Rabin, “Doing it Now or Later,” American Economic Review, 1999,
   89 (1), 103–124.
Olafsson, Arna and Michaela Pagel, “Family Finances: Intra-Household Bargaining, Spend-
   ing, and Capital Structure,” Technical Report 2016.


                                            27
   and , “The Ostrich in Us: Selective Attention to Financial Accounts, Income, Spending,
  and Liquidity,” Technical Report 2018.
   and , “The Liquid Hand-to-Mouth: Evidence from a Personal Finance Management Soft-
  ware,” The Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
   and Tomas Thörnqvist, “Bargaining over risk: The impact of decision power on household
  portfolios,” Technical Report 2018.
Pagel, Michaela, “Expectations-Based Reference-Dependent Life-Cycle Consumption,” Re-
  view of Economic Studies, 2017.
Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise, “The Composition and Draw-Down of
  Wealth in Retirement,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25, 95–117.
  , , and , “Family Status Transitions, Latent Health, and the Post-Retirement Evolution
  of Assets,” In David A. Wise (ed.), Explorations in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: The
  University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Reis, Ricardo, “Inattentive consumers,” Journal of monetary Economics, 2006, 53 (8), 1761–
  1800.
Schwerdt, Guido, “Why does consumption fall at retirement? Evidence from Germany,” Eco-
  nomics Letters, 2005, 89 (3), 300 – 305.




                                           28
                  Men                                       Women


Figure 1: Average effective retirement age for men and women in Iceland (solid line)
compared to Germany (dotted line) and the United States (dashed line)




                  Men                                       Women


                           Figure 2: Share retired by age




                                        29
Figure 3: Distribution of retirement age: women (white bars) and men (gray bars)




                                      30
                   Table 1: Summary statistics

                                  Mean        Standard         Statistics
                                              Deviation         Iceland

Monthly regular income            3,547         3,717           3,768
Monthly salary                    3,157         3,494           2,867
Monthly spending:
  Total                           1,535         1,429
  Groceries                        546           454             572
  Fuel                             276           302            (419)
  Alcohol                           72           141              99
  ready-made food                  198           202            (294)
  Home Improvement                 175           543            (267)
  Transportations                   68           817              77
  Clothing & accessories           102           211             112
  Sports & activities               51           173             (42)
  Pharmacies                        47            72              49
Age                                40.6          11.5            37.2
Female                             0.49          0.50            0.48
Eligibible for retirement         0.087         0.282           0.194
Retired                           0.039         0.194

Note: All numbers are in US dollars. Parentheses indicate that data cate-
gories do not match perfectly.




                                  31
                           Table 2: Summary statistics

                                       Eligible but not retired       Retired
                                       Mean          St.dev.       Mean     St.dev.

Demographics:
  Age                                   64.2           3.6         71.2        5.8
  Female                                0.41          0.49         0.41       0.49
Monthly income:
 Total                                 4,580         3,973         3,403     2,563
 Regular                               4,462         3,856         3,293     2,426
 Irregular                              89            391           79        374
 Salary                                4,066         3,706        708.695    2,084
 Total hh                              4,865         4,263         3,727     2,947
Personal finances:
  Total bank fees                         49           98            37        85
  Late fees                               18           79            14        44
  Overdraft interest                      52           81            43        89
  Overdraft amount                       970         4,326          852      4,196
  Savings account balance               6,259        73,649        8,720    27,868
  Interest income                        248         2,217          337      1,306
  Current account balance               2,184        13,033        2,079     9,173
  Overdraft limit                       2,024        5,578        2,281      6,128
  Credit card balance                  -1,051        6,339        -1,221    14,435
  Credit card card limit                3,872        9,640        4,504     15,944
  Liquidity                            11,581        71,056       13,967    30,179
Daily spending:
Individual:
  Total                                 56.7          38.3         53.4       31.3
  Groceries                             16.4          12.4         16.6       10.4
  Fuel                                   7.9           7.5          6.5        6.2
  Alcohol                                2.8           4.4          2.6        4.3
  Ready-made food                        4.1           4.9          3.4        4.0
  Home improvements                      6.2          11.6          5.5       10.4
  Home security                          0.3           0.8          0.3        0.8
  Transportation                         2.7           5.7          2.2        5.2
  Clothing & accessories                 3.5           6.3          2.7        5.1
  Sports & activities                    0.3           1.3          0.2        1.1
  Pharmacies                             2.0           2.5          2.4        2.6
Household:
 Total                                  60.3          41.8         57.6       35.8
 Groceries                              17.4          12.9         17.7       11.0
 Fuel                                    8.2           7.7          7.0        6.4
 Alcohol                                 2.9           4.6          2.9        4.6
 Ready-made food                         4.4           5.2          3.7        4.4
 Home improvements                       6.7          12.4          6.0       11.3
 Home security                           0.3           0.8          0.3        0.8
 Transportation                          2.9           6.2          2.5        5.6
 Clothing & accessories                  3.7           6.7          3.0        5.5
 Sports & activities                     0.4           1.4          0.3        1.3
 Pharmacies                              2.1           2.6          2.6        2.7

Note: All numbers are in US dollars.




                                               32
                  Figure 4: The financial aggregation app: screenshots




Notes: This figure shows the Meniga app interfaces.




                    Men                                       Women


   Figure 5: Total and labor income, expenditure, and pension payments over age




                                               33
                                    Total spending                                      Grocery spending by price category (total monthly spending in budget and
                                                                                                               expensive grocery stores)
34




                                                                                            Share of expensive groceries (the share of expenditures in grocery
                                 Spending by category                                            stores/supermarkets that are spent in expensive stores)


                                                          Figure 6: Life-cycle profiles of expenditures
     The figures plot the estimated age coefficient from the regression of the outcome variables relative to the coefficient for age 20. The regressions include
     month-by-year fixed effects and individual fixed effects.
                                                         Table 3: Effects of retirement on spending by category


                              Total        Grocery        Fuel        Alcohol     Ready-made         Home            Home       Transportation    Clothing and     Sports and    Pharmacies
                           expenditure                                               -food        improvement       security                       accessories      activities

     Without controlling for income:
                           -0.136***      -0.121***    -0.230***     -0.142***      -0.145***         -0.056       -0.046***       -0.239***        -0.164***      -0.137***      -0.073**
     Retired
                             (0.010)        (0.019)      (0.025)       (0.033)        (0.02)         (0.037)         (0.012)         (0.036)          (0.040)        (0.025)       (0.032)
     R-sqr                    0.079          0.046        0.013         0.027          0.05           0.056           0.003           0.038            0.035          0.005         0.008
     Controlling for income:
                           -0.093***      -0.077***    -0.176***     -0.097***      -0.099***         0.017        -0.038***       -0.177***        -0.098**       -0.119***        -0.036
     Retired
                             (0.010)        (0.018)      (0.025)       (0.033)        (0.020)        (0.037)         (0.012)         (0.036)         (0.040)         (0.025)       (0.032)
     R-sqr                    0.095          0.051        0.017         0.029          0.055          0.059           0.003           0.041           0.038           0.006          0.01
     #obs                    781,263       781,263      781,263       781,263        781,263         781,263        781,263         781,263          781,263        781,263       781,263
35




     #individuals             12,143        12,143       12,143       12,143         12,143          12,143         12,143          12,143           12,143         12,143        12,143
     Individual FE              X             X            X             X              X               X              X               X                X              X              X
     Month-by-year FE           X             X            X             X              X               X              X               X                X              X              X

                a
      Note:       This table shows regression results for log spending by different categories using individual and calendar fixed effects as well as a dummy for retirement with and without
                                                                                               b
     controlling for total income. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.        Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01
     c
       All coefficients represent percentage changes.
     Restaurant spending (solid) and visits (broken)                               Restaurant expenditure by category per month
36




        Restaurant trips by category per month                                           Expenditure by type of restaurant


                             Figure 7: Life-cycle profiles of restaurant trips and grocery store visits
                                                    Table 4: Effects of retirement on restaurant spending and visits


                                 Total          Casual dining       Cold dishes           Cafes         Bakeries           Bars           Fast food        Fine dining        Canteens

     Spending:

     Without controlling for income:
                               -0.234***         -0.441***              0.007          -0.071***          -0.003        -0.247***        -0.394***         -0.073***         -0.048***
     Retired
                                 (0.021)           (0.024)             (0.014)           (0.020)         (0.020 )         (0.017)          (0.022)          (0.020 )           (0.007)
     R-sqr                        0.233             0.113               0.012             0.046            0.07            0.027            0.156            0.017              0.012
     Controlling for income:
                               -0.136***         -0.382***              0.014           -0.043**          0.028         -0.238***        -0.319***          -0.049**         -0.050***
     Retired
                                  (0.02            (0.023)             (0.014)           (0.02 0)        (0.020)          (0.018)          (0.021)           (0.020)           (0.007)
     R-sqr                       0.278              0.134               0.015             0.055           0.084            0.031            0.186             0.022             0.012
37




     Number of visits:

     Without controlling for income:
                               -3.768***         -0.623***             -0.001          -0.116***          0.027         -0.190***        -1.237***         -0.026***         -0.058***
     Retired
                                 (0.241)           (0.042)             (0.004)           (0.029)         (0.030)          (0.023)          (0.088)           (0.007)           (0.011)
     R-sqr                        0.056             0.033               0.002             0.01            0.022            0.009            0.039             0.004             0.007
     Controlling for income:
                               -3.448***         -0.588***              0.001          -0.100***         0.052*         -0.189***        -1.113***         -0.022***         -0.062***
     Retired
                                 (0.245)           (0.042)             (0.004)          (0.03 0)         (0.031)          (0.024)          (0.090)           (0.007)           (0.011)
     R-sqr                        0.067             0.038               0.003            0.012            0.027            0.009            0.047             0.005             0.007
     Individual FE                X                  X                   X                 X                X               X                X                 X                 X
     Month-by-year FE             X                  X                   X                 X                X               X                X                 X                 X
     #obs.                     900,090            900,090             900,090           900,090          900,090         900,090          900,090           900,090           900,090
     #individuals               14,287             14,287              14,287            14,287           14,287          14,287           14,287            14,287            14,287


      Note: a This table shows regression results for the log spending on different restaurant categories and on the number of visits to different types of restaurants with and without
                                                                                           b
     controlling for total income. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.    Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01
     c
       All coefficients represent percentage changes.
                                            Table 5: Effects of retirement on personal finances


                               Total       Late      Overdraft     Interest    Current acct    Overdraft   Credit card    Credit card   Liquidity
                               fees        fees       interest     income        balance        amount      balance          limit

     Without controlling for income:
                          -0.208***     -0.144***    -0.132***     0.054**        0.162*       -0.100**      -0.116**        -0.047       0.010
     Retired
                            (0.037)       (0.035)      (0.034)     (0.022)        (0.093)       (0.045)       (0.057)       (0.050)      (0.033)
     R-sqr                   0.058         0.028        0.035       0.059          0.024         0.001         0.010         0.019        0.060
     Controlling for income:
                             -0.035       -0.022        -0.028     0.121***      0.238**       -0.099**      -0.103*         -0.036       0.035
     Retired
                            (0.037)      (0.035)       (0.033)      (0.056)      (0.022)        (0.088)      (0.057)        (0.050)      (0.033)
     R-sqr                   0.078        0.041         0.045        0.051        0.026          0.001        0.010          0.019        0.061
     #obs                  885,189       885,189      885,189      885,189       331,668       331,668       331,668       331,668       331,668
38




     #individuals           12,143        12,143       12,143       12,143        12,143        12,143        12,143        12,143        12,143
     Individual FE              X           X            X            X             X             X             X             X             X
     Month-by-year FE           X           X            X            X             X             X             X             X             X

                a
      Note:       This table shows regression results for log interest payments, balances, and limits using individual and month-by-year fixed ef-
     fects as well as a dummy for retirement with and without controlling for total income. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
     b                                                            c
       Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01           All coefficients represent percentage changes.
                                                Figure 8: Consumer debt
This figure plots the estimated age coefficient from the regression of log total monthly overdraft interest payments on age dummies
 relative to the coefficient for age 20. The regressions include month fixed effects, year fixed effects, and individual fixed effects.




                                               Figure 9: Interest income
This figure plots the estimated age coefficient from the regression of log total monthly interest income from bank account balances
    on age dummies relative to the coefficient for age 20. The regressions include month-by-year and individual fixed effects.




                                                                 39
 Table 6: Effects of retirement on investment transactions and uncategorized income


                                      Investment     Uncategorized        Investment     Uncategorized
                                     transactions      income            transactions      income

                                        -0.010         -0.071***            -0.014         -0.079***
     Retired
                                       (0.009)           (0.012)           (0.009)           (0.012)
     R-sqr                             0.0232             0.0211           0.0247           0.0235
     #obs                             885,189             885,189         885,189           885,189
     #individuals                      12,144              12,144          12,144            12,144

     Individual FE                       X                  X                X                    X
     Month-by-year FE
                                          X                 X                 X                   X
     Total HH
                                                                              X                   X
     income


     Note: a This table shows regression results for log investment related income and uncate-
     gorized income. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. b Significance levels:
     * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01 c All coefficients represent percentage changes.




Table 7: Effects of retirement on savings (measured as income minus consumption),
checking, and savings account balances in CEX data

                       Income minus       Income minus        Current      Current      Savings       Savings
                        consumption        consumption        account      account      account       account

 Retired                  0.203∗∗∗           0.0960∗∗∗       1.024∗∗∗     0.957∗∗∗      1.488∗∗∗      1.391∗∗∗
                           (6.84)             (3.64)            (8.80)      (8.18)       (8.60)        (8.06)
 Unemployment rate           X                   X                X           X            X             X
 # earners                   X                   X                X           X            X             X
 # family                    X                   X                X           X            X             X
 Cohort FE                   X                   X                X           X            X             X
 Year FE                     X                   X                X           X            X             X
 Age FE                      X                   X                X           X            X             X
 Total HH
                                                 X                            X                          X
 income
 #obs                      36,505             36,505            26,046     25,813       21,408        21,248

  Note: a This table shows regression results for household savings (measured as income minus spend-
 ing), checking and savings account balances. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity.
 b
   Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01




                                                     40
Table 8: Effects of retirement on leverage, debt, current and savings account balances in
SCF data

                                                                          Current                    Savings
                      Leverage                   Debt
                                                                          account                    account
 Retired      -0.293∗∗    -0.349∗∗∗    -0.674∗∗∗     -0.211∗∗∗       0.006       0.329∗∗∗      0.076     0.407∗∗∗
               (-3.02)      (-3.38)    (-15.81)         (-5.31)     (0.15)        (9.02)       (1.44)       (8.02)
 # family        X               X        X               X           X             X            X            X
 Cohort FE       X               X        X               X           X             X            X            X
 Year FE         X               X        X               X           X             X            X            X
 Age FE          X               X        X               X           X             X            X            X
 Total HH
                                 X                        X                         X                         X
 income

 #obs         128,805      128,085      99,249          98,734      119,110      118,461       58,612       58,422

 Note: a This table shows regression results for leverage, debt, checking and savings account balances.
 Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. b Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01




Table 9: Effects of retirement on income minus spending, current account balances, portfolio,
and credit account balances in German bank data

                  Income minus                    Current                     Value of               Credit account
                    spending                      account                     portfolio                 balance
 Retired       0.145∗∗      0.149∗∗∗    0.311∗∗∗         0.0781      0.358∗∗∗       0.327∗∗∗      -0.152       -0.153
                (3.20)       (7.20)       (6.42)          (1.81)       (7.44)        (5.86)       (-1.82)      (-1.83)
 Indiv FE         X              X          X               X             X               X          X            X
 Year FE          X              X          X               X             X               X          X            X
 Month FE         X              X          X               X             X               X          X            X
 Total HH
                                 X                          X                             X                       X
 income

 #obs         1,407,347    1,407,347    1,407,347       1,407,347     250,664       250,664      158,173       158,173

           a
  Note:      This table shows regression results for log household savings (measured as income minus spend-
 ing), current account balances, portfolio, and credit account balances. Standard errors are clustered at the
                      b
 individual level.      Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01




                                                    41
Table 10: Effects of retirement on spending, checking and savings account balances, amount
of debt, and wealth in PSID data

                    Spending                  Savings                  Debt                     Wealth
 Retired    -0.146∗∗∗    -0.0958∗∗∗   0.00342     0.143∗∗    -0.310∗∗     -0.334∗∗   17875.9∗∗      24945.9∗∗∗
              (-9.28)      (-6.33)     (0.07)      (2.81)    (-2.98)      (-3.11)      (3.06)             (4.18)
 Indiv FE       X              X         X              X       X             X           X                X
 Year FE        X              X         X              X       X             X           X                X

 Total HH
                               X                        X                     X                            X
  income
  #obs        68,895       68,240      68,895      68,240    44,442       43,989       68,895          68,240

            a
 Note:        This table shows regression results for log household spending, checking and savings account
 balances, amount of debt, and wealth (winsorized not logged due to many negative observations). Standard
                                               b
 errors are clustered at the individual level.   Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01




Table 11: Effects of retirement on spending, savings, amount of IRA assets, and wealth
in HRS data

                    Spending                Savings             IRA assets           Financial wealth

 Retired     -0.240∗∗∗   -0.229∗∗∗    0.0814     0.234∗∗∗   0.271∗∗∗     0.295∗∗∗    0.106      0.235∗∗∗
              (-2.82)     (-2.70)     (1.10)      (3.17)     (3.79)       (4.03)     (1.45)      (3.25)
 Indiv FE       X              X        X           X          X              X       X            X
 Year FE        X              X        X           X          X              X       X            X

 Total HH
                               X                    X                         X                    X
  income
   #obs        1,184       1,184      9,455       9,455      9,455        9,455      9,455       9,455

            a
  Note:       This table shows regression results for log household spending, savings, amount of IRA
 assets, and wealth. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
 b
   Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01




                                                  42
                           Figure 10: Illustration of the argument




This figure illustrates why a rational model has difficulty explaining our two findings that 1) in-
dividual savings increase after retirement and 2) eligible individuals do not retire immediately. A
fall in income and work-related expenses (or any other theory that would decrease consumption
such as a health shock) will only increase savings if work-related expenses (or the fall in con-
sumption more generally) are larger than the fall in income. However, in that case, the individual
gains on net in life-time resources if she retires early.




                                                43
                 Figure 11: Housing wealth and mortgage debt over age




This figure plots the amount of mortgage debt and housing wealth (source: Statistics Iceland)
over age.




                                             44
                   Table 12: Environmental and preference parameters

                                                                             A0
      parameter µP        σP µT       σT      p  Gt         r     P0         P0
                                                                                   R    T
        value    0        0.1 0       0.1   0.01 G
                                                 ct       0.01    1       0.0096   11   78


                       parameter  β         θ    η   λ    γ       b     τ
                         value   0.97       2    1   2   0.7     0.7   0.1

                         This table displays all calibrated parameters.




         Figure 12: Life-cycle profiles and CEX consumption and income data




This figure contrasts the five agents’ consumption paths with the average CEX consumption and
income data. The parameter values are µT = µP = 0, σT = σP = 0.1, p = 0.01, , r = 0.01,
and Gt is estimated from the CEX data. The preference parameters are β = 0.97, θ = 2, η = 1,
λ = 2, γ = 0.7, the hyperbolic discounting parameter is b = 0.7, and the temptation-disutility
parameter is τ = 0.1. The standard agent’s exponential discounting parameter β is 1 after retire-
ment, the hyperbolic discounting parameter is 1 after retirement, and the temptation-disutility
parameter is 0. The unit of consumption and income is the log of 1984 dollars controlling for
cohort, family size, and time effects.




                                                45
Table 13: Effects of retirement on spending and savings
in simulated data

             Standard     News-utility    Hyperbolic     Tempted
              agent         agent           agent         agent

 Consumption regressions:
 Retired      0.06∗∗∗       -0.38∗∗∗       -0.14∗∗∗      -0.004∗∗∗
              (22.67)       (-94.40)       (-44.76)       (-1.42)
 Total HH
                 X             X              X              X
  income
  #obs          8,00          8,00           8,00           8,00


 Savings regressions:
 Retired     -0.006∗∗∗      0.052∗∗∗       0.016∗∗∗     -0.0004∗∗∗
              (-21.93)       (86.56)        (44.61)       (-1.37)
 Total HH
                 X             X              X              X
  income
  #obs          8,00          8,00           8,00           8,00

  Note: a The table displays the regression results for 200 agents
 and their simulated data points for four years around the retire-
 ment date. The displayed regression coefficients represent the per-
 centage fall or increase in consumption and savings due to retire-
 ment. The corresponding t-statistics are displayed in parentheses.
 b
   Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p< 0.01




                                46
A      The Icelandic pension system
The Icelandic pension system consists of three pillars: a tax-financed public pension
(social security benefits), compulsory occupational pension funds which are the domi-
nant feature of the system, and voluntary private pensions with tax incentives.
     Pillar one - public pensions. The social security system in Iceland was founded in
1936 with the main purpose of ensuring the livelihood of those unable to work because
of old age or disability. The system provides old age, disability, sickness, maternity,
and survivors pensions. The old age pension is paid from the age of 67. The public
pension is paid as a basic pension and supplementary additions to single or low income
people. The basic pension is low or roughly 10 percent of the average earnings of
unskilled workers and is means-tested by a 30 percent reduction rate after a certain
income threshold. The main transfers are, however, paid through the supplementary
pension which is also means-tested with a 45 percent reduction rate. The maximum
pension per year for an individual without any supplementary income is almost the same
as the minimum wage level. The public pension system in Iceland is fully financed by
taxes. The main financing source is the social security tax which is earmarked to the
social security system. The social security tax rate is currently 5.79 percent and the tax
base is total salaries. The social security tax is paid by the employers.
     Pillar two - occupational pensions. Occupational pensions are the cornerstone of
the Icelandic pension system. The compulsory employer and employee-financed pen-
sion system provides benefits amounting to 50-60 percent of full time earnings during
employment. The contribution rate must be at least 11 percent with the employer paying
7 percent and the employee 4%. Premiums are fully deductible for tax purposes. The
accumulated pension rights in the occupational pension funds are generally indexed to
the consumer price index. The contribution can be divided into two parts. The first part
goes towards acquiring pension rights which (for a 40 years period of contributions)
should give a lifelong pension amounting to at least 56 percent of wages at the end of
the contribution period. The second part can go towards acquiring additional pension
rights, including defined contribution schemes with individual accounts. The main rule
is that members can begin to withdraw old-age pensions at the age of 67. It is, however,
possible to start withdrawing pension as early as 65, but then with a reduced benefit, or
as late as 70 with additional benefits.
     Pillar Three - voluntary individual pension savings. Employees can deduct from
their taxable income a contribution to authorized individual pension schemes. Currently,
the maximum taxable deduction by the employee is 4 percent. In addition, all employ-
ers have agreed in wage settlements to contribute 2 percent to those voluntary pension
savings if the employee matched the amount with at least the same percentage. The
total contribution can therefore be 6 percent. The voluntary pension savings cannot be
distributed until the age of 60.13
  13
     After the financial crisis, individuals were given permission to take out private pension savings to
pay down debt. We observe all such one-time withdrawals but exclude individuals younger than 60 in all
analyses.




                                                  47
B      Derivation of the theoretical framework
B.1       The news-utility model
Before starting with the fully-fledged problem, we outline the second-to-last period for
the case of power utility. In the second-to-last period the agent allocates his cash-on-
hand XT −1 between contemporaneous consumption CT −1 and future consumption CT ,
knowing that in the last period he will consume whatever he saved in addition to last
period’s income shock CT = XT = (XT −1 −CT −1 )R+YT . According to the monotone-
personal equilibrium solution concept, in period T − 1 the agent takes the beliefs about
contemporaneous and future consumption he entered the period with {FCTT−2  −1
                                                                              , FCTT−2 } as
given and maximizes

    u(CT −1 ) + n(CT −1 , FCTT−2
                               −1
                                  ) + γβn(FCTT−1,T −2 ) + βET −1 [u(CT ) + n(CT , FCTT−1 )]

which can be rewritten as
              Z CT −1                                    Z            ∞
                                          T −2
u(CT −1 ) + η         (u(CT −1 ) − u(c))dFCT −1 (c) + ηλ                     (u(CT −1 ) − u(c))dFCTT−2
                                                                                                     −1
                                                                                                        (c)
                    −∞                                               CT −1
      Z   ∞   Z   ∞                                                                     Z   ∞
+γβ                   (u(c)−u(r))dFCTT−1,T −2 (c, r)+βET −1 [u(CT )+η(λ−1)                      (u(CT )−u(c))dFCTT−1 (c)].
       −∞     −∞                                                                         CT

To gain intuition for the model’s predictions, we explain the derivation of the first-order
condition

u0 (CT −1 )(1+η(λ−(λ−1)FCTT−2
                            −1
                               (CT −1 ))) = γβRET −1 [u0 (CT )]η(λ−(λ−1)FATT−2
                                                                             −1
                                                                                (AT −1 ))
                                                     Z   ∞
                               0
                  +βRET −1 [u (CT ) + η(λ − 1)               (u0 (CT ) − u0 (c))dFCTT−1 (c)].
                                                      CT

The first two terms in the first-order condition represent marginal consumption utility
and news utility over contemporaneous consumption in period T − 1. As the agent
takes his beliefs {FCTT−2
                        −1
                           , FCTT−2 } as given in the optimization, we apply Leibniz’s rule
for differentiation under the integral sign. This results in marginal news utility being the
sum of states that would have promised less consumption FCTT−2    −1
                                                                     (CT −1 ), weighted by η,
                                T −2
or more consumption 1 − FCT −1 (CT −1 ), weighted by ηλ,

                   ∂n(CT −1 , FCTT−2  )
                                   −1
                                          = u0 (CT −1 )η(λ − (λ − 1)FCTT−2  (CT −1 )).
                          ∂CT −1                                         −1



Note that, if contemporaneous consumption is increasing in the realization of cash-on-
hand then we can simplify FCTT−2−1
                                   (CT −1 ) = FXT T−2
                                                    −1
                                                       (XT −1 ). Returning to the maximiza-
tion problem the third term represents prospective news utility over future consumption
CT experienced in T − 1. As before, marginal news utility is given by the weighted sum
of states γβRET −1 [u0 (CT )]η(λ − (λ − 1)FATT−2−1
                                                    (AT −1 )). Note that FCTT−2 (c) is defined
as the probability P r(CT < c|IT −2 ) and

                                                                                       c − YT
    P r(CT < c|IT −2 ) = P r(AT −1 R + YT < c|IT −2 ) = P r(AT −1 <                           |IT −2 ).
                                                                                         R

                                                    48
Thus, if savings and therefore future consumption are increasing in the realization of
cash-on-hand, then we can simplify FATT−2
                                        −1
                                           (AT −1 ) = FXT T−2
                                                            −1
                                                               (XT −1 ).
   The last term in the maximization problem represents consumption and news utility
over future consumption CT in the last period T , i.e., the first derivative of the agent’s
continuation value with respect to consumption
                                      R∞ 0        or the marginal value of savings. Ex-
pected marginal news utility η(λ − 1) CT (u (CT ) − u0 (c))dFCTT−1 (c) is positive for any
concave utility function such that
                                                Z        ∞
    0                                                                                                                       0
                         0
  ΨT −1 = βRET −1 [u (CT )+η(λ−1)                                (u0 (CT )−u0 (c))dFCTT−1 (c)] > βRET −1 [u0 (CT )] = ΦT −1 .
                                                     CT

As expected marginal news disutility is positive, increasing in σY , absent if σY = 0,
and increases the marginal value of savings, we say that news-utility introduces an “ad-
ditional precautionary-savings motive.” The first-order condition can now be rewritten
as                           0          0                    T −2
                0
                            ΨT −1 +  γΦ T −1 η(λ − (λ − 1)FXT −1 (XT −1 ))
               u (CT −1 ) =                                                .
                                  1 + η(λ − (λ − 1)FXT T−2
                                                         −1
                                                            (XT −1 ))
                                                                               0                0
Beyond the additional precautionary-savings motive ΨT −1 > ΦT −1 implies that an in-
crease in FXT T−2
                −1
                   (XT −1 ) decreases
                              0
                             ΨT −1
                              0
                             ΦT −1
                                     + γη(λ − (λ − 1)FXT T−2
                                                           −1
                                                              (XT −1 ))
                                                                                            ,
                                  1 + η(λ − (λ − 1)FXT T−2
                                                         −1
                                                            (XT −1 ))

i.e., the terms in the first-order condition vary with the income realization XT −1 so that
consumption is excessively smooth and sensitive.
     The news-utility agent’s maximization problem in any period T − i is given by

                                              i
                                              X                                          i
                                                                                         X
  u(CT −i ) +   n(CT −i , FCTT−i−1
                               −i
                                   )     +γ              β   τ
                                                                 n(FCTT−i,T
                                                                        −i+τ
                                                                            −i−1
                                                                                 )   +          β τ ET −i [U (CT −i+τ )].
                                              τ =1                                       τ =1


Again, we can normalize maximization problem by PT1−θ−i as all terms are proportional
to consumption utility u(·). In normalized terms, the news-utility agent’s first-order
condition in any period T − i is given by
                                     0               0

                    0
                                  ΨT −i + γΦT −i η(λ − (λ − 1)FcTT−i−1
                                                                  −i
                                                                       (cT −i ))
                  u (cT −i ) =
                                         1 + η(λ − (λ − 1)FaTT−i−1
                                                              −i
                                                                   (aT −i ))
                                                                                                           0           0
We solve for each optimal value of c∗T −i for a grid of savings aT −i , as ΨT −i and ΦT −i
are functions of aT −i until we find a fixed point of c∗T −i , aT −i , FaTT−i−1
                                                                            −i
                                                                                (aT −i ), and
  T −i−1
FcT −i (cT −i ). We can infer the latter two from the observation that each cT −i + aT −i =
xT −i has a certain probability given the value of savings aT −i−1 we are currently it-
erating on. However, this probability varies with the realization of permanent income
        P
GT −i esT −i ; thus, we cannot fully normalize the problem but have to find the right con-
                                          P
sumption grid for each value of GT −i esT −i rather than just one. The first-order condition


                                                                 49
           can be slightly modified as follows
                                                               P          0                   P         0

            0           sP
                                             (GT −i esT −i )−θ ΨT −i + γ(GT −i esT −i )−θ ΦT −i η(λ − (λ − 1)FcTT−i−1
                                                                                                                 −i
                                                                                                                      (cT −i ))
           u (GT −i e    T −i   cT −i ) =
                                                                               1 + η(λ − (λ − 1)FaTT−i−1
                                                                                                    −i
                                                                                                         (aT −i ))

           to find each corresponding grid value. Note that, the resulting two-dimensional grid
           for cT −i will be the normalized grid for each realization of sTt and sPt , because we
                                                                           P
           multiply both sides of the first-order conditions with (GT −i esT −i )−θ . Thus, the agent’s
           consumption utility continuation value is

             0                                  ∂cT −i          P                        ∂cT −i           P         0
           ΦT −i−1 = βRET −i−1 [                       (GT −i eST −i )−θ u0 (cT −i )+(1−        )(GT −i eST −i )−θ ΦT −i ].
                                                ∂xT −i                                   ∂xT −i
           The agent’s news-utility continuation value is given by

                                                           0                             dCT −i 0
                                            PT−θ
                                               −i−1 ΨT −i−1 = βRET −i−1 [                       u (CT −i )
                                                                                         dXT −i
                                                       Z
                                                                       dCT −i 0                 T −i−1
                            +η(λ − 1)                              (          u (CT −i ) − x)dF dCT −i 0
                                                                                                                  (x)
                                                                       dXT −i                   dXT −i
                                                                                                       u (CT −i )
                                                CT −i <C T −i−1
                                                        T −i
                                   Z
                                                    dAT −i −θ 0              T −i−1                   dCT −i −θ 0
           +γη(λ−1)                             (          PT −i ΦT −i −x)dF dA               (x)+(1−       )P Ψ ]
                                                    dXT −i                     T −i −θ
                                                                                   P    Φ
                                                                                         0
                                                                             dXT −i T −i T −i         dXT −i T −i T −i
                           AT −i <AT −i−1
                                   T −i
                            R
           (here,                      means the integral over the loss domain) or in normalized terms
                     CT −i <C T −i−1
                             T −i


                                        0                                     dcT −i 0                  P
                                       ΨT −i−1 = βRET −i−1 [                         u (cT −i )(GT −i esT −i )−θ
                                                                              dxT −i
                                 Z
                                                dcT −i 0                  P              T −i−1
           +η(λ−1)                          (          u (cT −i )(GT −i eST −i )−θ −x)dF dc                       SP
                                                                                                                            (x)
                                                dxT −i                                      T −i 0
                                                                                         dxT −i
                                                                                                u (cT −i )(GT −i e T −i )−θ
                         CT −i <C T −i−1
                                 T −i
                 Z
                                daT −i 0              P              T −i−1                                dcT −i           P         0
+γη(λ−1)                    (          ΦT −i (GT −i eST −i )−θ −x)dF da       0          SP
                                                                                                   (x)+(1−        )(GT −i eST −i )−θ ΨT −i ].
                                dxT −i                                  T −i
                                                                             Φ
                                                                     dxT −i T −i
                                                                                 (GT −i e T −i )−θ         dxT −i
           AT −i <AT −i−1
                   T −i




           B.2        The hyperbolic-discounting model
           We consider an agent with hyperbolic-discounting preferences with the hyperbolic-
           discounting parameter denoted by γ. The agent’s maximization problem in any period
           T − i is
                                                 Xi
                               max{u(CT −i ) + γ     β τ ET −i [u(CT −i+τ )]}.
                                                                              τ =1

           We can normalize the maximization problem by PT1−θ
                                                           −i as for the standard agent. In turn,
           we can solve the model by numerical backward induction (as Laibson et al. (2012)) and


                                                                                50
            the first-order condition is
               0                         ∂cT −i+τ            P                            ∂cT −i+1             P           0
u0 (cT −i ) = γΦT −i = γβRET −i [                 (GT −i+1 esT −i+1 )−θ u0 (cT −i+1 )+(1−          )(GT −i+1 esT −i+1 )−θ ΦT −i+1 ].
                                         ∂xT −i+1                                         ∂xT −i+1

            B.3     The temptation-disutility model
            Consider an agent with temptation-disutility preferences as developed by Gul and Pe-
            sendorfer (2004) following the specification of Bucciol (2012). The “tempted” agent’s
            lifetime utility is given by
                                                             T −t
                                                             X
                               td
                u(Ct ) − λ (u(C̃t ) − u(Ct )) + Et [                β τ (u(Ct+τ ) − λtd (u(C̃t+τ ) − u(Ct+τ )))]
                                                             τ =1


            with C̃t being the most tempting alternative consumption level and λtd ∈ [0, ∞). Note
            that, in a life-cycle model context the most tempting alternative is to consume the entire
            cash-on-hand. However, not more as borrowing could be infinitely painful with power
            utility and a chance of zero income in all future periods. For illustration, in the second-
            to-last period the agent’s maximization problem is

                   u(CT −1 ) − λtd (u(XT −1 ) − u(CT −1 )) + βET −1 [u(R(XT −1 − CT −1 ) + YT )]
                                                    (1−θ)
            which can be normalized by PT −1 (then CT = PT cT for instance) and the maximiza-
            tion problem becomes

                                                                                       P         R
(PT −1 )1−θ (u(cT −1 )−λtd (u(xT −1 )−u(cT −1 )))+(PT −1 )1−θ βET −1 [(GT esT )1−θ u(                P (xT −1 −cT −1 )+yT )]
                                                                                                GT esT
            which results in the following first-order condition
                                           1                   sP            R
                        u0 (cT −1 ) =           βE T −1 [(GT e  T )−θ Ru0 (
                                                                                 P (xT −1 − cT −1 ) + yT )]
                                        1 + λtd                             GT esT
                    0
            with ΦT −1 being a function of savings xT −1 − cT −1 . The first-order condition can be
                                                                                                  0  1
            solved very robustly by iterating on a grid of savings aT −1 assuming c∗T −1 = (ΦT −1 )− θ =
                0           1
            (f Φ (aT −1 ))− θ . The normalized agent’s first-order condition in any period T −i is given
            by
                                      1                       P            dcT −i+1 0
                          c−θ
                           T −i =       td
                                           βET −i [(GT −i+1 esT −i+1 )−θ R          u (cT −i+1 )]
                                   1+λ                                     dxT −i+1
                                                   dcT −i+1             P           0
                                          +(1 −             )(GT −i+1 eST −i+1 )−θ ΦT −1 ].
                                                   dxT −i+1




                                                                    51
