                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SHINING A LIGHT ON PURCHASING POWER PARITIES

                                      Maxim Pinkovskiy
                                      Xavier Sala-i-Martin

                                       Working Paper 24419
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24419


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2018




We are very grateful to Matthew Bosch, Andrew Haughwout, Robert Feenstra, Nicole Gorton,
Robert Inklaar, Michelle Jiang, Chris Papageorgiou, Marcel Timmer, Wilbert van der Klaauw
and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and at the IMF for very
helpful comments. We are very grateful to Noah Kwicklis and Rachel Schuh for superb research
assistance. Any views expressed in this paper are the authors' and do not necessarily reflect those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shining a Light on Purchasing Power Parities
Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 24419
March 2018
JEL No. A1,E01,F00

                                           ABSTRACT

Nighttime lights data are a measure of economic activity whose error is plausibly independent of
the measurement errors of most conventional indicators. Therefore, we can use nighttime lights as
an independent benchmark to assess existing measures of economic activity (Pinkovskiy and
Sala-i-Martin (2016)). We employ this insight to generate three findings in the study of PPP-
adjusted estimates of GDP around the world between 1992 and 2010. First, we find that while
market exchange rates described poor economies better than did PPP-adjusted estimates in the
late 1990s (Dowrick and Akmal 2008; Almas 2012), this pattern has disappeared by the 2010s.
Second, we also find that estimates of PPPs have been steadily improving from one price survey
round to the next, including during the controversial 2005 and 2011 rounds. Third, we leverage
this fact to assess whether it is optimal to measure relative prices as close as possible to the year
of interest or to use the latest available relative price data and discard the rest, and provide a
theoretical framework in which the latter may be optimal. Using data from the Penn World
Tables, we find that, indeed, it is optimal to only use the latest price data, and hence, to revise
existing PPP-adjusted estimates whenever a new price survey is released.


Maxim Pinkovskiy
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
maxim.pinkovskiy@ny.frb.org

Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, 1005
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
xs23@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

One of the de…ning achievements of economic measurement is the computation of purchasing power parities

(PPPs) to take into account di¤erences in prices between countries. The …rst estimates of GDP by country

at PPP were constructed as part of the celebrated Penn World Table project (Kravis, Heston and Summers

1978, Summers and Heston 1991). Currently, PPP adjustment is employed by the leading sources of cross-

country data, including the World Development Indicators as well as the Penn World Tables. The creation

of what has been considered to be reliable PPP adjustment has fueled the cross-country growth literature

(Barro 1991 and the vast literature following) as well as the measurement of world distribution of income

(Chen and Ravallion 2001, Sala-i-Martin 2006).

    However, there exist important concerns about PPP adjustment as it stands now. First, while PPP

adjustment attempts to improve on market exchange rates by capturing the prices of nontraded goods, it

introduces a variety of other biases. For example, price surveys used to compute PPPs are fundamentally

limited in how well they can measure the underlying quality of transacted goods because this has to be

assessed by the surveyors themselves (which is known as quality measurement bias), while market exchange

rates incorporate quality di¤erentials between traded goods via the revealed preference of millions of con-

sumers. If the quality di¤erences between tradeables and nontradeables are very small, then market exchange

rates may better represent economic di¤erentials than PPPs do. Moreover, as was realized by Kravis, He-

ston and Summers (1982), "valuation at other than own prices tends to in‡ate the aggregate value of the

bundle of goods because no allowance is made for the substitutions in quantities toward the goods that are

relatively cheap," which is known as substitution bias. Dowrick and Akmal (2008) argue that these biases

warrant an alternative method of comparing the economies of di¤erent countries, and develop such metrics

by combining purchasing power parities and market exchange rate data. Almas (2012), on the other hand,

uses survey-based data on food consumption to compare PPP-adjusted estimates of GDP with the income

levels that would rationalize food shares in typical Engel curves for food. She …nds that while rich countries

are well described by PPP-adjusted data, poor countries may be better described by estimates of GDP

based on market exchange rates. While data limitations preclude Almas (2012) from looking at more than

32 countries (and only at 10 countries using her preferred methodology), her results point to the importance

of assessing the heterogeneity in the performance of PPP adjustment across di¤erent types of countries, and

further raise concerns about the quality of current PPP-adjustment procedures. Hence, a …rst question is:

does adjusting for PPP provide better estimates of the underlying economy than using market exchange

rates, especially for poor countries?

    Second, there has been considerable volatility in PPPs. Purchasing power parities are computed by



                                                      2
the International Comparisons Project (ICP) using international price surveys. These have largely focused

on the developed world until 1996. For countries without survey data, prices were extrapolated using a

regression-based procedure and not based on direct data from these countries. The state of a¤airs changed

dramatically following the 2005 round of surveys, which was the …rst to include China and several other large

developing countries. The new estimates suggested that prices in developing countries were higher (hence,

the economies of these countries were smaller) than was previously thought. However, this conclusion was

largely undone after the subsequent round of surveys in 2011. The instability of the PPP estimates does

not on its own give us a clue whether the changes implemented in the 2005 or the 2011 surveys led to

progress or regress. As Deaton and Aten (2017) write in their analysis of the di¤erence between the two

price survey rounds, "if ICP 2011 is inconsistent with ICP 2005, the problems could come from either ICP

2005 or ICP 2011, or both, or, in the case of ICP 2005, could have been inherited from 1993/1995." Deaton

and Aten (2017) go further to state that "those who know the institutional history of the project believe

that, through a host of methodological improvements and overall control, 2011 was a clear improvement

over the two previous rounds," and suggest that the process of comparing prices across regions in the 2005

ICP may have arti…cially depressed developing world prices. However, they go on to say that "our results

provide a plausible story for the con‡ict between the 2005 and 2011 ICP benchmarks...but the evidence is far

from conclusive. There are many other changes from ICP 2005 to ICP 2011 that [our] hypothesis does not

explain." While methodological considerations can suggest plausible hypotheses for which price estimates

from a particular survey may be preferable to those from another, it is di¢ cult to reach …rm conclusions

absent an independent benchmark for what the measurement goal may be. So a second question is: have

successive rounds of price surveys generated improvements or deteriorations in our estimates of PPP?

   In addition, the volatility of the successive price surveys raises a third question: should we use or discard

past prices data when new data becomes available? The standard practice has been to revise both current

and all past estimates of GDP once a new ICP price survey is conducted, essentially throwing out the price

data from the previous rounds. This appears to be suboptimal. Johnson et al. (2013) propose an alternative

approach, which assigns prices from each ICP survey to the benchmark year of the survey, and interpolates

between prices in the benchmark years. A version of this approach has now been incorporated into the Penn

World Table (as of version 8.0, see Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer 2015) alongside the more conventional

estimates based on the most recent PPP data. While Feenstra et al. (2015) caution that national accounts

growth rates may be more accurate than the "PPP-adjusted" growth rates used in the multiple-benchmark

approach, it remains unclear whether the multiple-benchmark PPPs might outperform the most recent PPPs

in a cross section.

   Our contribution in this paper is to answer these three questions using satellite-recorded nighttime lights


                                                       3
as an independent benchmark for unobserved true income, following the methodology of a previous paper of

ours, Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016). If we had a measurement of GDP whose error was uncorrelated

with the measurement errors of the di¤erent PPP-adjusted GDPs, it would be a straightforward matter

to see which set of PPPs was better by comparing them both to the independent measure. In Pinkovskiy

and Sala-i-Martin (2016) we argued that such an independent measurement can be constructed using data

on satellite-recorded nighttime lights, which were …rst studied by Elvidge et al. (1997, 1999, 2012) and

in economics by Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) and Chen and Nordhaus (2011). While errors

in di¤erent versions of GDP come from errors in the underlying national accounts data (such as faulty

assumptions about economic relationships like input-output tables), or from errors in calculating indicators

of purchasing power parity between di¤erent currencies, errors in the relationship between nighttime lights

and economic output come from weather and atmospheric disturbances that a¤ect how light is captured by

the orbiting satellites.1

   It is important to note that our approach is much more reduced-form than traditional analyses of the

virtues and defects of di¤erent ways of constructing national income statistics. For our empirical tests to

yield valid answers, we do not need to know anything about the way that the statistics that we are comparing

were constructed, except that we can assume their measurement error to be orthogonal to the measurement

error in the nighttime lights. As long as this assumption holds, our method yields impartial assessments

on how best to combine the statistics at hand to predict unobserved true income. On the other hand, our

method does not shed light on the methodological reasons why one estimator of GDP per capita might be

better than another. However, by looking at the patterns of which estimators appear to outperform others

and in which samples, we can exclude hypotheses that would predict counterfactual patterns of estimator

quality.

   Our nighttime lights analysis gives clear-cut answers to the three questions above in ways that reconciles

current practice with the concerns about PPP measurement discussed above. First, to test whether PPP-

adjusted GDP is a better measure than GDP at market exchange rates, we run bivariate regressions of log

nighttime lights on log GDP at PPP and log GDP at market exchange rates, and compare the coe¢ cients on

the right hand-side variables, which should be proportional to the optimal weights of these variables in the

best unbiased linear estimator of log unobserved true income. We clearly conclude that, at least for the most

recent (2011) PPP measures, PPP-adjusted GDP is a better measure of unobserved true income (correlates

better with nighttime lights) than GDP at market exchange rates. However, and in accordance with Almas

(2012), we observe that PPPs based on the 1996 price survey are a worse measure of unobserved true income
   1 Almas (2012) also compares PPP-adjusted GDP and GDP at market exchange-rates to a third series, namely the share of

food in consumption.




                                                           4
for poor countries than GDP at market exchange rates is. After the 2005 and 2011 price survey rounds,

PPP-adjusted GDP became a better measure of unobserved true income than GDP at market exchange

rates both for rich and for poor countries alike.

   To answer the second question, we regress log nighttime lights on log GDP at PPP and log GDP at

a previous PPP, and compare the coe¢ cients. We …nd that PPPs have been improving over time, at

least for the last two rounds of ICP in 2005 and 2011. On the other hand, we …nd that the underlying

national accounts data that undergoes PPP-adjustment has not been generally improving over time, and

may even have deteriorated in some time periods on average. This is notwithstanding revisions to the

national accounts data over time, some of which have been large, such as the recent Nigerian rebasing of its

GDP (The Economist, 04/12/2014). While we undoubtedly have better measures of economic activity than

we had …fteen years ago, most of the improvement has come from better estimates of PPPs.

   Lastly, we answer the third question by regressing log nighttime lights on log Penn World Tables GDP

at 2011 PPP and log Penn World Tables GDP at the synthetic PPP used in the multiple benchmark series

of the PWT. We …nd that GDP at the latest PPP is a much better estimator of log unobserved true income

than GDP at the multiple benchmark year PPP. This conclusion appears to be counterintuitive because we

are …nding that it is optimal to ignore data. However, it can be understood by the fact that the quality

of the price data is improving over time, and the rate of the improvement may be fast enough to outweigh

the magnitude of the ‡uctuations in prices. A straightforward model of these processes (in Section 3.2) also

suggests that it is optimal to use the latest price data to measure prices in the earliest years because the

measurement error problem is most signi…cant for them, while contemporaneous price data in later years is

optimal because its measurement error is fairly low, and less important to reduce relative to matching the

annual variation in price data. This is exactly the pattern that we …nd in the data.

   Our conclusion is somewhat dispiriting because, intuitively, one would have preferred a GDP series that

would change continuously with additional data, rather than requiring revisions to long-ago observations

whenever an update is made. For now, it appears that price survey methodology is continuously improving,

and improving so rapidly that current estimates of prices now (or methods of their aggregation) may be

superior estimates of prices in the past than were estimates of those past prices made in the past. Once

our methods of estimating prices reach a steady state, it may become preferable to move to the approach of

continuous variation of GDP estimates embodied in the multiple-benchmark series.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 presents the empirical

approach, which is an extension of Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016), as well as a stylized model that

explains our main empirical …nding that using latest price data is superior to using contemporaneous price

data. Sections 4, 5 and 6 present the results. Section 7 concludes.


                                                       5
2     Data

2.1     World Development Indicators

      We use data on GDP at constant PPP-adjusted international dollars, at constant US dollars and at

constant local currency units from every vintage in the archives of the World Development Indicators from

April 2005 (the …rst vintage available in the archives) to May 2017. The PPP-adjusted international dollars

are constructed using prices from the 1996 ICP until November 2007, using 2005 ICP between April 2008 and

April 2014, and using the 2011 ICP since May 2014. Since November 2007, the World Development Indicators

PPP-adjust GDP by multiplying the constant local currency GDP data in every year by a country-speci…c

time-constant PPP; before November 2007, the PPP factor was allowed to vary over time.


2.2     Penn World Tables

      We use vintages 8.0 and 9.0 of the Penn World Table. The current version of the Penn World Table

(version 9) and its relationship to its predecessors is described in detail in Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer

(2015). Each of these vintages includes a measure of GDP similar to the WDI measures in that time-constant

PPPs from the latest price survey are used to multiply series of national accounts data expressed in constant

local currency (this variable is called "rgdpna" in the PWT, and will be referred to as the latest price series),

as well as a measure of GDP for which the PPP adjustment factor is not time-constant, but instead is an

interpolation of the price data available from all the ICP price surveys (this variable is called "rgdpe" in the

PWT, and will be referred to as the "multiple-benchmark" series). The intent of the multiple-benchmark

series was to take into account the recommendations of Johnson et al. (2013) and have a measure that is

invariant to future price data, and would not change over time unless the underlying national accounts data

is revised, a feature that was not present in earlier PWTs.


2.3     Nighttime Lights

      Data on lights at night is collected by the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program Operational Lines-

can System (DMSP-OLS) satellite program and is maintained and processed by the National Oceanic and

Atmospheric Administration (NGDC 2010). Satellites orbit the Earth, sending images of every location

between 65 degrees south latitude and 65 degrees north latitude at a resolution of 30 arcseconds (approxi-

mately 1 square km at the equator) at 20:30 to 22:00 local time.2 The images are processed to remove cloud
   2 There are one or two satellites recording nighttime lights in each year, with an old satellite being retired and a new satellite

being launched every few years. The satellites from which data is avaliable are as follows: the satellite F-10 (in orbit 1992-
1994), F-12 (1994-1999), F-14 (1997-2003), F-15 (2000-2007), F-16 (2004-2009), F-18 (2010-2013), and the VIIRS satellite (April
2012-present).



                                                                 6
cover, snow and ephemeral lights (such as forest …res) to produce the …nal product.3 The nighttime lights

data is available from 1992 to 2013, and we use the data up to 2010 because many series of GDP per capita

represent vintages of the WDI that were archived before 2010.

        Each pixel (1 square kilometer) in the luminosity data is assigned a digital number (DN) representing

its luminosity. The DNs are integers that range from 0 to 63. We construct our lights proxy for aggregate

income by summing up all the digital numbers across pixels

                                  63
                                  X
                    Lightsj;t =         i (# of pixels in country j and year t with DN = i )                   (1)
                                  i=1

        This formula has been used to aggregate the nighttime lights maps into lights-based indices for

each country and year in nearly the entire literature on nighttime lights in economics, including Henderson,

Storeygard and Weil (2012), Chen and Nordhaus (2011) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013, 2014).

For years with multiple satellites available, we average the logarithms of our aggregate luminosity measure,

following Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012).

        It is very well established that lights are very strongly correlated with measures of economic activity,

such as national accounts GDP, in levels and growth rates. Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) pro-

vide these correlations, dramatic pictures of long-term di¤erences in incomes (North vs. South Korea) as

well as short-term ‡uctuations (the Asian …nancial crisis of 1997-8) re‡ected in lights. Michalopoulos and

Papaioannou (2013, 2014) present evidence that nighttime light density in a sample of African villages is

correlated with development indicators for these villages. Figure 1 of our paper show that there are very

strong correlations between log nighttime lights and log GDP at market exchange rates, or in PPP-adjusted

international dollars in the WDI.

        Our paper is closest in spirit to Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) and Chen and Nordhaus

(2011) in that it also considers the problem of optimally combining measures of economic activity. However,

instead of using nighttime lights as a component of such a measure, we use it as an auxiliary variable to help

uncover the correlation structure between the measures we do wish to use in our index. We also consider a

di¤erent type of predictor for true income that do either Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) or Chen

and Nordhaus (2011), which allows us to make fewer assumptions on the data generating processes that we

consider.

        There are also well-known problems with the relation between nighttime lights and economic devel-

opment, which we need to take into account. Pixels with DN equal to 0 or 63 are top- or bottom-censored.

The light data also are a¤ected by overglow and blooming: light tends to travel to pixels outside of those
   3 The  nighttime    lights  data   are  publicly     available    for   download   as   spatial   geoti¤s    at
http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html



                                                          7
in which it originates, and light tends to be magni…ed over certain terrain types such as water and snow

cover (Doll 2008). Given that we will compute national-level estimates of aggregate lights, it is unlikely

that these sources of error will be large enough or su¢ ciently correlated with important variables that they

will confound our analysis. Another problem may be that satellites age in space and are eventually retired.

Hence, they might give inconsistent readings from year to year, or new satellites may give fundamentally

di¤erent readings from old ones. While some evidence of this problem exists, we will show in Section 3 that

our calculations are supported by assumptions that allow nighttime lights to have all of the data problems

described above, so long as nighttime lights are correlated with true income.

   The …rst two panels of Figure 1 present scatterplots of log aggregate nighttime lights computed using

the formula (1) against log GDP in constant 2005 US dollars and constant 2011 PPP-adjusted international

dollars, respectively, from the May 2014 vintage of the WDI.4 The data covers the years 1992-2010 as

discussed above. We see that the scatterplots lie very close to the regression lines drawn through them, with

very few outliers. Therefore, we are con…dent that nighttime lights are strongly related to economic activity

in a typical country.


2.4       Covariates

      We use a number of covariates to test the crucial maintained assumption of our paper; that nighttime

lights are correlated with di¤erent vintages of the PWT or the WDI only through their joint correlation with

true income (see the introduction and Section 3 below). These covariates are as follows:

   GDP component shares


       Log Consumption share of GDP

       Log Capital formation as percent of GDP

       Log General government expenditure share of GDP

       Log shares of GDP in exports and imports


   Population Shares


       Log total population

       Log rural population share

       Log urban population share
  4 The   scatterplots are constructed over the baseline sample in the paper, which is described in Section 2.5



                                                                8
   Area


      Log area (time-constant)

      Log arable area (time-constant)


   Sectoral Shares


      Log agriculture share of GDP

      Log manufacturing share of GDP

      Log services share of GDP


   All these covariates come from the World Development Indicators. In addition, we also use two variables

from Dell, Jones and Olken (2014) to capture variation in climate, which may a¤ect the perception of

nighttime lights data by the satellites. These are


      Average temperature, population-weighted by 1-degree grid cell

      Average precipitation, population-weighted by 1-degree grid cell.


   Dell, Jones and Olken (2014) compute a balanced panel of these data for all the countries in the world

up to 2006; we extend their series by running regressions of each variable against year for each country,

and generating regression forecasts for the years 2007-2010. We do not believe this procedure to entail a

substantial loss in information as the cross-sectional variation in this variable is the main component that

we wish to capture, since PPP adjustments are largely cross-sectional and all of our regressions will exclude

country …xed e¤ects.


2.5     Sample

We look at a panel of countries from 1992 to 2010 for which covariate data is available at least for some

years, linearly interpolating and extrapolating any missing data.5 The sample grows over time as GDP data

for new countries are added to the World Development Indicators. By May 2014, we have 139 countries in

the sample.
   5 The covariates include all the variables in Section 2.4, as well as log GDP at 2011 PPP from PWT 9.0 for the purpose of

dividing countries into below- and above-median GDP per capita categories.




                                                             9
3          Mathematical Framework

3.1         Using Nighttime Lights to Recover Optimal Weights on GDP Vintages

       Although the main contribution of this paper is applied and not theoretical, for the bene…t of the reader,

we give another exposition of the methodology of Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016) to determine which

datasets do a better job of computing unobserved true income by using an independent benchmark. We

also provide an alternative and more intuitive proof of why this methodology is valid. The general approach

is closely related to the measurement error literature in econometrics, including Adcock (1878), Griliches

(1986), Fuller (1987), and Hausman (2001).

             Our goal is to …nd the best unbiased linear predictor of log unobserved true income yi;t , which is

the log total value added in country i and year t that we would compute if national statistical systems could

record all income being earned and if PPPs were perfectly computed. We will assume that this true income

is generated through some exogenous stochastic process that may not be stationary (if there is economic

growth, for example). We cannot observe yi;t directly. Instead, we can observe data on log light intensity
  L                                                   1      2
(yi;t ) and on two di¤erent measurements of log GDP (yi;t ; yi;t ) for a sample of countries i and years t. For
          1                                 2
example, yi;t may be log GDP at PPP, while yi;t could be log GDP at market exchange rates. These data

are related to log unobserved true income according to the following system of equations (partialling out

constants and other covariates):


                                                          L        L
                                                         yi;t =         yi;t + "L
                                                                                i;t                                           (2)



                                                          1         1
                                                         yi;t =         yi;t + "1i;t                                          (3)



                                                          2         2
                                                         yi;t =         yi;t + "2i;t                                          (4)


                  In other words, each of the measured variables is a linear function of log unobserved true income,

perturbed by some error.6 This framework is similar to the one used by Henderson, Storeygard and Weil
    6 In   fact, we can substantially relax the functional form speci…cation in equation 2 to read
                                                          L
                                                         yi;t = fi;t yi;t + "L
                                                                             i;t
    so long as
                                                        cov yi;t ; fi;t yi;t     6= 0
   (The analogous assumption in our framework is L 6= 0. We test and con…rm both of these assumptions in Section 4).
   This is a much more general framework that allows for errors in the lights data such as nonlinearity, top- and bottom-
coding, di¤erences in the lights-to-income relationship as satellites age and are replaced, and di¤erences in the lights-to-income
relationship across countries because of cultural attitudes to nighttime light and light pollution, as long as this heterogeneity



                                                                    10
(2012) and Chen and Nordhaus (2011), except that both of these papers used only one additional measure
                                                     1
of log GDP per capita and assumed that                   = 1, which means that log GDP per capita is an unbiased proxy

for log true income per capita. Instead, we do not assume that any of our measured proxies are unbiased,
                                                                                                 7
and allow them to deviate from log true income per capita along a linear trend.

            We assume that the error terms in all three processes are uncorrelated with true income. That is,



                                    cov yi;t ; "L                 1                 2
                                                i;t = cov yi;t ; "i;t = cov yi;t ; "i;t = 0                                (A1)


            In a model where the lights equation is linear in yi;t , this assumption always holds trivially because
                                        k
it is always possible to set the            ’s to the regression coe¢ cients of each proxy on unobserved true income,

and the "ki;t ’s to the empirical residuals:8

                                                               k
                                                k         cov yi;t ; yi;t
                                                     =
                                                            var yi;t
                                                                  k
                                             "ki;t   =     k
                                                          yi;t        yi;t , for k = 1; 2; L


The second and critical assumption of this paper is that the error term in the lights equation (2), "L
                                                                                                     i;t , is

uncorrelated with the error terms from the measurement equations (3) and (4) conditional on true income:



                                              E "1i;t "L              2 L
                                                       i;t jyi;t = E "i;t "i;t jyi;t = 0                                   (A2)


            Assumption A2 is the key reason for the use of the lights data. This assumption has also been made

in Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) and Chen and Nordhaus (2011). This is a plausible assumption

because the data generating processes of the lights data and of the di¤erent measures of GDP are largely

disjoint; lights data is collected by satellites without respect for the statistical assumptions and methods of

the underlying countries, whereas measurements of GDP are obtained primarily by using business surveys

and the government’s accounts, as well as by using price surveys, all of which depend on asking people about

their income or about the prices that they face or o¤er.
does not dominate the positive relation between nighttime lights and true income within our sample.
   7 Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016) …nd that when the measurement variables are log GDP per capita and log survey

means, it is the case that GDP > Surveys , with the di¤erence between the two slope coe¢ cients being signi…cant. In the
current paper, we do not typically …nd that the coe¢ cients on di¤erent measurements of log GDP per capita are statistically
(or economically) signi…cantly di¤erent from each other. Nevertheless, for the sake of generality, we allow the richer model with
potentially di¤erent coe¢ cients i , since it nests the model in which all the i ’s are the same.
   8 In                  L =f
          a model where yi;t              L
                              i;t yi;t + "i;t , straightforward uncorrelatedness needs to be strengthened to mean independence:

                                                                                         0
                                       E "L              1              2
                                          i;t jyi;t = E "i;t jyi;t = E "i;t jyi;t = 0 (A1 )

and this assumption has content. However, given that it is always possible to construct errors that are uncorrelated with
unobserved true income, this assumption should not be di¢ cult to satisfy.




                                                                   11
           We are interested in …nding the best unbiased linear predictor of log true income per capita (yi;t ) in
          1        2
terms of yi;t and yi;t :
                                                                                     1              2
                                                                zi;t =            1 yi;t     +   2 yi;t                               (5)


   where       1   and       2   are the weights on each of the GDP measurements that we are considering:

           Hence, we want to compute the vector (                            1;       2 ),   which minimizes the mean squared error


                                                                                                       1               2 2
                                         (    1;   2)   = arg min E                     yi;t        1 yi;t          2 yi;t            (6)
                                                                (     1;   2)




   The minimand of this problem is the minimand of an ordinary least squares regression of unobserved
                                 1        2
true income yi;t on the proxies yi;t and yi;t . This is intuitive because as a consequence of the Gauss-Markov

theorem, ordinary least squares produces the best predictor of the dependent variable that is a linear function

of the right hand-side variables. Since we do not have data on yi;t , we cannot run this regression. However,

if we run instead the regression


                                                                 L         1         2
                                                                yi;t = b1 yi;t + b2 yi;t                                              (7)


which is the regression of log lights per capita on all our proxies of log GDP per capita (and partialling out

the constant as well as the same other covariates that may be part of equations 2, 3 and 4), we can compute

the vector (       1;   2)   up to a proportionality constant.

   The regression coe¢ cients from equation (7) solve the minimization problem:


                                                                                         L            1            2     2
                                             (b1 ; b2 ) = arg min E                     yi;t      b2 yi;t      b2 yi;t                (8)
                                                                 (b1 ;b2 )


                        L
   Substituting in for yi;t , we can restate this problem in terms of yi;t . First, we obtain that


                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                  L
                                     (b1 ; b2 ) = arg min E                           yi;t + "L
                                                                                              i;t
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                          b2 yi;t         2
                                                                                                                      b2 yi;t
                                                         (b1 ;b2 )


   Then, we open the square to express the minimand as a function of three terms:9
  9 If   we assume that
                                                                      L
                                                                     yi;t = fi;t yi;t + "L
                                                                                         i;t
and make the mean independence assumption                A10    instead of assumption A1, we can get the same result by de…ning

                                                                           cov fi;t yi;t ; yi;t
                                                             L
                                                             OLS       =
                                                                                      var yi;t




                                                                                    12
                              "                                                                            !                                                                                             #
                                          2                                                            2
                                    L                             b2                 b2                                           2               L                              b2             b2
(b1 ; b2 ) = arg min                          E        yi;t          y1
                                                                    L i;t
                                                                                          y2
                                                                                         L i;t
                                                                                                               +E            "L
                                                                                                                              i;t          +2         E      "L
                                                                                                                                                              i;t       yi;t          y1
                                                                                                                                                                                     L i;t
                                                                                                                                                                                                  y2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 L i;t
                  (b1 ;b2 )



   The second term in this minimand is independent of the variables over which minimization is conducted

and may be omitted. The third term is equal to zero because

                                                                                                           1             1
                              b2              b2                                                  b2             b2                                     b2               b2
    E "L
       i;t yi;t                    y1
                                  L i;t
                                                   y2
                                                  L i;t
                                                                = E "L
                                                                     i;t 1                             L              L
                                                                                                                                  yi;t     "L
                                                                                                                                            i;t            "1
                                                                                                                                                          L i;t
                                                                                                                                                                    +      "2
                                                                                                                                                                          L i;t
                                                                                                                                                                                           =0


                                                                                                  2
                                                                                             L
by assumptions A1 and A2. Lastly, the coe¢ cient                                                      in front of the …rst term is irrelevant for optimization

and may be omitted. Therefore, the optimization problem becomes:
                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                b2                  b2
                                          (b1 ; b2 )       =     arg min E                        yi;t            y1
                                                                                                                 L i;t
                                                                                                                                       y2
                                                                                                                                      L i;t
                                                                         (b1 ;b2 )

                                                                    L
                                                           =             (    1;    2)



                                                                                                                L                               L
   the last line following straightforwardly by identifying b1 =                                                     =       1   and b2 =           =        2   from the maximization

problem (6).
                                                                                                       L
   Since we do not know the proportionality constant                                                           without further assumptions,                               1    and     2   remain

unidenti…ed. However, we can identify the ratio of the optimal weights to their sum, which turns out to be
and noting that
                                                                                         2
                                                     L             1              2
                                                  E yi;t       b1 yi;t        b2 yi;t
                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                             L                    L
                                          =       E fi;t yi;t                OLS yi;t     +       OLS yi;t      + "L
                                                                                                                   i;t
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                 b1 yi;t       2
                                                                                                                                           b2 yi;t
                                                                                             2
                                                                             L
                                          =       E fi;t yi;t                OLS yi;t

                                                                                L                      L
                                                  +2E fi;t yi;t                 OLS yi;t               OLS yi;t      + "L
                                                                                                                        i;t
                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                     b1 yi;t        2
                                                                                                                                                b2 yi;t
                                                                                                                 2
                                                          L
                                                  +E      OLS yi;t     + "L
                                                                          i;t
                                                                                            1
                                                                                        b1 yi;t           2
                                                                                                      b2 yi;t

  The …rst term of the minimand in the last line of the optimization does not depend on b1 and b2 and therefore is a constant
that may be dropped. The second term is equal to zero because

                                                                                                           L
                                                                         E         fi;t yi;t               OLS yi;t       yi;t
                                                                                                           L
                                                                =        E         fi;t yi;t               OLS yi;t       "ki;t
                                                                =        0
                                                  L
for k = 1; 2; L by the de…nition of     and by the mean independence assumption A10 . Note that mean independence rather
                                                  OLS
than uncorrelatedness has to be used to argue that

                                                                             E fi;t yi;t "ki;t = 0

  The last term is the minimand considered in the text, and the proof proceeds analogously.




                                                                                                 13
equal to the ratio of the regression coe¢ cients to their sum:


                                                       1                b1
                                                                =
                                                   1   +    2        b1 + b2

   Therefore, we can estimate the weight that should be placed on any measure of log GDP per capita

relative to the total weight on the proxies for log true income per capita. We cannot estimate each weight

individually, or their sum, but we can estimate their ratios.

        The core of our analysis in Section 4 will be running regressions similar to equation (7) presenting
                                                                                         b1       b2
estimates of the optimal relative weights on the measurements of GDP per capita        b1 +b2 ; b1 +b2   when the

elementary speci…cations in equations (2), (3) and (4) –and hence, regression equation (7) –are augmented

by covariates, or when they are estimated on di¤erent samples.


3.2    Theoretical Considerations on Vintage Selection

Before beginning our empirical analysis, it is useful to consider conceptually in what situations an analyst

might prefer to use current data in order to estimate prices in the past. We suppose that we desire to

measure pt , the true PPP in year t, for some location. We can think of the available price data from the

various ICP surveys as representing a series


                                                       p^t = pt + "t


   where pt is the true PPP in year t and "t is measurement error in prices associated with the survey carried

out at time t. For simplicity, we will assume that this measurement error is orthogonal to the realizations of
                                    T
the process of the true PPPs fp g    =1 .

   When the analyst considers whether to use current or historical prices to estimate PPP in year t, she

wishes to solve the problem


                                                                           2
                                                   min E (pt            p^ )
                                               1        T


   The objective function of this problem can then be described by


                                                   2                             2
                                     E (pt   p^ ) = E "2 + E (pt               p )


   in light of the independence assumption presented above. We further assume that the variance of the

measurement error in prices is declining over time, which is equivalent in our setup to the price survey data


                                                                14
p^t improving in MSE over time. Hence,


                                                                                      @
                                                      E "2 :=           2
                                                                        "   ( ),            2
                                                                                            "    ( )<0
                                                                                     @

     We also assume that the true PPP process satis…es


                                                                            2        2
                                                       E (pt          p ) =          p     1 (t 6= )                                                 (9)


     The intuition for this formula is that using current price measurements to approximate historical prices

is prima facie suboptimal because prices change over time. If the variance of the measurement error term
 2
 "   ( ) weren’t shrinking over time, it would be optimal to use contemporaneous prices surveys to measure

historical prices. A PPP process satisfying equation (9) is pt = p +                                      t,   were   t   is i.i.d.

     In the stylized example outlined above, it is easy to see that when one is choosing between using the

price survey conducted in year t and the price survey conducted in the last year (T ), one should choose the

latter whenever


                                                                 2               2               2
                                                                 "   (T ) <      "   (t)         p


                                         2             2               2
     In particular, as long as           "   (T ) <    "   (1)         p,   it is optimal to use p^T to measure pt for all t less than

a cuto¤ T , and to use p^t for all t greater or equal to that cuto¤. So (as long as static MSE reduction

is the objective) it should be optimal to use the latest available price data for the earliest years for which

one wishes to compute PPPs, and use the current price data for the later years for which one is seeking to

compute prices.10



4          Results 1: Comparison of PPPs and Market Exchange Rates

In this section we address our …rst question, which is whether PPP-adjusted GDP is a better predictor of

economic activity than is GDP at market exchange rates. We recall that market exchange rates do not

compare prices for nontraded goods, which comprise a large amount of economic activity. However, PPP-

adjustment is often ‡awed because it does not often capture relevant quality di¤erences of both traded and

nontraded goods, and frequently involves pricing the consumption basket of one country with the prices of
  1 0 It   is trivial to relax equation (9) to allow E (pt       p )2 to be           2
                                                                                      p    (jt       j), an increasing function of jt   j that is bounded
above by       2
               and that is equal to zero when t = . The same condition as in the main text; 2" (T ) < 2" (1)       2 ensures that
               p                                                                                                   p
using p^T instead of p^t to measure pt is optimal for all t at least up to a cuto¤ T that is weakly greater than the cuto¤ in the
case that (jt       j) takes the form of an indicator function. It also may become possible that the set of t such that using p^T
instead of p^t is optimal may consist of several intervals in the space t = f1; 2; ::; T g.




                                                                                15
another country, which leads to well-known biases when comparing the two countries (quality and substitution

bias). Dowrick and Akmal (2008) and Almas (2012) provide evidence that GDP at market exchange rates

may be a good supplement to, or superior to PPP-adjusted data, at least for large subsets of countries.


4.1    Regression Coe¢ cients

To understand whether we should use GDP at PPP or GDP at market exchange rates, our model in Section

3 suggests that we should look at partial correlations between these variables and log nighttime lights. Figure

1 presents scatterplots illustrating the raw and partial correlations between log aggregate nighttime lights

(lights for short) and log GDP at 2011 PPP (2011 PPP for short), or log GDP at market exchange rates

(MAR for short). The two log GDP variables are taken from the May 2014 World Development Indicators

vintage, which is the …rst WDI vintage to use 2011 PPP. As we discussed in Section 2, it is obvious from

graphs 1) and 2) of the …gure that both 2011 PPP and MAR are very tightly correlated with lights. Now,

graphs 3) and 4) present the partial correlations between lights and 2011 PPP or MAR, respectively, holding

the remaining variable …xed. We now observe that there remains a strong partial correlation between lights

and 2011 PPP, even holding MAR …xed. Hence, even conditional on the information contained in MAR,

the value of 2011 PPP is helpful for predicting lights, and, by extension, log unobserved true income. On

the other hand, once we condition on 2011 PPP, the lack of partial correlation between lights and MAR

shows that, conditional on 2011 PPP, MAR is just noise that is unrelated to log unobserved true income.

Therefore, when one is predicting log unobserved true income, one would not wish to include MAR whenever

one can condition on 2011 PPP. We recall that the slopes of the scatterplots in the partial correlation graphs

are just the regression coe¢ cients in the multiple regression of lights on 2011 PPP and MAR.

   More formally, in Table IA, we run the bivariate regression (7) of log nighttime lights on log GDP at

PPP and log GDP at market exchange rates for PPPs using the 2011 PPP, the 1996 PPP and the 1996 PPP

as modi…ed by the Penn World Tables, 6.1. (We include the latter PPP because we wish to compare our

results to Almas (2012), who uses data from PWT 6.1 to …nd substantial PPP bias for poor countries.) We

run each regression three ways. The …rst panel just runs the regression without covariates (analogous to the

scatterplots in Figure 1). Then, in the second panel, we present regressions with year …xed e¤ects, which

may capture changes in satellite sensitivity to light across years. In the third and last panel, we present

regressions with both year …xed e¤ects and the covariates described in Section 2.4.

   Column (1) of the …rst panel of Table IA presents the regression corresponding to the scatterplots in

Figure 1. We see that the regression coe¢ cient on log GDP at 2011 PPP is 0:96 and statistically signi…cantly

di¤erent from zero at the 1% signi…cance level, while the regression coe¢ cient on log GDP at market exchange



                                                      16
rates is 0:06 and statistically indistinguishable from zero at normal signi…cance levels. The upper bound of

the con…dence interval for the coe¢ cient on log GDP at market exchange rates is 0:28, suggesting at most

a modest role for log GDP at market exchange rates in explaining log nighttime lights once log GDP at

2011 PPP has been controlled for. Including year …xed e¤ects in Panel II changes little. While the satellites

recording nighttime lights tend to be considerably more or less sensitive in some years rather than others,

creating a putative role for year …xed e¤ects, the cross-sectional variation engendered by cross-country income

di¤erences drives most of the …ndings and dwarfs any over-time errors due to satellite sensitivity.

   As discussed in Sections 2.4 and 3.1, our analysis may be confounded if errors in nighttime lights are

correlated with errors in GDP at PPP or market exchange rates. Particularly concerning sources of this

correlation may be if output produced by di¤erent industries (such as agriculture vs. manufacturing) and

settings (urban vs. rural), or allocated to di¤erent uses (such as consumption vs. investment) has di¤erent

light intensity, and also di¤erential measurement error in the national accounts. For example, the 2005 ICP

price survey collected data on Chinese prices in the urban centers only, omitting the rural areas. If urban

output is more light-intensive than rural output is, and if urban prices are higher than rural prices are,

then the error in lights may be correlated with the error in the PPP-adjusted GDP data. Therefore, Panel

III includes the fourteen controls described in Section 2.4, which extensively focus on sectoral composition,

investment and government shares, the rural-urban population breakdown and climatic variables that may

a¤ect the perception of nighttime lights by satellites. Our inclusion of controls such as the log urban popu-

lation share and the log agriculture share of GDP should preclude the omitted variables problem discussed

above, at least on average and to …rst order. We see that including these covariates, if anything, increases

the coe¢ cient on log GDP at 2011 PPP, and turns the coe¢ cient on log GDP at market exchange rates

negative.

   The picture changes when we look at GDP at 1996 PPP instead of 2011 PPP. Column (2) of Panel I

shows that regressing log nighttime lights on log GDP at 1996 PPP (1996 PPP for short) and log GDP at

market exchange rates (MAR for short; all data is from the November 2007 version of the World Development

Indicators) generates coe¢ cients on the two measures of log GDP that are both statistically signi…cant and

roughly equal (the coe¢ cient on 1996 PPP is 0:53 and the coe¢ cient on MAR is 0.47). We get similar

results when we include year …xed e¤ects (column 2, panel II) and when we include both year …xed e¤ects

and covariates, the coe¢ cient on 1996 PPP becomes a statistically insigni…cant 0:16, while the coe¢ cient on

MAR becomes a statistically signi…cant 0:53.

   Almas (2012) uses data on Engel curves, market exchange rate data and PWT 6.1 PPP-adjusted GDP

to argue for substantial PPP bias, especially for poor countries. We will return to the question of di¤erential

PPP bias over time for rich and poor countries in Section 4.3, but to make our main results comparable


                                                      17
to those of Almas (2012), we also present estimates in which the source of the 1996 PPP-adjusted GDP

data is from PWT 6.1. If we run the regression of lights on log GDP from PWT 6.1 and log GDP at

market exchange rates (column 3; the market exchange rate variable is from the April 2005 vintage of the

World Development Indicators), we get coe¢ cients of 0:66 on log GDP from PWT 6.1 and 0:37 on log GDP

at market exchange rates, with similar magnitudes if we add year …xed e¤ects or covariates (though with

covariates, the coe¢ cient on log GDP at market exchange rates becomes statistically insigni…cant). Hence,

it appears that when 1996 PPP is used instead of 2011 PPP, the advantage of PPP adjustment over market

exchange rates is considerably less clear-cut. This …nding dovetails with the results of Dowrick and Akmal

(2008) and Almas (2012), who use 1996 PPP data to …nd that PPP-adjusted estimate do not necessarily

dominate market exchange rates.


4.2    Optimal Weights

Table IB presents the same results as does Table IA, but in the form of optimal relative weights, rather

than regression coe¢ cients. Recall that the optimal relative weight of each variable is equal to its coe¢ cient

divided by the sum of the coe¢ cients. Since the regression coe¢ cients are normally distributed, their

quotients may have nonstandard distributions, so we bootstrap the regressions that we run, and present the

2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the distributions of the optimal relative weights in lieu of standard errors. We

have 200 bootstrap replications. Since each regression has only two right-hand-side variables, the weights

and con…dence intervals on the second variable (in this case, log GDP at market exchange rates) are just 1

the weights and con…dence intervals on the …rst variable, but are presented for clarity.

   Upon shifting our focus to optimal weights, it is worth examining several null hypotheses. First, we wish

to consider the null that a series should receive zero weight in the best unbiased linear predictor, which

obtains whenever the con…dence interval includes zero. Second, we may test the null hypothesis that a

series should receive unit weight in the best unbiased linear predictor, which is equivalent to the other right

hand-side variable that is included in the predictor receiving zero weight.

   We see from column 1 that when we wish to form the best unbiased linear estimator from 2011 PPP and

MAR, then we reject the null hypothesis that the optimal weight on 2011 PPP is equal to zero regardless

of whether year …xed e¤ects or controls are added. We fail to reject the null hypothesis that this weight is

equal to unity in the …rst two panels, while in the third panel, we reject this null hypothesis because the

entire con…dence interval for this weight is above unity. The point estimates suggest that the weight on 2011

PPP should be approximately unity, while the weight on MAR should be zero. On the other hand, when we

look at 1996 PPP in the World Development Indicators or in PWT 6.1 (columns 2 and 3), we obtain that



                                                      18
its point estimates are far away from unity (0:52 and 0:63) and this 95% con…dence intervals lies strictly in

the unit interval unless covariates are added to the regression. If covariates are added, we fail to reject that

the optimal weight on 1996 PPP in the WDI is equal to zero, although we do reject this null for 1996 PPP

in PWT 6.1.


4.3        Di¤erences in Results for Rich and Poor Countries

Almas (2012) suggests that GDP data adjusted by 1996 PPP may be closer to true economic activity

for richer countries, while GDP data adjusted by contemporaneous market exchange rates better re‡ects

economic activity in poorer countries. Following this …nding, we present the analog of Table IB separately

for countries above and below median GDP per capita in 1992, which we call rich and poor countries,

respectively,11 in Tables IIA and IIB. We see in Table IIA that for rich countries, the optimal weight on log

GDP at PPP is above 0:9, regardless of speci…cation and both for 2011 and 1996 PPP. All these estimates

are statistically indistinguishable from unity at 95% con…dence, and statistically distinguishable from zero

with the same con…dence, except in the speci…cation that uses data at 1996 PPP from the WDI and contains

covariates.12 Unlike the optimal weight estimates in Table IB, which varied from constancy at around 100%

of the weight for log GDP at PPP when 2011 PPP was used to close to 50% of the weight for log GDP at PPP

and 50% of the weight for market exchange rates when 1996 PPP was used, the optimal weight estimates

in Table IIA are stable at around 100% or more of the weight for log GDP at PPP regardless of the PPP

vintage. There must then be considerable heterogeneity across countries in the optimal weights that should

be given to log GDP at PPP relative to log GDP at market exchange rates, and this heterogeneity must be

driven by the poor countries.

    In accordance with this intuition, Table IIB presents the results for poor countries. We observe that

when 2011 PPP is used (column 1), the estimated optimal weight on log GDP at PPP is above 0.93,

statistically indistinguishable from unity, and statistically distinguishable from zero with 95% con…dence or

more, regardless of whether covariates are employed. On the other hand, in column 2, where the November

2007 WDI vintage, which is at 1996 PPP, is used, the optimal weight on log GDP at PPP is quantitatively

small, statistically indistinguishable from zero, and statistically di¤erent from unity with 99% con…dence.

Correspondingly, the optimal weight on log GDP at market exchange rates is large, statistically di¤erent

from zero at 99% con…dence, and statistically insigni…cantly di¤erent from unity. In column 3, where PWT

6.1 log GDP is used (which also is at 1996 PPP but with some idiosyncratic adjustments), the optimal

weight on log GDP at PPP is somewhat larger (at about 0:19                  0:25) but still considerably and statistically
  1 1 Wemeasure GDP per capita in 1992 with the national accounts-based series of PWT 9.0
  1 2 Wealso reject the null hypothesis that the estimate is unity for the speci…cation with 2011 PPP and covariates because the
lower con…dence bound is above unity.


                                                              19
signi…cantly below unity, and statistically indistinguishable from zero.

   These results suggest that the arguments of Dowrick and Akmal (2008) and Almas (2012) that PPP-

adjusted estimates may be less accurate than GDP at market exchange rates for poor countries were valid

when they were formulated (and for the data that was used in these papers) but that improvements of the

PPP-adjusted data over time (and, speci…cally, by the use of 2011 PPP) has solved the problem that these

papers highlighted. The poorer performance of 1996 PPP relative to market exchange rates that was shown

in Table IB is entirely driven by its performance for poor countries, which, as we see from Table IIB, has

been remedied by 2011 PPP.


4.4    Optimal Weights by WDI Vintage

While in Tables IA through IIB we considered WDI data from May 2017 (the …rst vintage using 2011 PPP)

and November 2007 (the last vintage using 1996 PPP), it is interesting to examine the optimal weight on

log GDP at PPP relative to log GDP at market exchange rates for all available vintages of the WDI. Figure

2 presents the plot of the optimal relative weight on log GDP at PPP for all available vintages starting with

April 2005. All estimates are from the baseline speci…cation without year …xed e¤ects and controls. Vertical

lines denote the last vintages using 1996 PPP (released in November 2007) and 2005 PPP (April 2014). We

see at once that for all vintages before the introduction of 2005 PPP –not just November 2007 –the optimal

relative weight on log GDP at PPP was marginally above 0:5 and statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from

unity with 95% con…dence. However, as soon as 2005 PPP is introduced in April 2008, the optimal relative

weight on log GDP at PPP shoots up to unity (or slightly above). While the optimal relative weight declines

discretely upon the adoption of 2011 PPP, the decline is not large and the con…dence intervals reject the

null that it returns to its original level of 0:5, while at the same time failing to reject the null that it remains

at unity. Hence, we observe further evidence that the introduction of 2005 PPP improved the estimation of

GDP relative to market exchange rates over the price data that existed before.

   Figure 3 illustrates that this improvement took place disproportionately for poor countries, in parallel

with the results of Table IIB. In the left panel of Figure 3 we observe optimal weights for rich countries. We

see that their optimal relative weight of log GDP at PPP is always above unity, and statistically signi…cantly

so for all vintages with 2005 PPP. However, in the right panel, where we present optimal relative weights on

log GDP at PPP for poor countries, this weight is reasonably precisely estimated to be zero for all vintages

using 1996 PPP, with values above 0:5 excluded at 95% con…dence. Once 2005 and later pricing data is

used to compute PPP-adjusted estimates, the optimal relative weight on log GDP at PPP rises sharply to

unity, although the con…dence intervals on many estimates tend to be wide, with the lower bound skirting



                                                        20
zero. These results are consistent with our conclusion from Table IIB that while earlier PPP vintages had

considerable bias problems, later versions appear to have largely remedied them.


4.5    Did Extrapolation Matter?

In this section, we found that PPPs are more descriptive of economic activity than market exchange rates

are in 2011 but much less so in 1996. One possible explanation for this result may be that for many countries

in the 1996 ICP, prices were not directly obtained through surveys, but rather extrapolated from other

countries’survey results via regression. On the other hand, in 2011, virtually all countries participated in

price surveys. If extrapolated price estimates were inherently worse than direct survey evidence, then it is

not surprising that PPPs better describe economic activity in 2011 than in 1996. Alternatively, the quality

of all PPP estimates, including the ones for countries that provided direct survey evidence in both 1996 and

2011, may have improved over these …fteen years. One way to check which of these explanations might be

correct is by conducting our regressions from Table IB only on the sample of countries that had price surveys

in 1996. If we see that the results are the same as in Table IB, then we can conclude that the replacement

of extrapolated price estimates with direct survey data didn’t do much to improve PPPs relative to market

exchange rates. This is exactly what we do in Table III: we reproduce Table IB for the sample of countries

that participated in the 1996 price survey. First, we see that the estimates for data at 2011 PPP on the new

sample (column 1 of Table III) are very similar to the estimates for data at 2011 PPP for the full sample

(column 1 of Table IB). Using the 2011 PPPs, it is always optimal to give the PPPs 100% or more of the

weight relative to market exchange rate based estimates. Second, we see that the point estimates of the

optimal weights on log GDP at 1996 PPP relative to log GDP at market exchange rates (columns 2 and 3)

are always much larger than the corresponding estimates in Table IB. While in Table IB, we found it optimal

to assign roughly 50% of the weight to market exchange rates (with the weight being signi…cantly greater

than zero), on the restricted sample in Table III we …nd that it is optimal to assign close to zero weight to

market exchange rates, and these weights are never signi…cantly greater than zero. We can always reject

the null hypothesis that the optimal weight on log GDP at 1996 PPP is equal to zero except in column 2,

panel 3 (the estimates using World Bank data on GDP at PPP as well as including covariates). While the

sample of countries that participated in the 1996 ICP may also have other properties that make its PPPs

particularly re‡ective of unobserved true income, these results are consistent with PPPs providing better

estimates of economic size than market exchange rates do as long as the PPPs are actually measured, rather

than extrapolated.




                                                     21
5     Results 2: Comparison of Successive Vintages of PPPs

Our second question was whether PPPs have been improving over time. To answer it, we compare the

partial correlations of WDI vintages containing di¤erent PPPs with nighttime lights, following the theory

in Section 3. One important confounder that was not present in Section 4 will be changes to the underlying

national accounts data across WDI vintages. Without adequately controlling for these changes, we run the

risk of attributing the e¤ects of di¤erences in the national accounts data to di¤erences in PPPs. We will

alleviate this concern by showing that di¤erences in the PPPs dominate the di¤erent correlations between

various WDI vintages and nighttime lights.


5.1    Graphical Results

First, we consider comparisons between successive vintages of the WDI that involve a change in the PPP.

Panels 1) and 2) of Figure 4 present partial scatterplots of log nighttime lights against log GDP at 2011

PPP from the May 2014 vintage (2011 PPP for short) and log GDP at 2005 PPP from the April 2014

vintage (2005 PPP for short), respectively. We observe in Panel 1 that there is a strong positive partial

correlation between lights and 2011 PPP, which indicates that conditional on knowing 2005 PPP, there is

still considerable information to be gained about the nighttime lights from data on log GDP at the more

recent PPP. On the other hand, Panel 2 shows that the partial correlation between lights and 2005 PPP,

once 2011 PPP is conditioned on, is zero. Hence, a best unbiased linear estimator of log nighttime lights

(and, by our assumptions, of log unobserved true income) that is based on the two log GDP series should

place most of its weight on the newer 2011 PPP series rather than on the older 2005 PPP series.

    Panels 3) and 4) of Figure 4 present the same analysis for log GDP at 2005 PPP (measured in April 2008)

and log GDP at 1996 PPP (measured in November 2007). We again refer to them as 2005 PPP and 1996

PPP for short (although 2005 PPP is measured with a di¤erent dataset than in the previous paragraph).

Once again, we see that there is a strong, positive partial correlation between lights and log GDP at the

newer PPP. However, for the older PPP, the partial correlation is not just zero, but unambiguously negative.

The implication to draw is that, conditional on 2005 PPP, places with high 1996 PPP actually have lower

log nighttime lights (and hence, log unobserved true income) than places with low 1996 PPP. This can be

understood intuitively as that places where log GDP was revised upward by the transition from 1996 PPP

to 2005 PPP should have their log GDP revised further upward still, and vice versa for places where log

GDP was revised downward. In contrast to the case in which both vintages enter with positive weights,

which implies that each vintage introduces some idiosyncratic error that would be e¢ cient to average out,

the case with a positive and a negative weight suggests that not only is one of the vintages unambiguously


                                                    22
better than the other, but that we should revise the data further in the direction of the better vintage, and

away from the worse vintage.


5.2    Optimal Weights

Table IV presents optimal relative weights for log GDP at various PPPs. Column 1 presents the optimal

weights derived from the regression of log nighttime lights on log GDP at 2005 PPP (measured in April

2008) and log GDP at 1996 PPP (measured in November 2007), which is the regression generating the

scatterplots in Panels 3 and 4 of Figure 4. As in Table IB, the …rst panel presents estimates from just the

baseline regression without any additional controls, the second panel adds year …xed e¤ects, and the third

panel adds both year …xed e¤ects and the covariates discussed in Section 2.4. We see that 2005 PPP should

receive a weight of 1:43, with a con…dence interval between 1:2 and 1:6, while 1996 PPP should receive a

weight of   0:43, with a con…dence interval that includes only negative values. We conclude that the best

estimator of unobserved true income that is based on 2005 PPP and 1996 PPP should place unit weight

on 2005 PPP, and place a further 0:43 of the weight on the di¤erence between 2005 PPP and 1996 PPP.

Hence, while 1996 PPP can be helpful in estimating unobserved true income, it is helpful only in pinpointing

which observations should be revised even more strongly in the direction of 2005 PPP. We interpret these

estimates as indicating that 2005 PPP is not only a better measure of log unobserved true income than is

1996 PPP, but that further revisions should go further in revising the prediction of unobserved true income

in the direction of 2005 PPP and away from 1996 PPP. Adding year …xed e¤ects (column 1, panel 2) does

not change our results, while adding controls brings the optimal relative weight on 2005 PPP closer to unity,

which still indicates consistently that 2005 PPP is the better measure.

   As we have mentioned at the beginning of this section, one might be concerned that the WDI vintages in

November 2007 and April 2008 di¤er not only through the revision of the PPP, but also because of revisions

to the underlying national accounts data in local currency units (LCU). If national accounts are improving

over time, then such change would naturally favor the later vintage over the earlier vintage. While we will

show that, in fact, the national accounts are not consistently improving over time, in column 2 of Table IV

we address this concern by also including estimates of log GDP at constant LCU for both the November 2007

and April 2008 vintages. These variables should capture any changes in the underlying national accounts

data, if any, and leave the regression coe¢ cients on the PPP-adjusted measures be driven solely by the

di¤erences in PPPs. We see that the estimates of the optimal relative weights on 2005 PPP remain virtually

unchanged with the inclusion of the LCU controls. For every regression involving the comparison of 1996

PPP and 2005 PPP, we conclusively reject the null hypothesis that the older PPP should receive a weight



                                                     23
of unity, and moreover, we reject the null hypothesis that it should receive any positive weight above 0:01.

Hence, the data expresses a clear preference for using the newer PPP over the older PPP.

   Columns 3 and 4 compute optimal weights for 2011 PPP relative to 1996 PPP in the same manner,

and we observe the same results in favor of the newer PPP. All of the regressions considered reject the null

hypothesis that the older PPP vintage (1996 PPP) should receive a weight of more than 0:16, and all the

point estimates of the optimal relative weight on the older vintage are negative. In contrast, the regressions

typically fail to reject the null hypothesis that the newer vintage (2011 PPP) should receive unit weight, or,

if they reject it, the con…dence interval lies above, rather than below, unity.

   Columns 5 and 6 compute optimal weights for 2011 PPP relative to 2005 PPP. Once again, we can always

reject the null hypothesis that the weight on 2005 PPP should be unity while the weight on 2011 PPP should

be zero. We always fail to reject the null hypothesis that the 2011 PPP vintage should get the whole weight,

while the 2005 PPP vintage should get no weight, which is also what the point estimates suggest.

   It is interesting to examine whether the apparent improvement of PPPs over time may stem from the

growth of the number of countries participating in the price surveys (and thus, from the substitution of data

for imputed estimates) or from improvement in either the data quality or the methodology for countries

already participating in the ICP. If indeed the improvement of the PPPs comes exclusively from countries

that conduct price surveys for the …rst time, then estimating our regressions from Table IV over countries

that are already conducting price surveys in 1996 should yield no particularly higher weight for the newer

PPP. Table V presents estimates for the baseline speci…cation from Table IV, run over the sample of countries

participating in the 1996 ICP. The results are qualitatively unchanged from Table IV; in particular, we always

fail to reject the null hypothesis that the newer vintage should receive a weight of unity, and always reject

the null hypothesis that the older vintage should receive a weight of unity. Therefore, we conclude that

improvements in data quality and methodology for countries where price data was already collected have

been important to the improvement of PPP data over time.


5.3    Changes to the National Accounts Data over Time

In the previous section, we alleviated our earlier concern that changes in GDP estimates across consecutive

vintages may be driven by changes in the underlying national accounts data rather than by changes to

the PPP by including log GDP at local currency from both vintages as controls. The fact that we …nd our

estimates to remain essentially stable suggests that any changes in the national accounts data are not driving

our results. However, it is still interesting to ask whether the national accounts data may be improving over

time. To that end, Table VI compares the performance of GDP estimates in the earliest and latest available



                                                      24
WDI vintages that share the same PPP. For example, to look at the evolution of national accounts estimates

that rely on 1996 PPP, we include log GDP at 1996 PPP measured in April 2005 (the earliest available

WDI vintage) and log GDP at 1996 PPP measured in November 2007 (the latest available WDI vintage that

uses 1996 PPP) on the right hand-side of our regression speci…cation (column 1). We observe that, …rst,

the estimates of the optimal weights are very noisy, and the weight on neither WDI vintage is statistically

signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. Second, if anything, the weight on the older WDI vintage appears to

be larger than the weight on the newer WDI vintage. Since the PPP used in both vintages is the same,

this suggests that the older national accounts data was more predictive of nighttime lights than the newer

national accounts data is. Adding controls or weighting observations by country population does not alter

our conclusions. Surprisingly enough, when we compare the performance of the earliest and latest vintage

that use 2005 PPP (column 2), and especially the earliest and latest vintage that use 2011 PPP (column 3),

we see, if anything, a stronger tendency for the data to suggest evidence in favor of the older rather than

the newer vintage of the WDI, and hence, of the national accounts data. For example, in column 2, where

we compare log GDP from the April 2014 WDI vintage with log GDP from the April 2008 WDI vintage,

regardless of the inclusion of controls we can reject the null hypothesis that the newer vintage should receive

all of the weight and that the older vintage should receive zero weight, while failing to reject the converse

hypothesis that the newer vintage should receive zero weight and the older vintage should receive all of

the weight. We reach the same conclusion for all speci…cations in column 3, where we compare the latest

archived WDI vintage (May 2017) with the earliest WDI vintage that uses 2011 PPP (May 2014). Therefore,

if anything, while updates of the PPPs appear to increase the predictive power of GDP data in the WDI for

nighttime lights (and hence, for unobserved true income), updates of the underlying national accounts data

seem to lower it.

   We attempt to visualize the comparison between changes in the underlying national accounts data and

changes in the PPP in Figure 5. In this …gure, we run regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP at

PPP from each vintage of the WDI and its directly preceding vintage. We then compute a "t-statistic" for

the optimal relative weight on the successor vintage for each regression by dividing the weight by one-fourth

of the width of its 95% con…dence interval, and plot these t-statistics against the vintage date. We see that

most of these t-statistics lie in the range between   2 and 2, but the t-statistics corresponding to vintages in

which the PPP is changed stand out; the t-statistic for April 2008 (…rst vintage with 2005 PPP) is 8:5, while

the t-statistic for May 2014 (…rst vintage with 2011 PPP) is 3:5. The largest t-statistic for a vintage without

a PPP change is for July 2013, and is equal to 2:77. Therefore, it appears that PPP revisions dominate the

landscape of shocks to GDP quality across WDI vintages.




                                                       25
5.4    How does 2005 PPP Perform For Estimating GDP in 1996?

Johnson et al. (2013) have argued for PPP-adjusting GDP data using the closest price survey available to

the year for which GDP is estimated. While this argument makes intuitive sense, Section 3.2 outlined an

elementary model of a data generating process of price data for which this suggestion would not be optimal;

namely, newer data may be so much more precisely estimated relative to the over-time variation in prices

that price measures taken today are better measures of prices a long time ago than were the price measures

a long time ago. Our …rst pass at trying to determine whether the theory of Johnson et al. (2013) or the

elementary model of Section 3.2 better describes the data is to look at the performance of di¤erent PPP

vintages in predicting nighttime lights (and hence, unobserved true income) in di¤erent years. According

to the argument of Johnson et al. (2013), 1996 PPP should be relatively better at predicting log nighttime

lights around 1996, while 2005 PPP should be better at predicting log nighttime lights around 2005. On the

other hand, according to the argument in Section 3.2, 2005 PPP might be more predictive of log nighttime

lights in any year relative to 1996 PPP if it is more predictive of nighttime lights on average.

   Panel 1 of Figure 6 presents the results of the regression of lights on 1996 PPP and 2005 PPP separately

for each year. We see that in all years – including 1996, the year of the price survey underlying the older

PPP – the optimal weight on 2005 PPP is estimated to be greater than unity, with con…dence intervals

that comfortably exclude zero (or, for that matter, unity itself). This result parallels our …nding that log

nighttime lights are more strongly correlated with 2005 PPP than they are with 1996 PPP (Table IV, columns

1 and 2), but the fact that this statement holds individually for every year, rather than predominantly in

years closer to 2005 than to 1996, suggests that there are no special advantages to using contemporaneously

measured prices to measure GDP.

   Panel 2 of Figure 6 similarly presents the results of regressing year-by-year log nighttime lights on

2005 PPP and 2011 PPP. Once again, the optimal weight on 2011 PPP is close to unity and statistically

signi…cantly di¤erent from zero uniformly across years (with the only exception being the year 2008). We

conclude that when one PPP seems to be more correlated with nighttime lights than another PPP, this tends

to be uniform across years, rather than particularly strong for the year in which the PPP was constructed

and weaker in other years.




                                                      26
6     Results 3: Should We Use Contemporaneous Prices or Latest

      Prices?

We have just seen in Section 5.4 that later PPPs may be better measures of underlying economic activity

in a given year than PPPs constructed in that year. In particular, if data at 2005 PPP is better than data

at 1996 PPP at measuring economic activity in 1996, it seems intuitive that one might wish to discard

the data at 1996 PPP for the purposes of estimating unobserved true income and use only the data at

2005 PPP. In this section, we explicitly test this idea using alternative series from the Penn World Tables

(PWT). As of vintage 8.0, the PWT reports two distinct GDP series: one using the latest available PPP

(an extrapolated version of the 2005 PPP for PWT 8.0 and the 2011 PPP for PWT 9.0), and the other

using an interpolation of all the previous PPPs including the current one. We will refer to the latter series

as the multiple benchmark series. Since the evidence of the previous section, especially the fact that later

PPP measures are more predictive of nighttime lights than earlier measures in the years for which the earlier

measures were computed, is consistent with relative prices changing slowly, it is reasonable to believe that

the multiple benchmark series is a good approximaton to a GDP series using price data that vary over time

and that are computed using the best methodology available to date.


6.1    Graphical Evidence

We can test whether and when using the latest price data o¤ers a better estimate of nighttime lights, and

hence, unobserved true income, than using the best contemporaneous price data available by a simple linear

regression of log nighttime lights on log PWT GDP estimated with the multiple benchmark methodology

and log PWT GDP estimated by using the latest price survey. Figure 7 presents the partial scatters of log

nighttime lights on log PWT 9.0 GDP at 2011 PPP (latest PPP for short) holding log PWT 9.0 multiple

benchmark GDP (multiple benchmark series, or contemporaneous series, for short) …xed and vice versa.

While the scatters are not as linear as the plots in Figures 1 and 4, there is still an unmistakeable positive

partial correlation between lights and latest PPP, and no partial correlation between lights and the multiple

benchmark series, suggesting that analysts should put more weight on GDP estimates with latest prices than

GDP estimates with contemporaneous prices.


6.2    Optimal Weights

Table VII presents the optimal relative weights on the multiple benchmark series and log GDP at latest

PPP. Once again, interesting null hypotheses to test are that the weight on log GDP at latest PPP is zero



                                                     27
(which would suggest that log multiple benchmark GDP is a better predictor of log nighttime lights than

log GDP at latest PPP) and that the weight on log GDP at latest PPP is unity (which would suggest the

reverse conclusion). For each PWT vintage in 8.0 and 9.0 we present results without controls, with year

…xed e¤ects, and with year …xed e¤ects and the covariates described in Section 2.4 as usual. We also present

results on a sample of countries and years for which either direct price data exists from the PPP surveys

(these would be observations for 1996 and 2005 for the countries participating in the price surveys) or which

lie in between two price surveys for the same country, allowing prices to be interpolated within country and

across time. The multiple benchmark methodology would be expected to produce more accurate estimates

for the interpolated prices sample than for the non-interpolated sample. Finally, motivated by the potential

for outliers in Figure 7, we also present speci…cations in which we estimate the optimal relative weights using

median regression instead of ordinary least squares. Median regression minimizes least absolute deviations,

instead of least squares, which makes it more resistant to outliers than ordinary least squares is.

   We observe that for each set of estimates in Table VII we can reject the null hypothesis that the optimal

weight on the log GDP at latest PPP series is zero with 99% con…dence, and for each set of estimates but

one we fail to reject that the optimal weight on the log multiple benchmark GDP series is zero at traditional

signi…cance levels (the sole exception, which looks at PWT 8.0 data on the benchmark sample, and includes

year …xed e¤ects and controls, involves a rejection in favor of the alternative that the optimal weight on

log multiple benchmark GDP is negative). In particular, the …rst set of estimates (column 1, panel 1),

which corresponds to the ratio of the partial e¤ects depicted in Figure 7, suggests that all the weight should

be placed on the latest PPP and no weight should be placed on the multiple benchmark series. For the

analysis with PWT 9.0, point estimates of the optimal relative weight on log GDP at latest (2011) PPP are

all between 0.93 and 1.06, while for regressions with PWT 8.0 the point estimates in regressions without

covariates on the main sample can be as low as 0.76, but return to a value of around unity when covariates

are included. Hence, on average, it appears that using the latest price data is a much more e¤ective way of

explaining the nighttime lights data (and hence, is likely to be a much better measure of unobserved true

income) than using all available price data.

   Once again, it is relevant to ask whether the di¤erence in predictive power between GDP at the latest

PPP and GDP at the multiple benchmark PPP is driven by more countries participating in price surveys for

later rounds of the ICP. Table VIII presents estimates of the speci…cations in Table VII run over the sample

of countries that participated in the 1996 ICP. We see that the entry of new countries into the ICP is not

driving our results; in each speci…cation we reject the null hypothesis that the weight on log GDP at the

multiple benchmark PPP is unity and fail to reject the corresponding hypothesis for log GDP at the latest

PPP.


                                                      28
6.3    Optimal Weights over Time

We conclude our analysis by considering the pattern of the optimal weights on the latest PPP and the

multiple benchmark series over time. As we recall from Section 3.2, a straightforward model of the tradeo¤s

between using more precise (hence, later) data and using data that better corresponds to the prices that

one wishes to measure (the contemporaneous data) suggests that the analyst should use the latest price

data to estimate prices in the distant past, while she should use the contemporaneous price data to estimate

prices closer to the period of the latest price data. Hence, in our bivariate regression of log nighttime lights

on log GDP at latest prices (2011 PPP) and log GDP at contemporaneous prices (multiple benchmark

series), the optimal weight on the log GDP at latest prices should be high for early years in the sample,

but then should decline as one approaches 2011. Figure 8 presents estimates of this optimal relative weight

on the latest PPP in PWT 9.0 and PWT 8.0 for each year in our sample, separately, and we see that the

implication of our model in Section 3.2 is con…rmed. In particular, the optimal relative weight on log PWT

9.0 GDP at 2011 PPP is precisely estimated to be unity until around 2005, after which year it is no longer

signi…cantly di¤erent from zero at 5% signi…cance, and by 2009 the point estimate of this weight is negative.

The intuition for this pattern (and the result of the model) is that contemporaneous prices a long time ago

are measured very imprecisely relative to the latest price data, and since prices change slowly, the latest

price data is preferable. However, contemporaneous prices a few years before the latest price data may be

measured reasonably precisely, and it may be worth putting some weight on them as they should re‡ect

contemporaneous prices di¤erences quite well.



7     Conclusion

Our results are informative to researchers wishing to use PPPs in validating and a¢ rming current practices

in the literature, such as using PPPs directly rather than combining them with market exchange rate data,

and revising PPPs in faraway prior years after a new round of price surveys is completed. There may be

reason to revisit the literatures of the 1990s and 2000s that used 1996 PPP, and follow the recommendations

of Dowrick and Akmal (2008) and Almas (2012) to address the PPP bias, possibly by computing weighted

averages of PPPs and market exchange rates. However, papers that use more recent PPP data should largely

be free of these concerns, and market exchange rate data currently has little to contribute to estimating GDP

once PPPs are incorporated. This improvement in price data has occurred, obviously, because direct price

data now replaces extrapolation for many countries, but also because survey methodology and data analysis

have improved for countries that had direct price data to begin with. We have also learned, reassuringly, that



                                                      29
PPPs have improved considerably over time (in contrast to the underlying national accounts data, which, if

anything, may have deteriorated). We also learn, perhaps counterintuitively, that we cannot do much better

than revising previous PPP estimates each time we get a new price survey, because the price surveys appear

to be improving rapidly, and there is almost no bene…t to be obtained from older price data. While using

multiple rounds of price data may appear appealing in principle, it will become e¢ cient in practice only for

the years when the measurement error of price surveys becomes su¢ ciently small compared to the rate of

change of relative prices over time.



Author A¢ liations

Maxim Pinkovskiy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

   Xavier Sala-i-Martin, J. and M. Grossman Professor of Economics, Columbia University and NBER



References
 [1] Adcock, R. J. "A Problem in Least Squares." Analyst. 5 (1878), pp. 53-4.
 [2] Almås, Ingvild. "International Income Inequality: Measuring PPP bias by estimating Engel curves
     for food." American Economic Review 102, no. 2 (2012): 1093-1117.
 [3] Barro, Robert J. "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries." Quarterly Journal of Economics
     106 (1991), no. 2: 407-443.
 [4] Barro, Robert J. "Human Capital and Growth in Cross-Country Regressions." Swedish Economic
     Policy Review 6 (1999), no. 2: 237-277.
 [5] Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. "Convergence." Journal of Political Economy 100
     (1992), no. 2: 223-251.
 [6] Baugh, Kimberly E., Christopher D. Elvidge, Tilottama Ghosh and Daniel Ziskin. "Devel-
     opment of a 2009 Stable Lights Product using DMSP-OLS Data." Proceedings of the 30th Asia-Paci…c
     Advanced Network Meeting. 2009.
 [7] Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), Columbia Uni-
     versity; and Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT). Gridded Population of the
     World, Version 3 (GPWv3). Palisades, NY: Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC),
     Columbia University. Available at http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw. 2005.
 [8] Chen, Xi, and William D. Nordhaus. "Using Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic Statistics"
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2011
 [9] Ciccone, Antonio and Marek Jarocinski. "Determinants of Economic Growth: Will Data Tell?"
     American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2010):4, 222-246.

[10] Doll, Christopher N.H. "CIESIN Thematic Guide to Night-time Light Remote Sensing and its
     Applications." Manuscript. 2008
[11] Doll, Christopher N.H., Jan Peter Muller and Jeremy G. Morley. "Mapping Regional Eco-
     nomic Activity from Night-Time Light Satellite Imagery." Ecological Economics 57 (2006): 75-92


                                                     30
[12] Dowrick, Steve, and Muhammad Akmal. "Contradictory trends in global income inequality: A
     tale of two biases." Review of Income and Wealth 51, no. 2 (2005): 201-229.
[13] The Economist. "Step Change: Revised Figures Show Nigeria Africa’s Largest Economy,"
     https://www.economist.com/news/…nance-and-economics/21600734-revised-…gures-show-nigeria-
     africas-largest-economy-step-change. Date Created: 04/12/2-14. Date Accessed: 02/21/2018.

[14] Elvidge, Christopher D. and Kimberly E. Baugh, Eric A. Kihn, Herbert W. Kroehl, Ethan
     R. Davis. "Mapping City Lights With Nighttime Data from the DMSP Operational Linescan System."
     Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 63 (1997), no. 6: 727-734
[15] Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberly E. Baugh, John B. Dietz, Theodore Bland, Paul C.
     Sutton and Herbert W. Kroehl. "Radiance Calibration of DMSP-OLS Low-Light Imaging Data of
     Human Settlements." Remote Sensing of Environment, 68 (1999) no. 1:77-88.
[16] Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberly E. Baugh, Sharolyn. J. Anderson, Paul. C. Sutton,
     and Tilottama Ghosh. "The Night Light Development Index (NLDI): A Spatially Explicit Measure
     of Human Development from Satellite Data." Social Geography 7 (2012), 23–35.
[17] Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer, “The Next Generation of the Penn
     World Table,” American Economic Review 105 (2015). vol.10, 3150-3182
[18] Fuller, Wayne. Measurement Error Models. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 1987.
[19] Ghosh, Tilottama, Rebecca L. Powell, Christopher D. Elvidge, Kimberly E. Baugh, Paul C.
     Sutton and Sharolyn Anderson. "Shedding Light on the Global Distribution of Economic Activity."
     The Open Geography Journal 3 (2010), 148-161.
[20] Griliches, Zvi. “Economic Data Issues,” in Handbook of Econometrics, Volume III. Z. Griliches and
     M. D. Intriligator, eds. Amsterdam, New York and Oxford: North-Holland, pp. 1465–514. 1986.
[21] Hausman, Jerry A. "Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the Right and
     Problems from the Left." Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15 (2001), No. 4, pp. 57-67.
[22] Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. "Measuring Economic Growth
     from Outer Space." American Economic Review 102 (2012), no. 2: 994-1028.
[23] Kravis, Irving B., Alan W. Heston, and Robert Summers. "Real GDP per capita for more than
     one hundred countries." The Economic Journal 88, no. 350 (1978): 215-242.
[24] Kravis, Irving B., Alan Heston, and Robert Summers. World product and income: International
     comparisons of real gross product. The World Bank, 1982.
[25] Johnson, Simon, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and Arvind Subramanian. "Is Newer
     Better? Penn World Table Revisions and Their Impact on Growth Estimates." Journal of Monetary
     Economics 60 (2013), no. 2: 255-274.
[26] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. "Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contem-
     porary African Development." Econometrica 81 (2013), no. 1: 113-152.
[27] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. "National Institutions and Sub-national Devel-
     opment in Africa." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2014) no. 1:151-213.
[28] National     Geophysical    Data   Center  (NGDC). “Version 4 DMSP-OLS Night-
     time    Lights  Time     Series.” National Oceanic     and     Atmospheric     Administration.
     http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html. 2010. (accessed September 2013).
[29] Pinkovskiy, Maxim L. "Economic Discontinuities at Borders: Estimation Using Satellite Data of
     Lights at Night." mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2014.



                                                 31
[30] Pinkovskiy, Maxim L. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. "Lights, Camera, ... Income! Illuminating the
     National Accounts-Household Surveys Debate," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, vol. 2: 579-631.
[31] Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston. "The Penn World Table (Mark 5): an expanded set of
     international comparisons, 1950-1987." NBER Working Paper R1562.1991.

[32] Sutton, Paul C., Christopher D. Elvidge and Tilottama Ghosh. "Estimation of Gross Domestic
     Product at Sub-National Scales using Nighttime Satellite Imagery." International Journal of Ecological
     Economics & Statistics 8 (2007) :5-21
[33] World Bank. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC. 2006, 2014, 2015.




                                                    32
Tables
                                                Table IA                                               (IA)


                           Comparing PPP and Market Exchange Rates
                                 Lights Regression Coe¢ cients
                                  Dep. Var. is Log Light Intensity
                                                      (1)               (2)               (3)
        PPP Vintage                              2011 PPP          1996 PPP          1996 PPP
        PPP Data Source                         WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007       PWT 6.1
        Mrkt Exchange Rates Data Source         WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007      WDI Apr 2005
                                             No Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                         .96***                  .53***            .66***
                                                (.11)                   (.12)             (.12)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates          .06                  .47***            .37***
                                                (.11)                   (.12)             (.11)
        Number of Obs.                          2634                    2079              1113
        Number of Clusters                       139                     140               138
                                       Year Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                          .97***                 .54***            .65***
                                                 (.11)                  (.12)             (.12)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates           .06                 .47***            .37***
                                                 (.11)                  (.12)             (.11)
        Number of Obs.                           2634                   2079              1113
        Number of Clusters                        139                    140               138
                                  Year Fixed E¤ ects + Controls
        Log GDP at PPP                              1.24***               .16            .61***
                                                     (.15)              (.19)             (.20)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates            -.32***            .53***               .23
                                                     (.11)              (.15)             (.14)
        Number of Obs.                               2634               2079              1113
        Number of Clusters                            139                140               138

   Table IA presents estimates for the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP at PPP and log GDP
at market exchange rates as described in Section 4. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by country.
Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP at PPP and at market exchange
rates are from the World Development Indicators. The covariates are described in Section 2.4. The sample
comprises of all countries and years with full information on covariates.




                                                    33
                                                 Table IB                                                (IB)


                            Comparing PPP and Market Exchange Rates
                             Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                                Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)
        PPP Vintage                               2011 PPP          1996 PPP           1996 PPP
        PPP Data Source                          WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007        PWT 6.1
        Mrkt Exchange Rates Data Source          WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007       WDI Apr 2005
                                              No Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                          .93***                   .52***            .63***
                                              (.67,1.1)                (.26,.78)         (.39,.86)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates          .06                    .47***            .36***
                                             (-.12,.32)                (.21,.73)         (.13,.60)
        Number of Obs.                           2634                     2079              1113
        Number of Clusters                       139                      140               138
                                       Year Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                          .93***            .53***                   .63***
                                              (.67,1.1)         (.27,.78)                (.39,.85)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates          .06             .46***                   .36***
                                              (-.12,.32)        (.21,.72)                (.14,.60)
        Number of Obs.                           2634              2079                     1113
        Number of Clusters                       139               140                      138
                                  Year Fixed E¤ ects + Controls
        Log GDP at PPP                                1.35***              .23             .72***
                                                    (1.08,1.6)         (-.54,.82)        (.32,1.1)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates               -.35**            .76***              .27
                                                    (-.67,-.08)        (.17,1.5)         (-.12,.67)
        Number of Obs.                                 2634               2079              1113
        Number of Clusters                              139               140               138

   Table IB presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP
at PPP and log GDP at market exchange rates as described in Section 4. Country block-bootstrapped 95%
con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on
measures of log GDP at PPP and at market exchange rates are from the World Development Indicators. The
covariates are described in Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with full information
on covariates.




                                                     34
                                                Table IIA                                               (IIA)


          Comparing PPP and Market Exchange Rates, > Median Income Countries
                       Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                          Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)
        PPP Vintage                               2011 PPP          1996 PPP           1996 PPP
        PPP Data Source                          WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007        PWT 6.1
        Mrkt Exchange Rates Data Source          WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007       WDI Apr 2005
                                              No Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                         1.23***                  1.31***           1.21***
                                              (.97,1.4)               (1.03,1.5)         (.99,1.4)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates        -.23*                    -.31**             -.21*
                                             (-.44,.02)               (-.58,-.03)        (-.46,.00)
        Number of Obs.                          1212                      959               524
        Number of Clusters                       64                        65                63
                                       Year Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                         1.23***            1.31***                 1.21***
                                              (.97,1.4)         (1.03,1.5)               (.99,1.4)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates         -.23*             -.31**                   -.21*
                                              (-.45,.02)        (-.57,-.03)              (-.45,.00)
        Number of Obs.                           1212               959                     524
        Number of Clusters                        64                 65                      63
                                  Year Fixed E¤ ects + Controls
        Log GDP at PPP                                1.00**               .49              1.09*
                                                    (.28,1.4)          (-1.8,1.6)        (-1.3,1.6)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates                -.00               .50               -.09
                                                    (-.46,.71)         (-.60,2.8)        (-.61,2.3)
        Number of Obs.                                 1212               959               524
        Number of Clusters                              64                 65                63

Table IIA presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP
at PPP and log GDP at market exchange rates as described in Section 4. Country block-bootstrapped 95%
con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on
measures of log GDP at PPP and at market exchange rates are from the World Development Indicators. The
covariates are described in Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with full information
on covariates, and with the country’s PWT 9.0 GDP per capita at 2011 PPP above the median of its
distribution.




                                                     35
                                                Table IIB                                               (IIB)


          Comparing PPP and Market Exchange Rates, < Median Income Countries
                       Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                          Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)
        PPP Vintage                               2011 PPP          1996 PPP           1996 PPP
        PPP Data Source                          WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007        PWT 6.1
        Mrkt Exchange Rates Data Source          WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007       WDI Apr 2005
                                              No Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                          .95***                     .01               .25
                                              (.30,1.7)                (-.43,.40)        (-.28,.63)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates          .04                    .98***            .74***
                                             (-.77,.69)                (.59,1.4)         (.36,1.2)
        Number of Obs.                           1422                     1120              589
        Number of Clusters                        75                       75                75
                                       Year Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                          .93***              .01                      .24
                                              (.29,1.7)         (-.42,.39)               (-.28,.60)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates          .06             .98***                   .75***
                                              (-.73,.70)        (.60,1.4)                (.39,1.2)
        Number of Obs.                           1422              1120                     589
        Number of Clusters                        75                75                       75
                                  Year Fixed E¤ ects + Controls
        Log GDP at PPP                               1.23***               .00               .19
                                                    (.64,1.9)          (-.69,.42)        (-.36,.66)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates                -.23             .99***            .80***
                                                    (-.99,.35)         (.57,1.6)         (.33,1.3)
        Number of Obs.                                 1422               1120              589
        Number of Clusters                              75                 75                75

Table IIB presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP
at PPP and log GDP at market exchange rates as described in Section 4. Country block-bootstrapped 95%
con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on
measures of log GDP at PPP and at market exchange rates are from the World Development Indicators. The
covariates are described in Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with full information
on covariates, and with the country’s PWT 9.0 GDP per capita at 2011 PPP below the median of its
distribution.




                                                     36
                                                 Table III                                               (III)


          Comparing PPP and Market Exchange Rates: Countries in 1996 ICP Only
                       Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                          Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)
        PPP Vintage                               2011 PPP          1996 PPP           1996 PPP
        PPP Data Source                          WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007        PWT 6.1
        Mrkt Exchange Rates Data Source          WDI May 2014      WDI Nov 2007       WDI Apr 2005
                                              No Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                         1.03***                   .90***           .81***
                                              (.80,1.2)                (.55,1.2)        (.53,1.04)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates         -.03                      .09              .18
                                             (-.25,.19)                (-.21,.44)       (-.04,.46)
        Number of Obs.                          1782                      1439             801
        Number of Clusters                       94                        97               97
                                       Year Fixed E¤ ects
        Log GDP at PPP                         1.03***            .90***                  .80***
                                              (.80,1.2)         (.55,1.2)               (.52,1.03)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates          -.03              .09                     .19
                                              (-.26,.19)        (-.21,.44)              (-.03,.47)
        Number of Obs.                           1782              1439                    801
        Number of Clusters                        94                97                      97
                                  Year Fixed E¤ ects + Controls
        Log GDP at PPP                                1.41***              .61              .84**
                                                     (1.1,1.7)         (-.18,1.2)        (.38,1.2)
        Log GDP at Market Exchange Rates              -.41***              .38                .15
                                                    (-.70,-.17)        (-.25,1.1)        (-.22,.61)
        Number of Obs.                                 1782               1439               801
        Number of Clusters                               94                97                97

Table III presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP
at PPP and log GDP at market exchange rates as described in Section 4. Country block-bootstrapped 95%
con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on
measures of log GDP at PPP and at market exchange rates are from the World Development Indicators. The
covariates are described in Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with full information
on covariates, and with direct (not model-based) price data from the 1996 ICP.




                                                     37
                                                  Table IV                                                        (IV)


            Comparing Successive PPPs: Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                           Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                  (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
       New PPP                      2005 PPP                       2011 PPP                  2011 PPP
       Old PPP                      1996 PPP                       1996 PPP                  2005 PPP
       New PPP Data              WDI Apr 2008                   WDI May 2014              WDI May 2014
       Old PPP Data              WDI Nov 2007                   WDI Nov 2007              WDI Apr 2014
       Speci…cation            Baseline    LCU                Baseline    LCU           Baseline    LCU
                                          Control                        Control                   Control
                                              No Fixed E¤ ects
       New PPP                  1.43***       1.45***    1.19***            1.11***       .98***       .88***
                               (1.1,1.7)     (1.1,1.7)  (.94,1.4)          (.93,1.3)    (.35,1.4)    (.29,1.2)
       Old PPP                  -.43***       -.45***      -.19*               -.11         .01          .11
                              (-.79,-.12)   (-.76,-.14) (-.48,.05)         (-.35,.06)   (-.46,.64)   (-.23,.70)
       Number of Obs.            2043          2043        2026               2026         2615         2615
       Number of Clusters         137           137        137                137          138          138
                                              Year Fixed E¤ ects
       New PPP                  1.42***      1.44***      1.19***    1.10***              .97***       .88***
                               (1.1,1.7)    (1.1,1.7)    (.93,1.4)  (.92,1.3)           (.34,1.4)    (.29,1.2)
       Old PPP                  -.42***       -.44**       -.19*       -.10                 .02          .11
                              (-.78,-.11) (-.75,-.13) (-.48,.06) (-.35,.07)             (-.46,.65)   (-.22,.70)
       Number of Obs.            2043         2043         2026       2026                 2615         2615
       Number of Clusters         137          137          137        137                 138          138
                                        Year Fixed E¤ ects + Controls
       New PPP                  1.18***      1.27***           1.10***      1.14***      1.33***      1.11***
                               (.81,1.5)    (.92,1.7)         (.83,1.5)    (.89,1.5)    (.72,1.8)    (.58,1.6)
       Old PPP                     -.18         -.27              -.10         -.14         -.33         -.11
                               (-.57,.18)   (-.71,.07)        (-.51,.16)   (-.58,.10)   (-.88,.27)   (-.67,.41)
       Number of Obs.             2043         2043              2026         2026         2615         2615
       Number of Clusters         137           137              137          137          138          138

    Table IV presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log
GDP at PPP from di¤erent vintages of the WDI as described in Section 5. Columns 2, 4, and 6 include
log GDP at local currency from the di¤erent vintages of the WDI as controls in all speci…cations. Country
block-bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights
from the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP at PPP and at local currency are from the World Development
Indicators. The covariates are described in Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with
full information on covariates.




                                                         38
                                                   Table V                                               (V)

                    Comparing Successive PPPs: Countries in 1996 ICP Only
                          Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                             Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                             (1)                  (2)             (3)
                 New PPP                2005 PPP              2011 PPP       2011 PPP
                 Old PPP                1996 PPP              1996 PPP       2005 PPP
                 New PPP Data          WDI Apr 2008          WDI May 2014   WDI May 2014
                 Old PPP Data          WDI Nov 2007          WDI Nov 2007   WDI Apr 2014
                                              No Fixed E¤ ects
                 New PPP                    1.52***           1.18***             .84**
                                           (.98,2.0)         (.83,1.5)         (.20,1.4)
                 Old PPP                     -.52*              -.18               .15
                                          (-1.08,.01)       (-.58,.16)         (-.47,.79)
                 Number of Obs.              1403              1401               1763
                 Number of Clusters           94                95                 93
                                             Year Fixed E¤ ects
                 New PPP                1.52***                 1.18***           .84**
                                       (.99,2.0)               (.83,1.5)       (.20,1.4)
                 Old PPP                 -.52*                     -.18            .15
                                      (-1.08,.00)              (-.57,.16)      (-.47,.79)
                 Number of Obs.          1403                     1401            1763
                 Number of Clusters       94                       95              93
                                    Year Fixed E¤ ects +       Controls
                 New PPP                    1.42***             1.13***           .87**
                                           (.92,2.0)           (.64,1.6)       (.08,1.5)
                 Old PPP                     -.42*                 -.13            .12
                                          (-1.08,.07)          (-.62,.35)      (-.56,.91)
                 Number of Obs.              1403                 1401            1763
                 Number of Clusters           94                   95              93
Table IV presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP
at PPP from di¤erent vintages of the WDI as described in Section 5. Columns 2, 4, and 6 include log GDP
at local currency from the di¤erent vintages of the WDI as controls in all speci…cations. Country block-
bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights from
the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP at PPP and at local currency are from the World Development
Indicators. The covariates are described in Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with
full information on covariates and with available price data in the 1996 ICP.




                                                        39
                                                  Table VI                                           (VI)

                        Comparing Underlying National Accounts in WDI
                           Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                              Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                            (1)                 (2)             (3)
                PPP                    1996 PPP             2005 PPP       2011 PPP
                New NA                WDI Nov 2007         WDI Apr 2014   WDI May 2017
                Old NA                WDI Apr 2005         WDI Apr 2008   WDI May 2014
                                            No Fixed E¤ ects
                New NA                        .17              -.34             -1.00
                                         (-1.6,1.4)        (-1.2,.54)        (-2.1,.28)
                Old NA                        .82            1.34***          2.00***
                                         (-.48,2.6)         (.45,2.2)        (.71,3.1)
                Number of Obs.              1631              2076             2597
                Number of Clusters           138               140              138
                                            Year Fixed E¤ ects
                New NA                    .18                   -.32            -.99
                                      (-1.6,1.4)             (-1.1,.54)      (-2.0,.29)
                Old NA                    .81                 1.32***         1.99***
                                      (-.48,2.6)             (.45,2.1)       (.70,3.0)
                Number of Obs.           1631                  2076            2597
                Number of Clusters       138                    140             138
                                   Year Fixed E¤ ects +      Controls
                New NA                      -1.22                 .03           -.53
                                         (-4.0,.55)          (-.90,.83)      (-1.8,.99)
                Old NA                    2.22***               .96**          1.53**
                                         (.44,5.0)           (.16,1.9)       (.00,2.8)
                Number of Obs.             1631                 2076           2597
                Number of Clusters          138                  140            138
Table VI presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP
at PPP from di¤erent vintages of the WDI as described in Section 5. Country block-bootstrapped 95%
con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on
measures of log GDP at PPP are from the World Development Indicators. The covariates are described in
Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with full information on covariates.




                                                      40
                                                  Table VII                                                   (VII)


                    Multiple Benchmark vs. Most Recent PPP Series in PWT
                            Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                               Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
     PWT Vintage                           PWT 9.0                                      PWT 8.0
     Speci…cation                 Baseline   Inter      Median             Baseline       Inter      Median
                                            Polated       Reg                            Polated      Reg
                                           No Fixed E¤ ects
     Multiple Benchmark GDP           .00            .08       -.08             .23         -.11         -.02
                                  (-.27,.34)    (-.28,.46) (-.37,.23)      (-.32,.84)   (-.58,.39)   (-.58,.59)
     GDP at Most Recent PPP         .99***         .91***    1.08***          .76**      1.11***       1.02**
                                  (.65,1.2)      (.53,1.2)  (.76,1.3)      (.15,1.3)    (.60,1.5)    (.40,1.5)
     Number of Obs.                  2717           1943      2717            2660         1940         2660
     Number of Clusters              143            143        143             140         140           140
                                               Year Fixed E¤ ects
     Multiple Benchmark GDP           .03         .13        -.05        .23                -.13         -.01
                                  (-.23,.37) (-.22,.49) (-.33,.24) (-.32,.83)           (-.56,.31)   (-.57,.55)
     GDP at Most Recent PPP         .96***      .86***     1.05***     .76**             1.13***       1.01**
                                  (.62,1.2)   (.50,1.2)   (.75,1.3)  (.16,1.3)          (.68,1.5)    (.44,1.5)
     Number of Obs.                  2717        1943       2717       2660                1940         2660
     Number of Clusters              143         143         143        140                140           140
                                       Year Fixed E¤ ects + Controls
     Multiple Benchmark GDP           -.06          .03           -.15         -.03         -.20         -.20
                                  (-.39,.22)    (-.35,.37)    (-.43,.20)   (-.42,.70)   (-.51,.22)   (-.55,.49)
     GDP at Most Recent PPP        1.06***        .96***       1.15***      1.03***      1.20***       1.20**
                                  (.77,1.3)     (.62,1.3)     (.79,1.4)    (.29,1.4)    (.77,1.5)    (.50,1.5)
     Number of Obs.                  2717          1943          2717         2660         1940         2660
     Number of Clusters              143           143            143         140          140           140

Table VII presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP
at latest PPP and log GDP at the multiple benchmark PPP as described in Section 6. Country block-
bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights from
the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP are from the Penn World Tables. The covariates are described
in Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with full information on covariates. The
interpolated speci…cations (columns 2 and 5) include only years that lie between two price surveys for a
country. The median regression speci…cations (columns 3 and 6) use median regression in lieu of OLS to
reduce the in‡uence of outliers.




                                                         41
                                               Table VIII                                           (VIII)

                                      Multiple Benchmark vs.
                                 Most Recent PPP Series in PWT
                                    Countries in 1996 ICP Only
                             Lights Regression-Based Optimal Weights
                                Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
                                                            (1)          (2)
                            PWT Vintage                  PWT 9.0      PWT 8.0
                                             No Fixed E¤ ects
                            Multiple Benchmark GDP          .06           -.34
                                                       (-.30,.46)     (-.69,.07)
                            GDP at Most Recent PPP        .93***       1.34***
                                                        (.53,1.3)     (.92,1.6)
                            Number of Obs.                 1843          1843
                            Number of Clusters              97            97
                                           Year Fixed E¤ ects
                            Multiple Benchmark GDP         .08       -.36*
                                                       (-.28,.45) (-.73,.06)
                            GDP at Most Recent PPP       .91***    1.36***
                                                       (.54,1.2)  (.93,1.7)
                            Number of Obs.                1843       1843
                            Number of Clusters             97         97
                                    Year Fixed E¤ ects + Controls
                            Multiple Benchmark GDP           .04          -.22
                                                         (-.26,.44)   (-.61,.24)
                            GDP at Most Recent PPP         .95***      1.22***
                                                         (.55,1.2)    (.75,1.6)
                            Number of Obs.                  1843         1843
                            Number of Clusters               97           97
Table VII presents estimates of the optimal weights from the regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP
at latest PPP and log GDP at the multiple benchmark PPP as described in Section 6. Country block-
bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals for the weights are in parentheses. Data on nighttime lights from
the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP are from the Penn World Tables. The covariates are described in
Section 2.4. The sample comprises of all countries and years with full information on covariates and with
available price data in 1996 ICP.




                                                    42
Figures

   Figure 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (1)
                                                    Scatter of Log Lights on Log GDP at MAR                                                                                Scatter of Log Lights on Log GDP at 2011 PPP
                                 35                                                                                                                         35




                                                                                                                                                            30
         Log Aggregate Lights




                                                                                                                                    Log Aggregate Lights
                                 30


                                                                                                                                                            25

                                 25

                                                                                                                                                            20


                                 20
                                                                                                                                                            15
                                      15                      20                           25                  30                                                 15                  20                     25               30
                                                                          Log GDP at MAR                                                                                                   Log GDP at 2011 PPP
    1)                                                                                                                       2)
                                            Scatter of Log Lights on Log GDP at MAR, Partial Relation                                                              Scatter of Log Lights on Log GDP at 2011 PPP, Partial Relation
                                                                                                                                                            4
                                 2



                                 1                                                                                                                          2
         Log Lights, Residuals




                                                                                                                                    Log Lights, Residuals
                                 0
                                                                                                                                                            0

                                 -1

                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                 -2



                                 -3                                                                                                                         -4
                                       -1            -.5         0            .5            1                   1.5                                              -1.5        -1         -.5          0            .5          1
                                                    Log GDP, Market Exchange Rates, Residuals                                                                                      Log GDP at 2011 PPP, Residuals
    3)                                                                                                                       4)


                                                      Figure 2                                                                                                                                                                      (2)

                                                                      Weight on PPP-adjusted GDP relative to GDP at Market Exchange Rates by WDI Release
                                                                                                                         All Countries
                                                                    1.5
                                                                    1
                                                           Weight
                                                                    .5
                                                                    0




                                                                     2004m1         2006m1        2008m1       2010m1 2012m1                                            2014m1    2016m1          2018m1
                                                                                                                    date

                                                                                                         Weight                                             95% Upper Bound
                                                                           Vertical lines indicate time of introduction of 2005 PPP and 2011 PPP respectively




                                                                                                                    43
  Figure 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (3)
                                       Weight on PPP-adjusted GDP relative to GDP at Market Exchange Rates by WDI Release                                              Weight on PPP-adjusted GDP relative to GDP at Market Exchange Rates by WDI Release
                                                                      Countries Above Median GDP per Capita in 1992                                                                                         Countries Below Median GDP per Capita in 1992
                                    1.8




                                                                                                                                                        2
                                    1.6




                                                                                                                                                        1.5
                                      1.4




                                                                                                                                                           1
                                  Weight




                                                                                                                                                      Weight
                                1.2




                                                                                                                                                     .5
                                    1




                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                        -.5
                                    .8




                                      2004m1          2006m1         2008m1     2010m1 2012m1               2014m1       2016m1       2018m1                    2004m1                     2006m1        2008m1        2010m1 2012m1              2014m1     2016m1   2018m1
                                                                                     date                                                                                                                                   date

                                                                          Weight                   95% Upper Bound                                                                                                 Weight                95% Upper Bound
                                            Vertical lines indicate time of introduction of 2005 PPP and 2011 PPP respectively                                                  Vertical lines indicate time of introduction of 2005 PPP and 2011 PPP respectively

  1)                                                                                                                                           2)



Figure 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (4)
                                            Scatter of Log Lights on Log GDP at 2011 PPP, Partial Relation                                                                             Scatter of Log Lights on Log GDP at 2005 PPP, Partial Relation
                                  2                                                                                                                                             2


                                  1                                                                                                                                             1
       Log Lights , Residuals




                                                                                                                                                        Log Lights, Residuals




                                  0                                                                                                                                             0


                                 -1                                                                                                                                             -1


                                 -2                                                                                                                                             -2


                                 -3                                                                                                                                             -3
                                                -.5                             0                                                .5                                                           -.5                             0                                        .5
                                                              Log GDP at 2011 PPP (05/2014), Residuals                                                                                                    Log GDP at 2005 PPP (04/2014), Residuals
                                        Regression line is y=.93*x                                                                                                                   Regression line is y=.10*x

 1)                                                                                                                                             2)
                                            Scatter of Log Lights on Log GDP at 2005 PPP, Partial Relation                                                                             Scatter of Log Lights on Log GDP at 1996 PPP, Partial Relation
                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                  2

                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                  1
       Log Lights, Residuals




                                                                                                                                                        Log Lights, Residuals




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                  0

                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                 -1

                                                                                                                                                                                -2

                                 -2
                                                                                                                                                                                -3
                                        -1                      -.5             0                 .5                                  1                                              -1                     -.5             0                 .5                            1
                                                              Log GDP at 2005 PPP (04/2008), Residuals                                                                                                    Log GDP at 1996 PPP (11/2007), Residuals
                                        Regression line is y=1.45*x                                                                                                                  Regression line is y=-.42*x

 3)                                                                                                                                             4)




                                                                                                                                       44
                                                         Figure 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (5)

                                                                                                              Changes in Significance of Optimal Weight on Successor Vintage in WDI




                                                                -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                                                Test Statistic




                                                                                            2004m1                 2006m1       2008m1       2010m1 2012m1                                              2014m1             2016m1            2018m1
                                                                                                                                                  date
                                                                                                        Vertical lines indicate time of introduction of 2005 PPP and 2011 PPP respectively




     Figure 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (6)
                                                    Optimal Weights by Year for 2000 to 2005 PPP Transition                                                                                                   Optimal Weights by Year for 2005 to 2011 PPP Transition
                                                                  Dep. Var. is Log Light Intensity                                                                                                                        Dep. Var. is Log Light Intensity
                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
           1.6                 1.8




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
      Weight




                                                                                                                                                                                Weight
      1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                               1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                               1




                                     1990                           1995                                            2000                 2005                                                  1990                  1995                   2000            2005               2010
                                                                                                            year                                                                                                                            year

                                                          Weight on 2005 PPP                                               95% Upper Bound                                                                          Weight on 2011 PPP                  95% Upper Bound
                                      Vertical lines indicate 1996 and 2005 ICP                                                                                                                 Vertical lines indicate 1996 and 2005 ICP

1)                                                                                                                                                   2)



     Figure 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (7)
                                                            Scatter of Lights on PWT 9.0 NA, Partial Relation                                                                                      Scatter of Lights on PWT 9.0 Multiple Benchmark GDP, Partial Relation
                                4                                                                                                                                              2



                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                2
       Log Lights, Residuals




                                                                                                                                                       Log Lights, Residuals




                                                                                                                                                                               0

                                0

                                                                                                                                                                               -1


                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2



                               -4                                                                                                                                              -3
                                      -2                     -1                0                 1                                              2                                        -2                  -1                0               1                           2
                                                                  Log GDP, PWT 9.0 NA, Residuals                                                                                                      Log GDP, PWT 9.0 Multiple Benchmark GDP, Residuals




                                                                                                                                                45
     Figure 8                                                                                                                                                                                      (8)
                  Optimal Weights by Year for PWT 9.0 2011 PPP vs. Multiple Benchmark Series                      Optimal Weights by Year for PWT 8.0 Latest PPP vs. Multiple Benchmark Series
                                            Dep. Var. is Log Light Intensity                                                        Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity
         2




                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                          1
         1




                                                                                                            0
      Weight




                                                                                                       Weight
        0




                                                                                                      -1
         -1




                                                                                                          -2
         -2




                                                                                                          -3
               1990                   1995                     2000        2005           2010                  1990                  1995                   2000        2005               2010
                                                               year                                                                                          year

                                     Weight on 2011 PPP                 95% Upper Bound                                             Weight on Latest PPP              95% Upper Bound
                Vertical lines indicate coarse time periods in tables                                            Vertical lines indicate 1996 and 2005 ICP

1)                                                                                               2)




                                                                                           46
