                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         CONGESTION PRICING, AIR POLLUTION AND CHILDREN’S HEALTH

                                        Emilia Simeonova
                                          Janet Currie
                                          Peter Nilsson
                                          Reed Walker

                                       Working Paper 24410
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24410


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 2018, Revised September 2019




We would like to thank Nicholas Sanders and participants at the 2017 AEA meetings, as well as
seminar participants at Karolinska Institute, Uppsala University, the Institute for International
Economic Studies, University of Oslo, University of Bergen, University of Umea, and the
Stockholm School of Economics. We are grateful to three anonymous referees for helpful
comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Swedish Research Council.
Jenny Jans provided invaluable help as a research assistant for this project. The data used in this
study are confidential and protected by Swedish privacy laws. They cannot be accessed by
anyone not approved under the original data agreement signed by the authors. The data can be
purchased from Statistics Sweden, the Swedish National Board for Health and Welfare, and the
Swedish Tax registry after the appropriate ethics and privacy board approvals have been secured
from these agencies. Dr. Simeonova and Nilsson are willing to assist those interested in
purchasing registry data. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest to disclose. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Emilia Simeonova, Janet Currie, Peter Nilsson, and Reed Walker. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Congestion Pricing, Air Pollution and Children’s Health
Emilia Simeonova, Janet Currie, Peter Nilsson, and Reed Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 24410
March 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. H23,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

This study examines the effects of a congestion tax in central Stockholm on ambient air pollution
and the health of local children. We demonstrate that the tax reduced ambient air pollution by 5–
15 percent and the rate of acute asthma attacks among young children. We do not see
corresponding changes in accidents or hospitalizations for nonrespiratory conditions. As the
change in health was more gradual than the change in pollution, it may take time for the full
health effects of changes in pollution to materialize if the mechanism is pollution. Hence, short-
run estimates of pollution reduction programs may understate long-run health benefits.


Emilia Simeonova                                Peter Nilsson
JHU Carey School of Business                    Assistant Professor
100 International Drive                         IIES, Stockholm University
Baltimore, MD 21202                             peter.nilsson(a)iies.su.se
and NBER                                        nilssonjanpeter@gmail.com
emilia.simeonova@gmail.com
                                                Reed Walker
Janet Currie                                    Haas School of Business
Department of Economics                         University of California, Berkeley
Center for Health and Wellbeing                 2220 Piedmont Ave
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building             Berkeley, CA 94720
Princeton University                            and NBER
Princeton, NJ 08544                             rwalker@haas.berkeley.edu
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
    I.       Inroduction

         Economists have long recognized the negative externalities associated with traffic

congestion and have suggested congestion pricing as a possible solution (Vickrey 1969).

Typically, research and policy making surrounding congestion pricing has been concerned with

time lost commuting, fuel costs, and business activity (Leape 2006). 1 Recent research suggests

that congestion also significantly contributes to local air pollution levels and negatively impacts

the health and well-being of nearby residents (see for example, Currie and Walker, 2011; Knittel,

Miller, and Sanders 2016).

         As traffic congestion in cities has increased, rates of respiratory illnesses such as asthma

have risen (Centers for Disease Control 2011). Asthma is now the leading cause of

hospitalization among children in the United States. The increase in asthma rates is most

pronounced amongst individuals of low socioeconomic status, who disproportionately live in

densely populated areas with severe traffic congestion. The highest rates of asthma in the United

States are in the Bronx, New York (Garg et al. 2003). This area of New York City is bisected by

five major highways that rank among the most congested in the United States (Bruner 2009).

With both traffic congestion and children’s asthma rates trending upward in recent years, it is

plausible that the two are causally related.

         This study is the first to examine the link between congestion pricing and inpatient and

outpatient visits for child asthma. We use data from Stockholm, Sweden. Since August 2007,

Stockholm has levied charges on most vehicles entering the city center. The charge was

permanently implemented after a seven-month trial period between January and July 2006. 2 We


1
  Travel delays and extra fuel consumption cost the United States an estimated $70 billion each year (Schrank and
Lomax 2007). An urban motorist lost an estimated 62 hours to congestion during peak hours in 2000.
2
  See Eliasson (2017) for a survey of the effects of congestion pricing, including several studies of Stockholm’s
experience. Anas and Lindsey (2011) also offer an overview of this literature.

                                                                                                                    2
combine the variation in congestion fees with data on ambient air pollution and administrative

data on all inpatient and outpatient health visits. As a counterfactual for what would have

happened in the absence of a congestion fee program, we compare outcomes within the

Stockholm city center to outcomes in other city centers within Sweden that did not implement

congestion pricing.

        Consistent with studies of congestion pricing in other locales, we show that congestion

pricing in Stockholm reduced pollution from automobiles significantly. 3 Nitrogen dioxide

(NO2) and particulate matter (PM10) levels fell by 15– 20 and 10–15 percent relative to pre

congestion pricing levels, respectively. For this period, there are no reliable data on changes in

other pollutants from cars, such as PM2.5, but because PM2.5 is formed through combustion or

atmospheric reactions to traffic pollution, it is likely that the concentration of fine particles also

decreased.

        This policy-induced reduction in air pollution levels accompanied significant reductions

in the incidence of childhood asthma in Stockholm in the months and years after the program

was implemented. We estimate that during the trial, the rate of acute asthma visits fell by 16

percent. After congestion pricing became permanent, the rate fell by about 50 percent relative to

rates in the precongestion pricing period.

        Investigating the link between congestion pricing and children’s health is important for

several reasons. First, although congestion pricing has been evaluated largely in the context of its

effects on traffic and commuting times, it may also have significant benefits in terms of health,




3
 Wolff (2014) and Gibson and Carnovale (2015) examine the effects of congestion pricing on pollution in Germany
and in Milan, respectively. Other studies such as Danel and Bekka (2000) simulate the potential effects of
congestion pricing on pollution.

                                                                                                              3
and it is important to quantify those benefits. 4 More generally, a large body of literature has

investigated the effects of pollution on child mortality (see Almond, Currie, and Duque (2018)

for a review), but less attention has been paid to child morbidity, which is arguably a more

common and sensitive indicator.

         Second, because a trial period preceded the permanent Stockholm congestion pricing

zone (CPZ) program, the program offers a unique opportunity to assess both the immediate

effects of a drop in pollution and the somewhat longer-term effects. As health is a stock, it

would not be surprising if the longer-term effects, which allow for adjustment of the underlying

health stock, are larger than the shorter-term effects. Simply put, if a child never develops asthma

at all, then he or she will be less susceptible to asthma attacks. However, there is limited

empirical evidence documenting whether and to what extent short-run changes in pollution have

different effects in the short and long runs.

         Third, the Stockholm congestion pricing program took place in a context with low

ambient pollution levels, even by the standards of other developed countries. Hence, it offers

insight into whether pollution levels that are well below current U.S. regulatory standards can

have negative effects on children’s health and if so, whether those effects can be mitigated

through measures such as congestion pricing.

         Although we show that congestion pricing in central Stockholm reduced both pollution

and children’s asthma attacks, it is less clear whether the reduction in pollution caused all of the

reduction in asthma. Congestion pricing could have encouraged outdoor play, walking, or even




4
  Johansson et al. (2009) examine the effect of Stockholm’s program on PM10 and NO2 and then use estimates from
the literature to estimate the likely health effects. One study that looks at health effects directly is Green et al.
(2016) who examine the effect of London’s congestion pricing policy on accidents.

                                                                                                                   4
reduced stress in the affected zone relative to other parts of Stockholm. 5 It also could have

impacted the demographics of people in the central city. We show that congestion pricing had

little impact on acute care visits for non-respiratory conditions and that demographics did not

change in a way that was likely to reduce asthma rates. Our work is limited by the fact that we

are unable to compare people in central Stockholm to people in other parts of Stockholm as most

pollution monitors were clustered in the central area that became the congestion pricing zone

(CPZ).

         The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. The next section reviews the institutional

framework of the congestion pricing experiment and permanent implementation as well as the

relevant prior literature. In the third section we describe the data. Section 4 presents the empirical

framework, and Section 5 shows the estimation results. Section 6 concludes.



II. Background

         The purpose of the Stockholm CPZ was to reduce congestion by reducing traffic entering

the central city. The CPZ tax goes up to $2.60 USD per vehicle, depending on the time of the

day. There are no charges at night, on weekends, on public holidays, or during July. The toll is

collected automatically as cars cross the perimeter of the congestion zone, using license plate

scanning technology.

         The tax started with a seven-month trial period called the Stockholm Congestion Trials

(Stockholmsförsöket). The trial period ran from January 3, 2006 through July 31, 2006.

Government estimates suggested that inner-city traffic was reduced by around 20–25 percent


5
  The effects can be quite pervasive. For example, Daunfeldt et al. (2009) examine the effects on retail sales in the
CPZ. If we thought that the only effects were through pollution reduction, then we could use the policy as an
instrument for pollution to identify its effects on asthma. But given the possibility of other effects, we focus on
reduced-form estimates of the effects of congestion pricing on health.

                                                                                                                        5
during the trial (Stockholmsförsöket, 2006b). Based on the success of the trial program, the

Swedish government decided to make the program permanent. 6 The tolls were imposed again

starting August 1, 2007, and have been collected ever since.

        Automobile exhaust contains carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, particulate matter, and

other harmful pollutants. In urban areas, motor vehicle emissions are the leading cause of

ambient air pollution. The medical literature shows that particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5)

affects lung growth and lung function in children (Gauderman et al. 2000; Yu et al. 2000; Hoek

et al. 2000), and the biological channels are well-understood. Exposure to nitrogen dioxide

(NO2) also worsens asthma symptoms and is associated with inferior respiratory health (Lipsett

et al. 1997; Shima et al. 2000).

        Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways. In susceptible individuals, this

inflammation causes recurrent episodes of wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness, and

coughing. These episodes are usually associated with widespread but variable airflow

obstruction. The inflammation also causes bronchial hyperresponsiveness to a variety of stimuli.

After the removal of an initial stimulus, the airflow limitation may not be fully reversible. Stated

differently, once a child has asthma, it is harder to return to baseline functioning even after the

removal of triggers, like allergens. The onset of asthma in childhood is associated with

significant, permanent deficits in lung growth. Therefore, if asthma can be avoided, the child’s

lung growth and health will be better than it would have been in the presence of asthma. 7

        Previous research asking how air pollution affects children’s respiratory health has

generally focused on the impacts of short-term variations in air pollution that last between


6
  Although the county held a referendum on the issues, and the vote was overwhelmingly negative except inside the
CPZ, the government decided to proceed nevertheless.
7
  The discussion in this section is based on the U.S. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Third
Expert Panel on the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma (2007)

                                                                                                                6
several hours and a few days (Friedman et al. 2001; Neidell, 2004; Neidell and Moretti, 2011;

Schlenker and Walker, 2016; Jans et al. 2016). For example, Schlenker and Walker (2016) use

variation in daily airport congestion rates as a cause of increased carbon monoxide emissions that

are then linked to hospital admissions for respiratory conditions. Bauernschuster et al. (2015)

show that on days that German public transport workers are on strike, there is increased pollution

due to heavier car traffic into major cities, as well as increased rates of hospitalizations for

respiratory conditions among the elderly and children younger than five. Friedman et al. (2001)

show how changes in transportation and commuting behaviors during the 1996 Atlanta Olympics

affected both air quality and childhood asthma. Each of these studies relies on high-frequency

short-term (day-to-day) variation in pollution levels to isolate congestion effects on health. In

contrast, we examine both the effect of a six-month reduction in air pollution (during the

congestion pricing trial) and the effects of the later longer-term reduction in pollution after the
                                                       8
congestion tax was permanently implemented.

        The mechanisms through which children are affected by traffic-generated pollution may

differ from those in adults: children spend more time outdoors and engage in more physical

activity. Furthermore, lung development continues post-natally until the adolescent years and is

susceptible to negative environmental shocks (Pinkerton et al. 2000; Dietert et al. 2000).

Children, and young children in particular, may find it harder to control asthma and thus present

with acute symptoms more often. For all these reasons, standards for air pollution that adequately

protect adults may not adequately protect children.




8
 The most closely related study regarding the effect of permanent congestion pricing may be Currie and Walker
(2011), which examines the effect of implementing Electronic Toll Collection technology on air pollution and infant
health near highway toll plazas. The study, however, only was able to examine the effects of in-utero exposure, not
exposure after birth.

                                                                                                                 7
     There is considerable evidence in both the medical and epidemiology literature that both

the level of pollution and the length of exposure to it affect the severity of asthma. Avol et al.

(2001) show that children who relocated from areas with high air pollution to areas with lower

air pollution experienced improved lung functioning, with the effects being larger for children

who relocated three to five years prior compared to those who had moved within the previous

one to two years. Similarly, among individuals who had lived close to a major road in Los

Angeles for several years, there was a strong correlation between distance from the road and

asthma prevalence, but there was no correlation between distance and asthma prevalence among

people who had just moved to the neighborhood (McConnell et al. 2006).

       Crucially for our study, these studies suggest that it may take some time after an initial

change in pollution levels for a new equilibrium level of asthma to be reached. Because pollution

has a cumulative effect on asthma that is not immediately reversed, the effect of a short-run

decrease in pollution may be quite different than the longer-term effect of a permanent decrease

in pollution.

        The implementation of congestion pricing and the ensuing traffic reduction in central

Stockholm also may have affected children’s health in ways not directly related to reductions in

ambient pollution. For example, more time spent outside, more active lifestyles, or reductions in

stress levels could have beneficial effects on health. Because we are not able to directly examine

the relative contributions of different channels to the overall rate of asthma in the population, we

present our analysis as the reduced-form effect of implementing a CPZ on young children’s

asthma and investigate effects on other health conditions as well.



III. Data



                                                                                                     8
We use detailed data on the residential location and timing of all hospital inpatient and acute

(unplanned) outpatient visits among residents of inner-city Stockholm and 102 other Swedish

central cities between 2004 and 2010. The analysis focuses on all children aged zero through five

who resided in major Swedish municipalities that monitor ambient air pollution. We focus on

children aged five and younger because they are much more likely to have acute asthma episodes

compared to older children: their rate of acute asthma incidents is 19.060 per 10,000, compared

to 3.336 per 10,000 among children aged six to 18. 9 However, for comparison, we also show

estimates for children aged six to 18 in the Appendix. We also restrict our analysis to children

whose mothers were born in Sweden. We aggregate to the monthly level to avoid small-cell

sizes, because acute asthma attacks are relatively rare events.

         We use Geographic Information System (GIS) to determine whether the parents’

residence is inside or outside the CPZ in Stockholm. We drop observations for children who live

in the Stockholm region but outside the CPZ for two reasons. First, it is not clear whether and

how they were affected by the CPZ. Children who live outside the CPZ but close to a major

traffic artery leading into the inner city may have experienced a decrease in ambient pollution

levels. Alternatively, they may have experienced increased pollution levels if traffic was

diverted from the inner city to surrounding areas. More important, there is only one pollution

monitor in the Stockholm region but outside the CPZ, which impedes our ability to measure how

air pollution changed in different areas outside central Stockholm.

         We collected data on ambient air pollution from cities’ environmental agencies

(Miljöförvaltningen) for the period 2004–2010. The data are recorded by ambient air monitors



9
   This may be because asthma in older children is likely to be better controlled and therefore less likely to lead to an
acute attack. Moorman, Person, and Zahran (2013) estimate that in the United States, children aged zero to four are
1.9 times more likely to have an asthma attack, all other things being equal, than children aged 12 to 17.

                                                                                                                       9
located in these cities. In total, we have air pollution data from 103 Swedish municipalities,

including central Stockholm. We focus on how the congestion trial affected levels of nitrogen

dioxide (NO2) and PM10. 10 We choose these pollutants because automobiles account for a

disproportionate share of both particulate and nitrogen emissions and the monitor data is

sufficiently detailed to examine these pollutants.

        We aggregate the daily monitor data for each city to the monthly level. The first two

rows of Table 1 show the average levels and growth rates in NO2 and PM10 levels for central

Stockholm (inside CPZ) and all other central cities in the two years preceding the CPZ trial. The

levels of these two pollutants—33.32 and 33.28 micrograms per cubic meter, respectively—are

less than current EPA standards of 66.25 micrograms per cubic meter for NO2 and 50

micrograms per cubic meter for PM10. Hence, Table 1 shows that the pollution levels in

Stockholm were below current U.S. EPA standards for these pollutants even prior to the

implementation of congestion pricing. Our results therefore illustrate the health benefits of

reducing pollution levels below levels of ambient air pollution that are already relatively low.

        Column (5) of Table 1 presents p-values from a test of the null hypothesis that the levels

are the same inside Stockholm as in other central cities. Column (6) shows p-values from a test

of the null hypothesis that the pretrends in these pollutants are the same. These p-values are

based on permutation tests (Fisher 1935; Good, 2005; Dinardo and Lee 2011). These tests do not

depend on distributional assumptions, and in small samples (such as our 103 municipalities),

they are likely to yield more reliable p-values for differences between treatments and controls.

The permutation-based test assumes exchangeability of treatments and controls under the null.



10
  For current EPA standards, see: https://www3.epa.gov/region1/airquality/pm-aq-standards.html and
https://www.epa.gov/no2-pollution/fact-sheets-and-additional-information-regarding-2010-revision-primary-
national. Note that for NO2, one part per billion is equal to 1.25 micrograms per cubic meter.

                                                                                                            10
        To conduct the test, we assign treatment status to different Swedish cities and then

recalculate the differences in mean levels and in pretrends between the index city and all other

Swedish cities. The p-value corresponds to the percentile of the distribution where the observed

difference falls, relative to the other permutations. For example, if none of the permutation

differences exceeded the actual difference, then the p-value would be zero. In this group of 103

cities, if for 76 permutations, the difference was greater than the difference between Stockholm

and all other cities, then the p-value would be 0.738 (as it is in the first row of column 5 of Table

1). The results in the first two rows of columns (5) and (6) suggest there are no significant

differences in pollution pre-trends in the two years preceding the CPZ trial.


       Figure 1 shows the differences in PM10 and NO2 between the Stockholm CPZ and other

Swedish central cities in each month of the sample. The vertical lines indicate the “pre,” “trial,”

“in between,” and “permanent CPZ” periods. The figure presents the raw data, after taking out

month-of-year dummies to adjust for seasonality. We took means by month for both the inside

and outside group so as not to plot thousands of points (for example, bin scatter) and then plotted

the difference. We overlaid the means (that is, the flat lines) within each period. In total, we

have 72 months of data.


       For both PM10 and NO2, after the CPZ was made permanent, there is a relative reduction

in pollution during the trial period, a rebound in the “in-between” period, and a larger relative

reduction in Stockholm compared to other central cities.      Despite the finding in Table 1 that

there are no statistically significant pre-trends in the pollution levels, Figure 1 suggests that there

may be a pre-trend in NO2 levels. Hence, in Appendix Figure 1, we redo this figure using

linear and quadratic regression overlays for comparison. Both figures suggest however, that there



                                                                                                     11
is a real fall in NO2 associated with congestion pricing. Figure 1 also shows that there is one

large outlier for PM10 during the trial period. However, Appendix Figure 2 shows that

excluding this observation does not change our qualitative conclusion that there was a reduction

in PM10 during the trial.


       Health data were collected from the inpatient (Swedish National Patient Register

(Socialstyrelsen, 2009)) and outpatient registries. The inpatient register contains administrative

information such as date of admission, number of days in hospital care, as well as discharge

diagnoses classified according to the ninth and tenth versions of the International Classification

of Diseases (ICD). The National Patient Register records all hospital admissions that included an

overnight hospital stay whether or not it originated in the Emergency Room.

       The outpatient register contains information on all outpatient visits to primary care

providers and specialists including visits to Emergency Rooms that did not result in inpatient

admissions. The date of the visit and the primary ICD 9 (or ICD10) code identifying the main

reason for the visit are also provided. Importantly, the register records whether the visit was

planned (such as a routine yearly physical check-up) or urgent. Urgent outpatient visits are

same-day visits initiated at the request of the patient and usually concern an acute health problem

that would be treated as an emergency on an outpatient basis.

       To construct an acute asthma rate, we add the number of overnight hospital visits and the

unscheduled outpatient visits that record asthma as the primary reason for the visit. We then

calculate the cumulative number of acute asthma episodes for each calendar month among

children aged zero through five in the municipality and divide by the total number of resident

children.




                                                                                                     12
        Table 1 shows that at 18.7 cases per 10,000 children aged zero through five, the asthma

rate was higher in central Stockholm than in other central cities, and the rate was rising during

the pre-period in both Stockholm and in other central cities. The p-values shown in column (6)

show that there were, however, no significant differences in these trends between Stockholm and

other central cities.

        For comparison, we also examine visits for unintentional injuries (accidents) among

children aged zero through five. Unintentional injuries are one of the most common reasons for

children to seek medical attention, and they should not be mechanically related to air pollution

and/or asthma although the absence of cars from the inner city could reduce injuries from car

accidents. The baseline incidence of accidents was lower in Stockholm than in other central

cities. However, once again the p-values in Table 1 show that there was no difference in

pretrends in any of the health conditions considered.

        Table 1 also shows pretrends in several measures of the socioeconomic status of parents

as well as a measure of city size. Although the Stockholm CPZ is much larger, has higher per

capita income, more college graduates, and fewer people on social assistance than other Swedish

central cities, differences in the pre-trends in these variables are generally not statistically

significant.

        In all our regression results, we control for weather conditions that may affect the extent

of ambient air pollution independent of the congestion pricing policy. We use data from the

Swedish Meteorological Institute that come from weather stations in each municipality and are

considered high quality. The weather data from each station is linked to each city centroid using

the inverse distance weighted average of all weather monitors within 100 km of the municipal

center. This procedure places much more weight on monitors located at the city center than on



                                                                                                    13
monitors located far away so that the means are not sensitive to the exact cutoff for the inclusion

of monitors. Daily data on rain (mm), rain squared, mean temperature, temperature squared,

maximum temperature, minimum temperature, average wind speed, and maximum wind speed is

calculated for each weather monitor and then aggregated to the municipality by month level.



IV. Methods

          We first investigate the extent to which both the Stockholm congestion trial and the

eventual full implementation of the congestion fee affected ambient air pollution. Formally, we

estimate the following equation, which allows the effects of the trial, the “in-between” period,

and the period after the charges were made permanent to be distinguished:



       (1) Pollit = α + β1CPZi*Trialt + β2CPZi*InBetweent + β3CPZi*Permanentt + υi + µty

          Zitγ + ωWit + εit,


where Trial, InBetween, and Permanent are dummy variables equal to one during the relevant

periods. Pollution in municipality i in month t (𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) is regressed on a set of interactions,

where, for example, CPZi*Trialt is an indicator equal to one if the period is one in which the
11
     congestion trial is in effect. Equation (1) also includes fixed effects for month*year, µty, which

allows very flexibly for pollution trends in all central cities. For example, changes in cars or fuel

formulation could lead to such changes. All models also include municipal fixed effects, υi, to

allow for the fact that some municipalities may have higher or lower asthma rates for reasons

other than traffic congestion.




11


                                                                                                         14
       In addition, we estimate versions of Equation (1) with and without weather controls, Wit,

interactions of weather with municipality, interactions of weather with calendar month, and

region-specific time trends, Zit. There are twenty-five provinces in Sweden, ranging from the

southern tip, which is about the same geographic latitude as Denmark, to the northern regions

close to the Arctic circle. Weather may have independent effects on asthma rates, and it is

possible that the same weather conditions could have different effects in different places due to

variations in the availability of air conditioning or wood-burning, for example. Included weather

controls are total rainfall, mean temperatures, and mean wind speed during the month. In

practice, our results are all quite similar with and without these additional controls.

       The coefficients 𝛽𝛽1 and 𝛽𝛽3 measure the shorter- and longer-run effects of implementing

congestion pricing, and 𝛽𝛽2 measures whether the dependent variable returned to “baseline”

during the “in-between” period. Municipality fixed effects ensure that the identifying variation

comes from within-municipality changes in air pollution in periods with congestion pricing

versus periods without. The main identifying assumption is that even if the pollution levels were

different between Stockholm and other municipalities, the trends did not differ systematically for

reasons other than the implementation of congestion pricing. This assumption is the motivation

for testing for differing pre-trends in pollution, as was discussed above. Because the issue of

differential trends is potentially important, our regressions include both region-specific time

trends and interactions between municipality and weather controls and calendar month and

weather controls. These latter interactions allow for the fact that the same weather patterns

could have different impacts on pollution levels in different cities and across different calendar

months. Appendix Table 5 demonstrates that the results are not sensitive to including weather

interactions with municipality and calendar month.



                                                                                                     15
        We examine asthma rates and other health outcomes using the following model:

    (2) Asthmait = α + β1CPZi*Trialt + β2CPZi*InBetweent + β3CPZi*Permanentt + Xitδ + υi + µty

        Zitγ + ωWit + εit,


which takes much the same form as Equation (1) except that it uses measures of asthma rates at

the municipality and month level as the dependent variable and includes a vector Xit of time-

varying municipality-level demographic characteristics. These characteristics include: average

family income in municipality j in month t, the proportion of mothers on social support, and the

proportion of mothers with a college degree.

        The key identifying assumption is that there would have been parallel trends in pollution

and in asthma in the absence of the CPZ. We provide some evidence in support of this

assumption by examining pretrends in Table 1 and graphically representing the difference in

pollution levels in the CPZ and other cities in Figure 1, as discussed above.

        As a robustness check, we also model asthma rates using all of the data except that

collected in central Stockholm while congestion pricing was in effect, and then ask whether the

predicted asthma rates from this model change after the CPZ was implemented. This test

assesses the degree to which underlying demographics and other observables changed in

Stockholm in a way that would predict changes in asthma rates during the CPZ period. Finally,

as a comparison, we also examine the effects of the CPZ on visits for childhood unintentional

injuries (accidents), and for all other acute visits (that is, those that are not related to respiratory

or unintentional injury diagnoses). We expect that if the effects of the CPZ on asthma are coming

mainly through pollution, then the implementation of congestion pricing should have small or

nonexistent effects on these other classes of diagnoses.




                                                                                                       16
       As discussed above, an important issue is whether the short- and longer-term effects of

congestion pricing vary for young children. A child who never develops asthma in the first place

will be less likely to have asthma attacks than one who already has developed asthma. Moreover,

given the timing of the trial and the permanent implementation of congestion pricing, children

who were between ages zero and five at some point during those intervals could have had very

different experiences with congestion pricing. For example, a Stockholm child who was three

years old in January 2006, might have already developed asthma and might then have

experienced mild relief as a result of the January to July 2006 trial period. A Stockholm child

who was three years old in August 2010 would have lived his or her entire life under congestion

pricing and may have been able to avoid ever developing asthma.

       To make an apples-to-apples comparison, we offer an additional analysis that focuses on

children six months old and younger and excludes the first six months of the “in-between”

period. In this way, we can ensure that children were affected at similar ages by the trial and by

the permanent implementation of congestion pricing, and that children’s health outcomes

measured during the in-between period did not receive the benefit of congestion pricing at all.

Unfortunately, given the design of the implementation, it is not possible to do the same

experiment (that is, to find an “in-between” group unaffected by congestion pricing) for older

children.

       All regressions involving health data are estimated by weighted least squares using the

number of children of the respective age group residing in the municipality as weights. The

results are not sensitive to weighting however.



V. Results



                                                                                                  17
A. Congestion Pricing and Pollution Levels

       Table 2 presents estimates for effects of the CPZ on levels of PM10 and NO2. We show

analytical standard errors in parentheses, clustered by municipality, and we present two sets of p-

values: p-values that correspond to the analytical standard errors, which are shown in curvy

brackets, and our preferred permutation-based p-values, which are shown in square brackets for

all estimates that are statistically significant at conventional levels. The permutation-based

values are based on 500 simulations in which the type of CPZ “treatment” (trial, in between, or

permanent) is randomly assigned across municipalities semi-annually, so that the permuted cells

represent each municipality in each six-month period during the observation window (see for

example, Cesarini et al (2016)). For each outcome and each permuted sample, we estimate

Equation (1). We then examine the fraction of the times that the coefficient estimate exceeds the

estimated value when the CPZ is correctly assigned to Stockholm.

       The estimates are consistent with Figure 1 in that they suggest that both PM10 and NO2

declined during the trial, rebounded somewhat during the in-between period, and settled at a new

lower level similar to that seen during the trial when the CPZ became permanent. Specifications

with and without controls for location-specific weather and region-specific seasonality are quite

similar to each other, in terms of the estimated effects of permanent pollution reductions. The

estimated effects of the congestion pricing trial become somewhat larger when controls are

added, as do the estimated effect of the in-between period. Although we cannot completely rule

out the hypothesis that PM10 and NO2 levels reverted to the pretrial levels during the in-between

period, there is some evidence that on average, they remained at somewhat lower levels. This

inference is also consistent with the available data on traffic flows. For example, Figure 2 shows

a vehicle count reduction of 10 percent relative to baseline levels during the in-between period.



                                                                                                    18
        The 4.56 unit decline in PM10 and the 6.2 unit decline in NO2 after the CPZ was made

permanent correspond to a 13.7 percent and a 18.7 percent reduction in these two pollutants

relative to the mean levels of pre-CPZ pollution in Stockholm shown in Table 1. If one did not

allow for the lack of a “rebound” effect during the in-between period, one would get a slightly

lower estimate of the impact of congestion pricing on pollution.

        Appendix Table 1 shows an alternative specification that uses only cities that had

continuously operating monitors. We end up with only 20 cities in this table and the p-values

(now also calculated using the wild bootstrap to account for the small number of clusters)

suggest that the results are not statistically significant but that the point estimates are similar to

those discussed above.



B. Congestion Pricing and Asthma

        Table 3 shows the estimated effects of the CPZ on asthma rates in children aged zero

through five. Column (1) shows the basic specification controlling for month-specific and

municipality-specific fixed effects. In column (2) we add interactions of month fixed effects with

region (to allow for different regional seasonal effects), weather variables, and interactions of

weather and municipality (to allow weather conditions to have differential effects in different

cities) and weather and calendar month (to allow weather conditions to have differential effects

by month of the year). Appendix Table 5 shows that the estimates are not sensitive to the

inclusion of weather interactions. The models also control for the basic demographic

characteristics discussed above.

        Unlike the pollution estimates, which show a reduction in pollution followed by a

rebound and then a permanent reduction, column (2) shows that the congestion pricing trial was



                                                                                                         19
associated with a continuous decline in asthma cases from the trial period onwards. There was a

reduction of 2.1 asthma visits per 10,000 children (on a baseline of 19.06 visits per 10,000)

during the trial. The in-between period saw a reduction of 5.7 cases per 10,000, and the

permanent CPZ reduced asthma visits by about 9.6 per 10,000. These numbers represent the

total changes for each period (they are not cumulative). These estimates suggest that the trial

brought an immediate reduction in asthma rates, but that the permanent CPZ had a much larger

effect, reducing urgent visits and hospitalizations for asthma by half among children aged zero

through five. In these models, the analytical and permutation-based p-values are very close to

each other, and both suggest that the estimated effects are strongly statistically significant.

       Figure 3 follows a format similar to Figure 1 and shows the difference in asthma rates by

calendar month in Stockholm compared to other central cities before and after the adoption of

congestion pricing. This figure shows an initial decline in asthma in Stockholm relative to the

other central cities during the trial period. However, instead of rebounding, relative asthma rates

in Stockholm versus other cities continued to decline in the in-between period, and fell to their

lowest levels after the CPZ became permanent.

       Figure 4 provides insight into whether the changes in asthma rates accompanying

congestion pricing are reasonable given the overall relationships observed between pollution and

asthma in Sweden. The figure is based on data for each January and February from 2004 to 2009

for each month and municipality except Stockholm. We use January and February because

asthma is highly seasonal, and these are peak months. The line shows the relationship between

the monthly asthma rate and the mean monthly PM10 level conditional on municipal fixed

effects, mean temperature, mean rainfall, and average wind speed. The shaded area is the 99

percent confidence interval. The blue triangles show estimates for Stockholm in the pre-CPZ



                                                                                                    20
period; the red circles show Stockholm estimates during the trial period; and the black rectangles

show the values for Stockholm after the CPZ became permanent. All Stockholm-specific data

points are within the 99 percent confidence interval for the estimated association between asthma

and mean PM10. Hence, the figure demonstrates that the fall in asthma rates in Stockholm is

within the range that one would expect given the relationship between pollution and acute

asthma rates in the rest of Sweden.

        Figures 5 and 6 are similar to Figure 3, but for the alternative outcomes of accidents and

all other acute care visits (that is, visits that are not for respiratory or accident-related causes,

respectively). The difference in the rate of accidents increases over time and the difference in the

rate of all other acute visits first increases and then decreases during the in-between and the

period after congestion pricing became permanent. However, all changes are small relative to

those shown for asthma, as illustrated in Figure 3.

        Table 4 shows an additional analysis that focuses on children younger than o six- months

old and excludes the first six months of the in-between period. In this way, we can ensure that

children were affected at similar ages by the trial and by the permanent implementation of

congestion pricing, and that children’s health outcomes measured during the in-between period

did not receive the benefit of congestion pricing at all. Unfortunately, given the design of the

implementation, it is not possible to do the same experiment (that is, to find an in-between group

unaffected by congestion pricing) for older children.

        Table 4 shows that when we chose cohorts of children who are exactly comparable in

terms of age, then we do see a pattern that mimics the pattern for pollution. That is, there is a

16.5 percent reduction in asthma during the trial, which falls during the in-between- period after

the trial ended and then jumps to a 15.2 percent reduction in asthma after congestion pricing



                                                                                                        21
becomes permanent. Importantly, in this subsample, acute asthma episodes do not continue to

decline during the in-between period and thus follow the “fall-increase-fall” pattern of pollution

more closely. The estimates lose conventional statistical significance when all fixed effects are

included in the model, but on the whole, they support the story that the effects of congestion

pricing on young children are cumulative and may act by helping young children to avoid the

onset of asthma. Appendix Figure 3 shows these results graphically.



C. Robustness

      Table 5 presents results from several robustness checks. The specification in column (1) is

the same as our main specification in Table 3, except that it includes municipality-specific linear

trends. These trends should absorb any unobserved municipality-specific changes in asthma

prevalence that happen during the observation period. The coefficients of interest do not change

significantly.

      In column (2) we assign the first municipality in which children are observed as their

permanent municipality of residence. For example, if a child was born in Stockholm but moved

outside the city after a few years, we include this child as part of the Stockholm sample for all

years included in the observation window. Similarly, if a child moved into Stockholm, but was

first observed as a resident of another city, we assign the original city as that child’s residence

throughout the observation window. Constructing the analysis sample in this fashion may

address concerns about children differentially moving in or out of Stockholm based on their

health status. On the other hand, we are introducing noise in the treatment variable, which could

bias our estimates downward and increase our standard errors. However, the estimates shown in

column (2) are robust to specifying the analysis sample in this way, and the standard errors are



                                                                                                      22
also similar to those in the column 2 of Table 3. This is perhaps unsurprising given that only

about 7 percent of children younger than five in Stockholm during the period 2004–2009 were

born in a different city, so mobility in and out of central Stockholm was relatively low.

           Column (3) of Table 5 shows estimates from a model using predicted asthma rates as the

dependent variable. Estimates of the prediction equation itself are shown in Appendix Table 3. 12

The purpose of this specification is to see whether the characteristics of children in Stockholm

changed after the introduction of the CPZ in a way that would have reduced asthma rates even in

the absence of any change in pollution. By construction, predicted asthma rates have the same

mean as the actual asthma rates (as shown in the row marked “Mean of Dep. Var.” in Table 5).

        The model using predicted asthma as the dependent variable shown in column (3) of

Table 5 suggests that changes in the congestion pricing program were associated with changes in

the observable characteristics of Stockholm children that were predictive of small but statistically

significant increases in the asthma rate during the trial. The estimates suggest that observable

characteristics of Stockholm children changed in a way that would have predicted about 0.457

more acute asthma episodes per 10,000 children annually during the trial period. There is no

significant change in predicted asthma during the in-between or the permanent CPZ periods, and

the point estimates are small. Although there may be other changes in unobservables that are

correlated with both asthma and congestion pricing, the evidence presented here suggests that

changes in observable characteristics have limited scope for explaining the baseline asthma

results.




12
   With an R-squared of .544, we do a reasonably good job explaining variation in asthma rates. Because we saw in
Table 1 that rates of social assistance and income levels in Stockholm are different than in other central cities, it is
reassuring that neither of these variables are predictive of asthma rates in our baseline Appendix Table 3 model,
which includes municipality fixed effects, interactions between month and year, interactions between region and
month, and interactions between municipality and weather.

                                                                                                                      23
      Column (4) of Table 5 presents estimates from specifications in which the dependent

variable is visits due to unintentional injuries. Injuries are another common reason for acute-care

visits, with a mean of 8.711 visits per 10,000 children. This model takes the same form as the

baseline model of asthma. The analytical standard errors suggest statistically significant effects:

an initial decline of 1.614 injuries during the trial is followed by increases of 1.018 and 0.966

during the in-between period and CPZ permanent periods, respectively. However, our preferred

permutation-based p-values suggest that none of the estimated effects on unintentional injuries

are statistically significant.

      Column (5) shows the same specification with all other acute visits (that is, nonrespiratory

and non-accident-related visits) as the outcome variable. Because many causes are aggregated,

there is a mean of 183 acute visits per 10,000 children. The point estimates are not large at three

to four percent of the mean rate over the period (7.325, 5.511, and -7.885 for the trial, in-

between, and permanent periods, respectively), and the standard errors are substantial. Hence,

this model also suggests that congestion pricing had little effect on nonrespiratory health

outcomes in this age group.

       We have also estimated a series of models in the same form but using demographic

characteristics as the dependent variables. The purpose of these regressions is to assess the

extent to which the reductions in asthma rates that accompanied congestion pricing could have

been due to changes in demographic characteristics in central Stockholm relative to other cities

rather than to congestion pricing per se. Appendix Table 2 shows that there were some

significant changes over time. More children came to Stockholm than to other central cities and

this movement tended to reduce the number of children on social assistance over the entire

period. The trial period is associated with a slightly lower proportion of children whose mothers



                                                                                                    24
had a college education and higher household income levels than in the period when congestion

pricing became permanent. However, as we show in Appendix Table 3, none of these

demographic characteristics have statistically significant effects on asthma rates in Sweden. The

variable that comes closest is income, and the decline in household income over the course of the

sample would predict an increase rather than a decrease in asthma rates.



VI. Discussion and Conclusions

This paper estimates the impact of congestion pricing in a large urban center city on ambient

pollution and children’s health. Our findings indicate that the congestion tax in central

Stockholm reduced ambient pollution levels. The two pollutants we can measure best, PM10

and NO2, declined between 10–20 percent, relative to precongeston pricing levels. This decline

suggests that other pollutants from traffic are also likely to have fallen. Declines in relative

ambient pollution levels in Stockholm compared to other central cities show a step-wise pattern,

first falling during the trial period, then rebounding somewhat during the period in between the

trial and permanent adoption, and then showing a sustained decline following the permanent

adoption of congestion pricing.

       Turning to health outcomes, we find a significant reduction in visits for acute asthma

attacks among children aged zero through five in the years after congestion pricing took effect.

Although congestion pricing had an immediate impact on asthma, the impact grew over time and

asthma rates continued to decline during what proved to be a temporary hiatus in congestion

pricing before its permanent adoption. Our findings therefore suggest that congestion charges in

large cities can have significant positive effects on health in the short term, but even larger

effects in the longer term as the stock of child health evolves to a new lower-pollution



                                                                                                   25
equilibrium level. In the short run, children with asthma will have fewer attacks when pollution

is reduced. In the long run, fewer children will develop asthma to begin with. This finding is

consistent with our understanding of health as a stock that often changes relatively slowly over

time, as suggested by the medical literature.

          Our estimates are among the first to demonstrate that congestion pricing as implemented

in Stockholm not only resulted in a significant decrease in ambient air pollution but also had

significant impacts in children’s respiratory health. These improvements in health occurred even

though initial pollution levels were well below the current U.S. EPA standards, suggesting that

reductions in air pollution from traffic can have large positive effects on children’s respiratory

health.




                                                                                                     26
References

Anas, Alex and Robin Lindsey. 2011. "Reducing Urban Road Transportation Externalities: Road
Pricing in Theory and in Practice." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy Association
of Environmental and Resource Economists, 5(1): 66–88.

Avol, Edward, James Gauderman, Sylvia Tan, Stephanie London, and John Peters. 2001.
“Respiratory Effects of Relocating to Areas of Differing Air Pollution Levels.” American
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 164 (11):2067-2072

Bauernschuster, Stefan, Timo Hener, and Helmut Rainer. 2015. “When Labor Disputes Bring
Cities to a Standstill: The Impact of Public Transit Strikes on Traffic, Accidents, Air Pollution
and Health.” Ifo Institute Working Paper.

Bruner, Jon. 2009. “America’s Worst Intersections.” Forbes, February 24, 2009.

Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Robert Ostling, and Björn Wallace. 2016. “Wealth, Health, and
Child Development: Evidence from Administrative Data on Swedish Lottery Players.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 131: 687-738

Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2013. “Evidence on the
Impact of Sustained Exposure to Air Pollution on Life Expectancy from China’s Huai River
Policy.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110(32): 12936–41.

Currie, Janet and Reed Walker. 2011. ”Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
E-Zpass.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3: 65–90.

Currie, Janet, Joshua Graff Zivin, Jamie Mullins, and Matthew Neidell. 2014. “What Do We
Know about Short and Long Term Effects of Early Life Exposure to Pollution?” Annual Review
of Resource Economics 6: 217–47.

Currie, Janet, Douglas Almond, and Valentina Duque. 2018. “Childhood Circumstances and
Adult Outcomes: Act II.” The Journal of Economic Literature, 56(4): 1360–1446

Daniel, Joseph and Bekka, Khalid. 2000. “The Environmental Impact of Highway Congestion
Pricing.” Journal of Urban Economics 47: 180–215.

Daunfeldt, Sven-Olov., Niklas Rudholm, and Ulf Rämme. 2009. “Congestion Charges and Retail
Revenues: Results from the Stockholm Road Pricing Trial.” Transportation Research Part A:
Policy and Practice 43(3): 306–09.

Dietert Rodney, Ruth Etzel, DavidChen D, Marilyn Halonen, Steven Holladay, Annie Jarabek,
Kenneth Landreth, David Peden, Ralph Smialowicz,, Kent Pinkerton, and Tracey Zoetis. 2000.
“Workshop to Identify Critical Windows of Exposure for Children’s Health: Immune and
Respiratory Systems Work Group Summary.” Environmental Health Perspectives 108(3): 483–
490.

                                                                                                    27
Dinardo, John and David Lee. 2011. “Program Evaluation and Research Designs.” In Handbook
of Labor Economics, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David E. Card, Volume 4 Part A, 463-536
Eliasson, Jonas. 2017. “Congestion Pricing.” In The Routledge Handbook of Transport
Economics. Cowie and Ison, eds. London: Routledge.

Fisher, Sir Ronald Aylmer. 1935. Design of Experiments. Edinburgh, London: Oliver and Boyd).

Fletcher, Jason, Jeremy Green, and Matthew Neidell. 2010. “Long Term Effects of Childhood
Asthma on Adult Health.” Journal of Health Economics 29(3): 377–87.

Friedman, Michael S., Kenneth E. Powell, Lori Hutwagner, LeRoy M. Graham, and W. Gerald
Teague. 2001. “Impact of Changes in Transportation and Commuting Behaviors During the 1996
Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta on Air Quality and Childhood Asthma.” Journal of the
American Medical Association 285(7): 897–905.

Garg, Renu, Adam Karpati, Jessica Leighton, Mary Perrin, and Mona Shah. 2003. “Asthma
Facts.” New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.

Gauderman W James, Rob McConnell, Frank Gilliland, Stephanie London, Duncan Thomas,
Edward Avol, Hita Vora, Kiros Berhane, Edward Rappaport, Fred Lurmann, Helene Margolis,
and John Peters (2000. “Association Between Air Pollution and Lung Function Growth in
Southern California Children.” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine
162: 1383–90.

Gibson, Matthew and Maria Carnovale. 2015. "The Effects of Road Pricing on Driver Behavior
and Air Pollution." Department of Economics Working Papers 2015–16, Department of
Economics, Williams College.

Good, Phillip. 2005. Permutation, Parametric, and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses. New York:
Springer.

Green, Colin, John Heywood, and Maria Navarro2016. “Traffic Accidents and the London
Congestion Charge.” Journal of Public Economics 133: 11–22.

Hoek Gerard, Douglas Dockery, Arden Pope, Lucas Neas , Willem Roemer, and Bert Brunekreef
1998. “Association between PM10 and Decrements in Peak Expiratory Flow Rates in Children:
Reanalysis of Data from Five Panel Studies.” European Respiratory Journal. v11:1307–11.

Jans, Jenny, Per Johansson, and J. Peter Nilsson (2016), "Economic Status, Air Quality, and
Child Health: Evidence from Inversion Episodes." Manuscript April 2016, Stockholm University

Johansson, Christer, Lars Burman, and Bertil Forsberg. 2009. “The Effects of Congestions Tax
on Air Quality and Health.” Atmospheric Environment 43. 4843-54.

Knittel, Miller, and Ryan Sanders .2016. “Caution, Drivers! Children Present: Traffic, Pollution,
and Infant Health.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2): 350–66. ,

                                                                                               28
Leape, Jonathan. 2006. "The London Congestion Charge." Journal of Economic Perspectives
20(4): 157–76.

Lipsett Michael, Susan Hurley, and Bart Ostro 1997. “Air Pollution and Emergency Room
Visits for Asthma in Santa Clara County, California.” Environmental Health Perspectives
105:216 –22.

McConnell, Rob, Kiros Berhane, Ling Yao, Michael Jerrett, Fred Lurmann, Frank Gilliland,
Nino Kunzli, Jim Gauderman, Ed Avol, Duncan Thomas, and John Peters. 2006. ”Traffic,
Susceptibility, and Childhood Asthma.” Environmental Health Perspectives 114(5):, 766–72.

Moorman, Jeanne, Cara Person, and Hatice Zahran. 2013. “Asthma Attacks among Persons with
Current Asthma – United States, 2001–2010.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report Nov. 22,
62(3): 93–8.

Neidell, Matthew. 2004. “Air Pollution, Health, and Socio-Economic Status: The Effect of
Outdoor Air Quality on Childhood Asthma.” Journal of Health Economics, , 23(6): 1209–36.

Enrico Moretti and Matthew Neidell. 2011. “Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behavior
Evidence from the Ports of Los Angeles.” Journal of Human Resources 46(1): 154–75

Pinkerton Kent and Jesse Joad. 2000.. “The Mammalian Respiratory System and Critical
Windows of Exposure for Children’s Health.” Environmental Health Perspectives 108(3):457–
62.

Pope, C. Arden, Richard Burnett, Michael Thun, Eugenia Calle, Daniel Krewski, Kazihiko Ito,
and George D. Thurston. 2002. “Lung Cancer, Cardiopulmonary Mortality, and Long-Term
Exposure to Fine Particulate Air Pollution.” JAMA 287 #9, 1132–41.

Schlenker, Wolfram and Reed Walker. 2016. “Airports, Air Pollution and Contemporaneous
Health.” Review of Economic Studies, 83(2): 768–809.

Shima Masayuki and Motoaki Adachi .2000. “Effect of Outdoor and Indoor Nitrogen Dioxide on
Respiratory Symptoms in Schoolchildren,” International Journal of Epidemiology 29: 862–70.

Schrank, David and Tim Lomax. 2007. “The 2007 Urban Mobility Report.” Texas
Transportation Institute, Texas A&M University, September 2007 (accessible at
http://www.ncga.state.nc.us/documentsites/committees/21stcenturytransportation/prioritization-
best%20practices-efficiency/presentations/mobility_report_2007_wappx.pdf)

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency NAAQS table (https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-
pollutants/naaqs-table)

U.S. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program (2007). Third Expert Panel on the
Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Bethesda (MD): National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute (US); Aug.

                                                                                             29
Vickrey, William. 1969. “Congestion Theory and Traffic Investment.” The American Economic
Review, 59(2), Papers and Proceedings of the Eighty-first Annual Meeting of the American
Economic Association (May, 1969), 251–60

Wolff, Henrik. 2014., “Keep Your Clunker in the Suburb: Low‐Emission Zones and Adoption of
Green Vehicles.” Economic Journal, 124: F481-F512.

Yu Onchee, Lianne Sheppard , Thomas Lumley , Jane Q Koenig , and Gail Shapiro G 2000.
“Effects of Ambient Air Pollution on Symptoms of Asthma in Seattle-Area Children Enrolled in
the CAMP Study.” Environmental Health Perspectives 108: 1209–14.




                                                                                          30
31
                                                       Graphs

Figure 1: Scatterplot of differences in measured NO2 and PM10 inside the CPZ and in other
central cities by implementation period.




 Notes: This figure plots the differences in the unadjusted monthly mean NO2 levels inside versus outside the
 CPZ. The vertical lines indicate the beginning of the trial period, the end of the trial period, and the beginning of
 the permanent CPZ implementation. Red horizontal lines represent the mean value within each period.




 Notes: This figure plots the differences in the unadjusted monthly mean PM10 levels inside versus outside the
 CPZ. The vertical lines indicate the beginning of the trial period, the end of the trial period, and the beginning of
 the permanent CPZ implementation. Red horizontal lines represent the mean value within each period.




                                                                                                                         32
Figure 2: Number of cars passing the CPZ toll boundary on an average weekday
                                                       500000


                                                                       Pre-Trial      Trial   In-between   Permanentization
     # Cars Passing CPZ Boundary on an Average Weekday
   300000       350000       400000        450000




                                                                2005               2006        2007        2008          2009   2010   2011


Note: The average number cars per day (by month) passing toll boundary is connected by the black line.
Hollow diamonds show predictions in years with missing data on July traffic. Mean traffic levels for the four
periods are in solid maroon lines.




                                                                                                                                              33
Figure 3: Asthma differences inside CPZ versus other central cities




Notes: This figure plots the differences in the unadjusted monthly mean asthma rates inside versus outside the CPZ.
The vertical lines indicate the beginning of the trial period, the end of the trial period, and the beginning of the
permanent CPZ implementation. Red horizontal lines represent the mean value within each period.




                                                                                                                  34
Figure 4: PM10 and the incidence of acute asthma attacks in Swedish municipalities




Data for January and February 2004–2009. The shaded area is the 99 percent confidence interval around the
estimated relationship between the mean number of acute asthma episodes per month and municipality and the mean
PM10 measured in the municipality during the month, net of municipality fixed effects and controlling for weather
parameters such as mean temperature, rainfall, and wind. The blue triangle indicates the values for Stockholm in the
pre-CPZ period; the red circle indicates the values for Stockholm during the trial period; the black rectangle
indicates the values for Stockholm after the CPZ was made permanent.




                                                                                                                 35
Figure 5: Accidents difference in CPZ versus other cities




Notes: This figure plots the differences in the unadjusted monthly mean accident rates inside versus outside the
CPZ. The vertical lines indicate the beginning of the trial period, the end of the trial period, and the beginning of
the permanent CPZ implementation. Red horizontal lines represent the mean value within each period.



Figure 6: All other nonrespiratory diseases, differences between CPZ and other cities




Notes: This figure plots the differences in the unadjusted monthly mean rates for all other diseases (that is,
nonrespiratory and nonaccidents) inside versus outside the CPZ. The vertical lines indicate the beginning of the trial
period, the end of the trial period, and the beginning of the permanent CPZ implementation. Red horizontal lines
represent the mean value within each period.




                                                                                                                        36
Appendix Figure 1: Scatterplot of differences in measured NO2 inside the CPZ and in other
central cities by implementation period, with piecewise linear and quadratic regression overlays
within each period




Notes: These figures plot the differences in the unadjusted monthly mean NO2 levels inside versus outside the CPZ.
The vertical lines indicate the beginning of the trial period, the end of the trial period, and the beginning of the
permanent CPZ implementation. Red lines represent linear and quadratic regression overlays within each time
period.




                                                                                                                  37
Appendix Figure 2: Scatterplot of differences in measured PM10 inside the CPZ and in other
central cities by implementation period, dropping an outlying observation in the preperiod




Notes: This figure plots the differences in the unadjusted monthly mean PM10 levels inside versus outside the CPZ.
The vertical lines indicate the beginning of the trial period, the end of the trial period, and the beginning of the
permanent CPZ implementation. Red horizontal lines represent the mean value within each period.




                                                                                                                  38
Appendix Figure 3: Asthma differences inside CPZ versus other central cities for children
younger than six-months old only. First six months of the in-between period are omitted




Notes: This figure plots the differences in the unadjusted monthly mean asthma rates inside versus outside the CPZ
for children younger than six-months old only. The vertical lines indicate the beginning of the trial period, the end of
the trial period, and the beginning of the permanent CPZ implementation. Red horizontal lines represent the mean
value within each period.




                                                                                                                     39
Table 1: Means and Pretrends of Outcome and Key Control Variables in the Pre-Congestion Pricing Zone (CPZ) Period
                                               (1)         (2)              (3)          (4)         (5)      (6)
                                                                               Difference
                                                   Levels                Dec. 2005–Dec. 2004       p-value p-value
                                           inside CPZ other cities     inside CPZ other cities     (2)-(1) (4)-(3)
            NO2 μg/m3                        33.322      17.555           -0.153       -0.105       0.738   0.981

                PM10 μg/m3                                 33.279          13.958              0.237           -0.067           0.660       0.854

                Asthma per 10,000                           18.7             15.9                1.2             1.4            0.447       0.835

                Accidents per 10,000                         5.5             8.3               -2.32             0.0            0.272       0.641

                All other diagnoses per 10,000               179             173                -1.6              3              0.94        0.92

                Ln Annual Income                            7.150           6.838              -0.005          -0.002           0.019       0.913

                Ln Ratio College Graduates                 -0.834          -0.859              0.084            0.046           0.883       0.320

                Ln Ratio on Social Assistance              -2.247          -1.585              -0.129          -0.021           0.019       0.592

                Log # children 0–5                         10.685           7.774              0.114            0.050           0.000       0.078

Notes: Columns (1) and (2) display the average characteristics inside the Stockholm Congestion Pricing Zone (CPZ) and other Swedish cities that did not have a
congestion pricing program. The data in columns (1) and (2) come from the month preceding the trial, December 2005. Columns (3) and (4) present the average
two-year change in characteristics in the years preceding the trial. Column (5) presents p-values from a two-tailed permutation test of the null hypothesis that the
difference between columns (1) and (2) is equal to zero. Column (6) presents p-values from a similar test, comparing column (3) to column (4).




                                                                                                                                                                  40
Table 2: Effects of Congestion Pricing on Ambient Air Pollution – PM10 and NO2
                                                 (1)                   (2)                                           (3)                          (4)
 Dependent Variable:                          PM10                   PM10                                           NO2                          NO2
 CPZ*Trial                                    -2.860                 -3.994                                        -3.580                        -3.85
                                             (0.633)                (0.717)                                       (1.176)                      (1.425)
                                             {0.000}                {0.000}                                       {0.000}                      {0.009}
                                             [0.423]                [0.004]                                       [0.004]                      [0.004]
 CPZ*in between                                0.779                 -2.509                                        -2.927                        -3.83
                                             (0.582)                (0.792)                                       (1.013)                      (0.974)
                                             {0.184}                {0.002}                                       {0.005}                      {0.002}
                                             [0.814]                [0.100]                                       [0.050]                      [0.004]
 CPZ*Perm                                     -4.572                 -4.568                                        -6.025                        -6.19
                                             (0.694)                (0.840)                                       (1.295)                       (1.44)
                                             {0.000}                {0.000}                                       {0.000}                      {0.000}
                                             [0.430]                [0.004]                                       [0.004]                      [0.004]
 Month * year FE                                  *                     *                                             *                            *
 Municipal FE                                     *                     *                                             *                            *
 Region * month FE                                                      *                                                                          *
 Weather controls                                                       *                                                                          *
 Municipality*weather                                                   *                                                                          *
 Calendar month*weather                                                 *                                                                          *
 Observations                                  2,177                 2,177                                         1,431                        1,431
 Adjusted R-squared                             0.56                  0.72                                          0.75                         0.79
 Mean of Dep Var                               18.79                 18.79                                         18.55                        18.55
 Clusters                                        99                    99                                            58                           58
Notes: Columns (1)–(4) present regression results from four separate regressions, one per column, where the dependent variable is in the column heading. The
regressions relate pollution monitor readings aggregated to the municipality-month level to indicator variables describing the various phases of CPZ
implementation and whether or not the monitor is in the CPZ region. Weather controls include: total rainfall in the month, mean temperatures, and mean wind
speed during the month. For each regression coefficient, we present the coefficient estimate, the standard error (in parentheses), as well as two sets of p-values.
Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. Analytical p-values are in curvy brackets. Permutation-based two-tailed p-values appear in square brackets
under the analytical p-values. Permutation-based p-values are estimated using 500 permutations of treatment assignments across municipalities and time (in six-
month cells).




                                                                                                                                                                41
                       Table 3: Acute Asthma Episodes per 10,000 Children Younger Than Five Years Old, per Month
                                                                                      (1)                          (2)
                                                                               Limited Controls               Full Controls

CPZ*Trial                                                                                                 -3.043                                -2.125
                                                                                                         (1.174)                               (1.173)
                                                                                                         {0.010}                               {0.050}
                                                                                                         [0.010]                               [0.007]
CPZ*in between                                                                                            -6.399                                -5.680
                                                                                                         (1.175)                               (1.176)
                                                                                                         {0.000}                               {0.000}
                                                                                                         [0.007]                               [0.007]
CPZ*Perm                                                                                                  -8.735                                -9.597
                                                                                                         (1.898)                               (1.935)
                                                                                                         {0.000}                               {0.000}
                                                                                                         [0.007]                               [0.007]
Month * year FE                                                                                              *                                     *
Municipal FE                                                                                                 *                                     *
Region * month FE                                                                                                                                  *
Weather controls                                                                                                                                   *
Municipality*weather                                                                                                                               *
Calendar month*weather                                                                                                                             *
Observations                                                                                               7,416                                 7,416
R-squared                                                                                                  0.447                                 0.567
Mean of Dep Var                                                                                            19.06                                 19.06
Clusters                                                                                                    103                                   103
Notes: Each column presents results from a separate regression. Demographic controls are included in all specifications and include: the log of mean income, the
proportion of mothers on social support, and the proportion of mothers with a college education. Weather controls include: total rainfall in the month, minimum
and maximum temperatures, and mean wind speed during the month. For each regression coefficient, we present the coefficient estimate, the standard error (in
parentheses), as well as two sets of p-values for estimates that are statistically significant at conventional levels. The SEs are clustered at the municipality level.
Analytical p-values are in curvy brackets under each estimate. Permutation-based two-tailed p-values appear in square brackets and are estimated using 500
permutations of treatment assignment across municipalities and time (in six-month cells). All regressions use the number of children younger than five years old
in the municipality as weights.



                                                                                                                                                                    42
Table 4: The Effect of the CPZ on Acute Asthma Episodes for Children Younger Than Six-
Months Old, Excluding the First Six Months of the In-Between Period
                                                                  (1)             (2)


 CPZ*Trial                                                                      -2.885                -2.719
                                                                               (1.574)               (2.227)
                                                                               {0.070}               {0.225}
                                                                               [0.004]               [0.004]
 CPZ*In between                                                                 -1.227                0.012
                                                                               (1.317)               (1.985)
                                                                               {0.350}               {0.995}
                                                                               [0.001]                [0.99]
 CPZ*Permanent                                                                  -4.314                -2.516
                                                                               (1.392)               (1.546)
                                                                               {0.003}               {0.110}
                                                                               [0.004]               [0.004]
 Month * year FE                                                                   *                     *
 Municipal FE                                                                      *                     *
 Region * month FE                                                                                       *
 Weather controls                                                                                        *
 Municipality*weather                                                                                    *
 Calendar month*weather                                                                                  *
 Observations                                                                    6,901                6,901
 R-squared                                                                       0.307                0.396
 Mean of Dep Var                                                                 16.52                16.52
 Clusters                                                                         103                  103
Notes: The sample only includes children younger than six-months old. We drop the first six months of the in-
between period to avoid contamination from potential long-term effects of the trial period. Demographic controls are
included in all specifications and include: the log of mean income, the proportion of mothers on social support, and
the proportion of mothers with a college education. Weather controls include: total rainfall in the month, minimum
and maximum temperatures, and mean wind speed during the month. Standard errors are clustered at the
municipality level and reported in parentheses under the estimates. Analytic p-values in curly brackets appear under
all estimates. Permutation based p-values appear in square brackets under the standard errors, and are based on the
500 bootstrap replications of treatment assignment across municipalities and time (in six-month cells). All
regressions use the number of children younger than six months old in the municipality as weights.




                                                                                                                 43
Table 5: Robustness and Placebo Checks

                                  (1)              (2)                   (3)              (4)          (5)
                                Asthma           Asthma              Predicted       Unintentional All other
                                                                      Asthma            Injury     diagnoses
CPZ*Trial                       -4.282            -1.875               0.457            -1.614        7.325
                               (1.098)            (1.25)              (0.118)          (0.376)      (11.373)
                               {0.000}           {0.138}             {0.000}           {0.000}      {0.950}
                               [0.004]           [0.004]              [0.000]          [0.677]       [0.370]
CPZ*in between                  -7.923            -5.150               0.165            1.018         5.511
                               (1.951)           (1.290)              (0.149)          (0.298)      (13.398)
                               {0.000}           {0.000}             {0.271}           {0.000}      {0.670}
                               [0.004]           [0.004]              [0.000]          [0.458]       [0.350]
CPZ*Perm                       -10.488            -8.770               -0.127           0.966        -7.885
                               (3.000)            (1.88)              (0.257)          (0.337)      (23.685)
                               {0.000}           {0.000}             {0.621}           {0.005}      {0.740}
                               [0.004]           [0.004]              [0.000]          [0.737]       [0.120]

Month * year FE                     *                *                   *                   *               *
Municipal FE                        *                *                   *                   *               *
Region * month FE                                    *                   *                   *               *
Weather controls                                     *                   *                   *               *
Municipality*weather                                 *                   *                   *               *
Calendar                                             *                   *                   *               *
month*weather
Municipality trends                *
Observations                     7,416             7,416               7,416              7,416            7,416
R-squared                        0.544              0.54               0.999              0.211            0.672
Mean of Dep Var                  19.06             19.06               19.06              8.711             183
Clusters                          103               103                 103                103              103
Notes: Each column presents results from a separate regression, relating the variable indicated in the column
heading to indicator variables describing the phases of the CPZ implementation and whether the municipality is in
the CPZ region. (1) Including municipality trends; (2). Assigning the first municipality observed in the data; (3).
Using predicted asthma; (4). Using unintentional injury and (5). Using all other diagnoses (nonrespiratory and non-
accident-related) as dependent variables. Demographic controls are included in all specifications and include: the log
of mean income, the proportion of mothers on social support, and the proportion of mothers with a college
education. Weather controls include: total rainfall in the month, minimum and maximum temperatures, and mean
wind speed during the month. For each regression coefficient, we present the coefficient estimate, the standard error
(in parentheses), as well as two sets of p-values for estimates. Analytical p-values are in curvy brackets and
clustered at the municipality level. Permutation-based two-tailed p-values appear in square brackets and are
estimated using 500 permutations of treatment assignment across municipalities and time (in six-month cells).
Predicted asthma is constructed using an auxiliary regression based on all observations except those in the CPZ
during the periods with congestion pricing. The predicted values from this auxiliary regression are used as the
dependent variable in column (3). All regressions are using the number of children aged zero through five in the
municipality as analytic weights.




                                                                                                                   44
                                                 Appendix Tables

Appendix Table 1: Effects of Congestion Pricing on Ambient Air Pollution – Continuously
Operating Monitors Only
                                        (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)
                                      PM10            PM10            NO2           NO2
CPZ*Trial                             -2.721          -3.434         -2.292        -3.149
                                      (1.03)          (1.29)        (1.394)       (1.458)
                                     {0.017}         {0.016}         {0.05}      {0.0438}
                                     [0.004]          [0.79]        [0.004]       [0.007]
                                       0.566           0.562         0.378          0.294
CPZ*in between                         1.486          -2.426         -1.034        -2.203
                                     (0.598)         (0.665)        (1.141)       (0.942)
                                     {0.023}         {0.002}        {0.376}       {0.030}
                                     [0.758]          [0.08]        [0.427]       [0.007]
                                       0.400           0.356         0.470          0.299
CPZ*Perm                              -2.741          -2.772         -3.235        -3.942
                                     (0.719)         (0.749)        (1.719)       (1.902)
                                     {0.003}         {0.002}        {0.075}       {0.052}
                                     [0.805]         [0.834]         [0.69]        [.007]
                                       0.430           0.503         0.500          0.451

Month * year FE                                    *                    *                  *                 *
Municipal FE                                       *                    *                  *                 *
Region * month FE                                                       *                                    *
Weather controls                                                        *                                    *
Municipality*weather                                                    *                                    *
Observations                                     903                  903               1,000             1,000
Adjusted R-squared                               0.70                 0.86               0.85              0.89
Mean of Dep Var                                 19.19                19.19              18.54             18.54
Clusters                                          20                   20                 20                20

Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate regression, relating the variable indicated in the column
heading to indicator variables describing the phases of the CPZ implementation and whether the monitor is in the
CPZ region. Monitor-level data are aggregated at the municipality-month level. Weather controls include: total
rainfall in the month, minimum and maximum temperatures, and mean wind speed during the month. Analytic
weights are based on the number of observations per municipality and are applied to all regressions. For each
regression coefficient, we present the coefficient estimate, the standard error (in parentheses) and three sets of p-
values. Analytical p-values appear in curvy brackets. They are clustered at the municipality level. Permutation-
based p-values appear in square brackets and are estimated using 500 permutations of treatment assignment across
municipalities and time (in six-month cells). To estimate the wild bootstrap p-values we used Rademacher weights
and 999 replications. Bootstrap clustering is by municipality.




                                                                                                                    45
 Appendix Table 2: Demographic Controls as the Dependent Variables.
                          (1)                  (2)               (3)                                    (4)
Dependent Variable:  Log N children    Social Assistance      College                               Log income
CPZ*Trial                        0.030                   -0.005                  -0.004                 0.016
                                (0.003)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)                (0.006)
                                {0.000}                 {0.000}                 {0.000}                {0.006}
                                [0.000]                 [0.000]                 [0.000]                [0.000]
CPZ*in between                   0.051                   -0.008                  -0.002                 0.009
                                (0.004)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)                (0.006)
                                {0.000}                 {0.000}                 {0.050}                {0.116}
                                [0.000]                 [0.000]                 [0.006]                [0.000]
CPZ*Permanent                    0.123                   -0.011                  0.001                  0.006
                                (0.006)                 (0.001)                 (0.002)                (0.006)
                                {0.000}                 {0.000}                 {0.453}                {0.315}
                                [0.000]                 [0.000]                 [0.640]                [0.000]
Observations                     7,416                   7,416                   7,416                  7,416
R-squared                        0.981                   0.999                   0.996                  0.997
Mean of Dep Var                  7.275                   0.038                    0.41                  7.236
Clusters                          103                      103                    103                    103
Month * year FE                     *                       *                       *                      *
Municipal FE                        *                       *                       *                      *
Region * month FE                   *                       *                       *                      *
Weather controls                    *                       *                       *                      *
Municipality*weather                *                       *                       *                      *
Calendar                            *                       *                       *                      *
month*weather
 Notes: Columns (1)–(4) present regression results from four separate models, one per column, where the dependent
 variable is labeled in the column heading. Weather controls include: total rainfall in the month, minimum and
 maximum temperatures, and mean wind speed during the month. Analytical p-values in curvy brackets under the
 SEs for all estimates. Standard errors under the coefficient are clustered at the municipality level. Permutation-
 based two-tailed p-values appear in square brackets under the analytical p-value estimates. Permutation-based p-
 values are estimated using 500 permutations of treatment assignment across municipalities and time (in six-month
 cells). All regressions use the number of children younger than five years in the municipality as analytic weights.




                                                                                                                  46
Appendix Table 3: Demographic Determinants of Asthma.
                                                                              (1)
                                                                          Asthma rate
          Social assistance                                                 47.951
                                                                           (91.294)



          Ln(Income)                                                         23.089
                                                                             (14.63)



          College                                                             -47.948
                                                                             (47.562)



          Observations                                                        7,368
          R-squared                                                           0.544
          Mean of Dep Var                                                     19.34
          Clusters                                                             103
          Month * year FE                                                       *
          Municipal FE                                                          *
          Region * month FE                                                     *
          Weather controls                                                      *
          Municipality*weather                                                  *
          Calendar month*weather                                                *
Notes: This table presents results relating the asthma rate to observable predictors of asthma using observations
outside the CPZ region. We use this predictive model to predict asthma rates as a function of demographics.
Weather controls include: total rainfall in the month, minimum and maximum temperatures, and mean wind speed
during the month. For each regression coefficient, we present the coefficient estimate and the standard error.
Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.




                                                                                                                47
Appendix Table 4: Asthma Rates in Children Older Than Five
                                                                                                 (1)
                                                                                              Ages 6–18

CPZ*Trial                                                                                        -0.054
                                                                                                (0.970)
                                                                                                {0.960}
                                                                                                [0.010]
CPZ*in between                                                                                   -0.284
                                                                                                (1.471)
                                                                                                {0.850}
                                                                                                [0.59]0
CPZ*Perm                                                                                         -1.448
                                                                                                (2.393)
                                                                                                {0.550}
                                                                                                 [0.01]
Month * year FE                                                                                     *
Municipal FE                                                                                        *
Region * month FE                                                                                   *
Weather controls                                                                                    *
Municipality*weather                                                                                *
Calendar month*weather                                                                              *
Observations                                                                                      7,416
R-squared                                                                                         0.496
Mean of Dep Var                                                                                   3.336
Clusters                                                                                           103
Notes: The model corresponds to Model 2 in Table 3. Demographic controls are included in all specifications and
include: the log of mean income, the proportion of mothers on social support, and the proportion of mothers with a
college education. Month-by-year fixed effects and municipality fixed effects are included in all specifications.
Weather controls include: total rainfall in the month, minimum and maximum temperatures, mean wind speed
during the month. Standard errors are reported in parentheses under the estimate, clustered on the municipality level.
Analytical weights based on the number of children of the associated age group residing in the municipality during
the months applied.




                                                                                                                   48
Appendix Table 5: Asthma Rates in Children Younger Than Five Years Old, Sensitive to
Excluding Weather Interactions
                                                                 (1)                   (2)
                                                            Full Controls        Weather Only
                                                                                    Controls
 CPZ*Trial                                                     -2.125                -2.920
                                                              (1.173)               (1.163)
 CPZ*in between                                                -5.680                -6.289
                                                              (1.176)               (1.104)
 CPZ*Perm                                                      -9.597                -9.292
                                                              (1.935)               (1.883)
 Month * year FE                                                  *                     *
 Municipal FE                                                     *                     *
 Region * month FE                                                *
 Weather controls                                                 *                     *
 Municipality*weather                                             *
 Calendar month*weather                                           *
 Observations                                                  7,416                  7,416
 R-squared                                                     0.567                  0.455
 Mean of Dep Var                                               19.06                  19.06
 Clusters                                                        103                   103
Notes: Each column presents results from a separate regression. Demographic controls are
included in all specifications and include: the log of mean income, the proportion of mothers on
social support, and the proportion of mothers with a college education. Weather controls include:
total rainfall in the month, minimum and maximum temperatures, and mean wind speed during
the month. The SEs are clustered at the municipality level. All regressions use the number of
children younger than age five in the municipality as weights.




                                                                                               49
