                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS AND THE VALUE OF CRYPTO TOKENS

                                        Christian Catalini
                                         Joshua S. Gans

                                       Working Paper 24418
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24418


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2018, Revised March 2019




We thank Jane Wu and participants at the University of Chicago, University of Michigan and
University of Toronto for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24418.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Christian Catalini and Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Initial Coin Offerings and the Value of Crypto Tokens
Christian Catalini and Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 24418
March 2018, Revised March 2019
JEL No. E42,L12,L26

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper explores how entrepreneurs can use initial coin offerings — whereby they issue crypto
tokens and commit to only accept those tokens as payment for their products — to fund venture
start-up costs. We show that the ICO mechanism allows entrepreneurs to generate buyer
competition for the token, giving it value. We also find that venture returns are independent of
any committed growth in the supply of tokens over time, but that initial funds raised are
maximized by setting that growth to zero to encourage saving by early participants. Nonetheless,
since the value of the tokens depends on a single period of demand, the ability to raise funds is
more limited than in traditional equity finance. Furthermore, a lack of commitment in monetary
policy undermines saving behavior, hence the cost of using tokens to fund start-up costs is
inflexibility in future capital raises. Crypto tokens can also facilitate coordination among
stakeholders within digital ecosystems when network effects are present.


Christian Catalini
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-480
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
catalini@mit.edu

Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com
1.       Introduction

      Initial coin offerings (ICOs) have emerged as a novel mechanism for financing

entrepreneurial ventures. Through an ICO, a venture offers a stock of specialized crypto tokens

for sale with the promise that those tokens will operate as the only medium of exchange when

accessing the venture’s future products. The sale of tokens provides capital to fund initial

development, although no commitment is made as to the price of future products (in tokens or

otherwise).2 Since 2017, blockchain startups have raised over $7B through initial coin offerings3

compared to $1B through traditional venture capital flowing into the space (Catalini et al., 2017).

Approximately one third of all ICO funding went to US-based teams, and more than 200 ICOs

raised above $10M.4

      While the idea of issuing firm-specific tokens dates back to de Bono (1994), the recent

spike in such activity follows the invention of Bitcoin by Nakamoto (2008), and the development

of cryptocurrencies with additional programming capabilities such as Ethereum. Using these

platforms, a venture can fund its development with extremely low frictions through the issuance

and auctioning off of dedicated crypto tokens. This is the result of blockchain technology

lowering both the cost of verifying transaction attributes — which allows for the self-custody of



2 In this respect, token sales have a pre-sale aspect similar to crowdfunding, but differ in that there is no pre-sale
price commitment to token holders (cf: Agrawal, Catalini and Goldfarb, 2013).
3 To place this number into perspective, crowdfunding platform Kickstarter, over the course of 9 years, allocated a
total of $3.5B to entrepreneurial and artistic projects. Equity crowdfunding platform AngelList, through its
syndicated model, facilitated approximately $700M in online, early stage equity investments since 2013.
4 Among recent offerings, Tezos raised $232M for developing a smart contracts and decentralized governance
platform; Filecoin $205M from over 2,100 accredited investors to deploy a decentralized file storage network; Kin
$98M to build a decentralized social network and communication platform; Blockstack $52M towards a
decentralized browser, identity and application ecosystem; and BAT $35M to develop a blockchain-based digital
advertising ecosystem.

                                                                                                                    !2
digital assets — and the cost of coordinating economic activity over the internet (Catalini and

Gans, 2016).

      This paper provides an economic analysis of the ICO funding mechanism and how it both

differs and relates to traditional equity financing.5 In traditional equity financing, a venture issues

shares that are claims on the discounted sum of future profits of the venture. Equity value is

determined by the trading price for those shares. By contrast, when specialized tokens are issued,

they are not claims on future profits, but are instead only related, at best, to the flow of future

revenues. This is because it is the flow of revenues that will determine the exchange rate of

tokens against fiat-currencies in the future. We argue that it is this fundamental insight that is

required to understand ICOs as a funding mechanism, and the conditions under which they may

be an effective source of capital for entrepreneurs.

      What is unclear about ICOs is how tokens can have any value given that the venture

issuing them controls both their technological evolution as well as their monetary policy. In a

basic implementation, investors only have the right to spend tokens to purchase products from

the venture. At the time of fundraising, neither the venture nor the investors can predict the future

demand for the tokens, and the venture cannot credibly commit to a future token-denominated

price, as committing to the ‘wrong’ price would lead to zero value to the venture. Moreover, if

the venture incurs additional costs to deliver their products and operate the ecosystem around the

token, then it would have an incentive to set the token price high to limit demand and economize

on costs.


5To our knowledge, it is the first analysis of ICOs as an alternative source of entrepreneurial financing. Other recent
and contemporaneous papers have focused on ICOs as a coordinating mechanism when there are network effects —
something we also remark upon later in this paper. See Cong, Li and Wang (2018), Fisch (2018), Li and Mann
(2018), and Bakos and Halaburda (2018).

                                                                                                                     !3
      In this paper, we examine how a token that can only be used to transact on a specific

platform can have value in the absence of additional rights over the venture itself, its governance,

or its future profits (i.e. we do not study crypto securities that resemble the rights of traditional

equity arrangements). To build a model of crypto tokens and understand how they can have value

and be used to raise capital, we abstract away from cases where entrepreneurs might fraudulently

issue tokens with no intention of creating a venture. We instead focus on situations where a

venture — if viable — will be created, and fraudulent entrepreneurs or those without the ability

to execute on their promises are unlikely to be funded (i.e. a market for curation of token

offerings has developed). Even in the absence of fraud and incompetence, it is not obvious how

tokens precisely have value without additional rights on the future profits of the venture.

      Our main findings are as follows. First, after an ICO, when setting their token-denominated

prices, ventures use a simple ‘divide the money’ rule that in equilibrium leads to the same dollar-

denominated price consumers would pay in the absence of tokens. As a result ventures have no

incentive to commit ex ante to a specific price. Second, there is a fundamental trade-off between

price stability of token-denominated prices and the amount that can be raised through an ICO: to

raise more upfront, a venture has to maximize the use of tokens as a store of value (i.e. it has to

encourage holding behavior through future appreciation), but this undermines the ability to use

the tokens as a stable medium of exchange. Third, we provide conditions under which the

venture needs to retain partial ownership of its tokens to mitigate incentives to later raise token-

denominated prices and under-supply their product.6 We also highlight the importance of two key

commitments by the venture: limiting the token supply, and enforcing the use of the token as the

6 This has implications for securities regulation which examines venture control over an asset to determine whether
it should be subject to regulation or not.

                                                                                                                 !4
only medium of exchange when transacting with the venture. Last, we show that ventures relying

on ICOs will face constraints in raising follow-on capital through the same mechanism, and that

perfectly viable ventures which could have raised sufficient capital through traditional sources,

may fail to do so through ICOs. This issue is particularly severe when the venture is long-lived,

and is consistent with the rise of hybrid arrangements where ventures raise a traditional equity

round before issuing tokens to the public or to accredited investors.7

      There has been a burgeoning literature studying cryptocurrencies and their use as a novel

source of early-stage capital. While several empirical papers have examined different aspects of

ICOs (Catalini, Boslego, and Zhang, 2017; Benedetti and Kostovetsky, 2018; Howell, Niessner

and Yermack, 2018; Momtaz, 2018), these are yet to draw on theory. On the theoretical side,

some papers examine the role of cryptocurrencies in the adoption of platforms (Cong, Li and

Wang, 2018; Fisch, 2018; Li and Mann, 2018; Bakos and Halaburda, 2018), and others have

examined the conditions under which blockchain technology can help enforce cryptocurrency

commitments (Halaburda and Sarvary, 2016; Biais, Bisiere, Bouvard and Casamatta, 2017;

Budish, 2018). While we discuss platform implications towards the end of the paper, our main

focus is to explore the more general idea of using tokens as venture-specific media of

fundraising and exchange. We also abstract away from issues of blockchain stability and instead

rely on characteristics of the technology to motivate the commitments — specifically to the

supply of tokens — that are now feasible. Finally, and most closely related to this paper, there is

7 While the returns to the platform (which often constitutes an open source software protocol and can be considered
as “shared infrastructure” among all participants within an ecosystem) can be appropriated by all early stage
investors through the direct appreciation of the token, the returns to the broader set of products the venture may
create over time (e.g. new applications on top of the shared protocol) only accrue to equity holders. Because of the
inherent uncertainty about which component will be more valuable in the long run — between the underlying
protocol and the additional products a venture or third-parties may develop on top of it — venture capital firms have
started writing hybrid contracts where they receive both tokens and equity in exchange for funding.

                                                                                                                   !5
research that examines the financial market characteristics of crypto tokens (Sockin and Xiong,

2018; Chod and Lyandres, 2018; Canidio, 2018). These papers explore different issues including

the role of information asymmetry between investors and entrepreneurs (Chod and Lyandres,

2018) or between platform users (Sockin and Xiong, 2018), and the ability to sell tokens without

developing a service (Canidio, 2018). Our model is, in a sense, more baseline in that it focuses

on the determinants of token value in the absence of these factors. Thus, this body of theoretical

research can be regarded as complementary to this paper.

     We proceed by building a simple model starting from the classical situation of an

entrepreneur who needs to raise equity financing from a venture capitalist because of financing

constraints (Section 2). We use this template for equity financing as our starting point, and then

benchmark it against ICOs (Section 3). In Section 4, we study what happens when the venture

faces a standard demand function, when tokens can be retired, when there are ongoing

operational costs, and when additional third-parties can provide services using the tokens

launched by the venture. Section 5 looks at imperfect commitment, and in particular at what

happens when the venture cannot commit to a pre-determined monetary policy or to making the

tokens the only medium of exchange within its ecosystem. Section 6 explores ICOs in the

presence of network effects. The last section concludes.



2.     Model Set-Up

     We model an entrepreneur who faces an upfront cost, C, of creating a venture. Once this

cost is sunk, the venture can deploy its product solution and start operating in the following

period. There are three time periods, ! t ∈{0,1,2} , and all agents in the model have a common


                                                                                                !6
discount factor, ! δ ∈[0,1] . Revenues can only be generated starting one period after the venture is

launched. Thus, our focus is on how a liquidity constrained entrepreneur raises pre-revenue funds

to finance the upfront development costs of their venture.

      There are a number of (small) buyers each placing the same value, ! q ∈[0,1] , on product

quality.8 Let nt — the number of buyers in period t — be a measure of demand where we assume that

n0 = 0. Product quality, q, and period 1 demand, n1, are initially unknown and distributed according

to a cdf, F(q,n1 ) . We assume that the number of buyers in the second period, n2, is fully


determined from the realization of n1 according to n2 = (1+ g n )n1 , where gn (demand growth) is

known from the outset.

      Once C is sunk (and the venture is created), all buyers and the entrepreneur learn q and n1.

Therefore, when referring to the quantity of demand, in what follows we let n = n1 . Finally, if et

is the token to dollar exchange rate in period t, and the venture’s token denominated price is pt,

then the dollar denominated price to buyers is ! Pt = et pt .


No financing constraint

      As a benchmark, suppose that the entrepreneur does not face a financing constraint and has C

in funds. When the venture is launched, q becomes common knowledge and so the entrepreneur

sets Pt = q. Given this, the venture will be launched if:

                         ! δ (E[nP1 ] + δ (1+ g n )E[nP2 ]) = δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))E[nq] ≥ C .




8 We use the term ‘product’ here because there is nothing in the model below that restricts the outcome to digital
services per se even though all of the use cases we have seen to date are digital services. Of course, this definition of
product is an economic one that encompasses digital services as a special case.

                                                                                                                       !7
Equity financing

     Suppose now there is a competitive venture capital market that can provide C to liquidity

constrained entrepreneurs. How much equity (i.e., share of profits, !1 − α) will an entrepreneur need

to cede in order to raise C ? The minimum equity an investor will accept to finance the venture is:

                                                          C
                                    !1− α * =
                                                δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))E[nq]


Thus, the entrepreneur’s expected return is:

                        ! α *δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))E[nq] = δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))E[nq] − C .

As in the no financing constraint case, whether a venture proceeds or not depends on whether the

discounted expected revenues are greater than the venture start-up costs.



3.     Initial Coin Offerings

     In an ICO, entrepreneurs specify an amount they aim to raise. That amount is usually a cap,

and the entrepreneurs may retain a share of the tokens offered and be exposed to fluctuations in

the value of their crypto token. The timeline is as follows:

     1. ICO stage
         • The entrepreneur sets the quantity of tokens m0; the minimum price each token will be
            issued at e (in exchange for dollars); the share of tokens the entrepreneur will retain a,
            and whether the ICO is made contingent on (1 − a)m0 tokens being purchased ex ante.
            The entrepreneur also specifies the tokens available in the following two periods (m1
            and m2).
         • The entrepreneur then auctions the tokens (in either a multi-unit English auction or
            second price auction). Other agents decide whether to purchase tokens or not.




                                                                                                      !8
            • If the total tokens purchased exceed the minimum threshold, the entrepreneur proceeds
                with the venture, otherwise all contributions are returned, the venture does not launch
                and the game ends. 9
         2. Market stage
            • One period after the venture is created (through the sinking of cost C), product
                quality is revealed to all uninformed agents.
            • The entrepreneur launches the venture with tokens being the only accepted medium of
                exchange for its products.
            • Buyers trade tokens at a new market determined exchange rate.
            • Payoffs and profits are realized.

Following Athey et. al. (2016), a dynamic price equilibrium requires the following:


         (a) (Agent optimization) Each buyer chooses to purchase the product in period t if
             ! et pt ≤ q . An agent chooses to purchase tokens at the end of a period if ! et ≤ δ et+1 . The
              venture sets a price in each period t to maximize !et pt D(et pt ) , the dollar value of
              revenue, where ! D(et pt ) = # I e p ≤q (that is, the number of units purchased). The choice
                                                t t


              of ! (m1 ,m2 ,a) maximizes the expected net present discounted value of venture profits.

         (b) (Market clearing) The market for tokens clears at the maximum exchange rate such that
             the demand for tokens is less than supply.
         (c) (Rational expectations) Agents’ expectation of the next period’s exchange rate are
             correct.


Market stage

         To examine the ICO process, we work backwards and start by examining the final market

stage. Suppose that mt tokens are available at time t (i.e. total issued tokens at t minus those being

held between t and t + 1). The following proposition characterizes the (token-denominated)

price, pt, set by the entrepreneurs given their knowledge of q.




9   This is similar to the provision point mechanism adopted on crowdfunding platforms.

                                                                                                          !9
Proposition 1. A dynamic price equilibrium exists where ! pt* = mt / nt and all consumers with a
positive value for the product purchase it during the market stage.

The proof is as follows. If product quality is revealed to be q, then the individual demand for

tokens in dollars will be ptet so long as pt et ≤ nt q . In equilibrium, the exchange rate, et, will be

set by market clearing. The exchange rate depends on whether ntpt (token demand) is less than,

equal to or greater than mt (token supply):

•   If pt < mt/nt, then products can be purchased without using all of the token supply. In this

    case, et will tend towards 0 in order to clear the token market. This will give the venture no

    revenue in dollar terms.

•   If pt > mt/nt instead, tokens will be scarce and total token demand will be less than ntq as

    some customers are excluded.

•   Last, if pt = mt/nt, then the (aggregate) dollar demand for tokens will be exactly ntq, making

    this the optimal price choice for the product. In this scenario, the exchange rate will be

    determined by: q/et = mt/nt, which occurs when e(mt) = ntq/mt (i.e. when all token holdings

    are used by consumers to purchase the venture’s products).

     It is useful to reflect on what this means from a pricing strategy perspective. Without

tokens, the venture would price based on expected willingness to pay. With tokens, it does not

have control over the exchange rate and so cannot directly price in the same way. Instead, what it

does is target the number of product units it wants to sell which, in this model, is the same as the

number of expected consumers in each period. It then sets a divide the money price which

divides the available supply of tokens equally among the expected number of consumers.

Consumers then bid for tokens if they they wish to purchase the product, leading to the exchange


                                                                                                    !10
rate reflecting their willingness to pay.10 Importantly, this pricing strategy does not require the

venture to have direct knowledge of (or even expectations about) consumers’ willingness to pay:

the scarcity of tokens induced by the divide the money price reveals consumer value through

buyer competition. It is the ability to choose price in this manner that gives tokens value post-

ICO, and explains why tokens can have value even in the absence of the additional rights

typically associated with traditional securities.

      Note that the equilibrium described in Proposition 1 is far from unique. At the beginning of

a market period, the venture may not have any tokens. In that case, when it sets pt, it will receive

tokens back as payment but there is no guarantee that those tokens have any value. In fact, given

that at the end of period 2 those tokens have no value, the venture could even set pt so high there

is no demand for its products. Consequently, there are multiple possible equilibria but we focus

on the one described in Proposition 1 because it maximizes the ongoing value of the tokens.

However, in Section 4, we consider a situation in which the venture has ongoing costs and,

therefore, has an incentive to set pt so high that there is no demand for its products. Nonetheless,

we demonstrate that the pricing outcome in Proposition 1 is an equilibrium in that case too.


The value of price commitments

      When prices are set ex post, expected revenues for the venture are ! (1+ δ (1+ g n ))E[nq] .

Since this plays an important role in determining the ex ante value of crypto tokens, it is useful to

examine whether an earlier price commitment at the time of the ICO (i.e., in period 0 before

uncertainty is resolved) can improve on this outcome.


10As the venture is receiving payment for those tokens, the exchange rate — so long as it is stable — will give them
dollar payments based on willingness to pay.

                                                                                                                 !11
     Suppose that, prior to sinking C, the venture commits to p1 and p2. If pt < mt/nt, then et = 0

and the venture’s expected revenues in period t would be 0. If pt > mt/nt, then et = q/pt. This is


                                                                          (         m
                                                                                        )    m
also true for pt = mt/nt. Thus, period 1 expected revenues would be 1− F(q, p11 ) E[q] p11 . It is


easy to see that this is less than ! E[n1q] . An analogous argument applies to period 2. Intuitively,

the divide the money price induces the dollar-denominated monopoly revenue for each period.

Because of the uncertainty, it is impossible to commit ex ante to this price and there is always a

range of outcomes where either no dollar denominated revenues are generated, or a reduced level

of revenues arises as not all buyers are able to purchase the product with the available token

supply. Of course, the venture could adjust the money supply ex post and achieve a divide the

money pricing outcome. However, this would be simply replacing one form of commitment for

another.


Timing of payments

     We now turn to consider the payments made in periods 1 and 2 of the market stage.

Discounting means that a buyer purchasing a token worth q in dollars tomorrow will only be

willing to pay !δ q for that token today. Therefore, for a given q, the venture will be viable if

! δ (n1 + δ n2 )q ≥ C . To see how this works, recall that in the market stage q is known to everyone.

At the beginning of any period, there are mt tokens on issue and consumers need to purchase

tokens in order to pay the price, pt, set by the venture. By the same argument discussed before, pt

will be set to be equal to mt and the exchange rate that clears the market will be e(mt) = ntq/mt. As

a result of this, by the end of the period at least mt tokens will be held by the venture. At this

point, the venture can divest itself of those tokens. However, the willingness to pay for those

                                                                                                   !12
tokens by others will be !δ q . Thus, the venture is indifferent between divesting itself of those

tokens or selling them to buyers in the next period. Regardless, the venture will earn q per period

for any period after the initial one it operates in.

      The initial two periods — the ICO stage and the first period of the market stage — involve

a different timing of payments to the venture. Working backwards, if buyers hold m0 tokens at

the beginning of the market stage, they will use those tokens to purchase the product at an

exchange rate of n1q/m0. If buyers choose not to save any tokens between periods 1 and 2, at the

end of that period the venture will hold the entire supply of tokens. However, it does not receive

any influx of dollar payments during that period (i.e., period 1).

      It is useful to note that if the venture holds tokens at the beginning of period 2, it always

has an incentive to release them. To see this, suppose that the venture holds a share, 1− a , of m2

(the tokens available in period 2). If it does not release any tokens, then ! e2 = n2 q / am2 . In this


case, its period 2 profits are 0. By contrast, if the venture releases those tokens, then ! e2 = n2 q / m2


and its profits are ! (1− a)e2 = (1− a)(n2 q / m2 ) . The intuition is simple: the venture does not earn

any revenue in a period except by selling tokens. In the final period (i.e., period 2) this means

that even if selling tokens depreciates the currency, the venture will always find it profitable to

sell its residual holdings.


Incentives to save

      In any given period, the supply of tokens is determined by several factors: the number of

tokens on issue, the number of tokens being saved for use in subsequent periods, and the number

of tokens released by the venture or others. Recall that in period 0, m0 tokens are issued. Suppose


                                                                                                       !13
that m1 and m2 tokens are intended to be ‘on issue’ in periods 1 and 2. A specific parameter of

interest will therefore be the growth rate in the money supply between periods 1 and 2 which we

                      m2 −m1
refer to as ! g m =     m1
                               (in our baseline model, we assume that ! gm ≥ 0 but relax this condition in


Section 4).

      To build the intuition around saving behavior, suppose that ! g m = 0 (i.e., the money supply

                                                                       n2 −n1
stays at a constant, m). Working backwards, let ! g n =                  n1
                                                                                be the growth in demand between


periods 1 and 2. Since period 2 is the last period, the exchange rate will be:

                                                           (1+ g n )nq
                                                  ! e2 =               ,
                                                               m

as there is no incentive to save beyond that period. In period 1, token holders have a choice

between selling their tokens to consumers demanding access to the product in that period, or

saving them to sell them to consumers in period 2. Let s denote the share of token supply in

period 1 that is saved. Tokens will be saved so long as ! δ e2 > e1 . The exchange rate in period 2 is


independent of the amount of tokens saved in period 1 while e1 =
                                                                                       n1q
                                                                                     (1−s)m
                                                                                              . Thus, as s rises, e1 also


rises. In equilibrium, therefore, s will rise until ! δ e2 = e1 . It is easy to show that:


                                                      ⎧ δ (1+ g n ) − 1 ⎫
                                            ! s = max ⎨                ,0 ⎬ .
                                                      ⎪⎩ δ (1+ g n )      ⎪⎭


That is, there is a positive level of saving if and only if ! δ (1+ g n ) > 1 . Note that all of the tokens


in the ICO are saved for at least one period. If s > 0, then ! e1 = δ e2 ; while if s = 0, then




                                                                                                                      !14
! e1 =   nq
         m
              > δ (1+ g n ) nqm = δ e2 . This means that the exchange rate will be increasing over time, while

the token-denominated price of the product will fall regardless.

          What happens when the money supply changes between periods 1 and 2? In this case,

                                                           (1+ g n )nq
                                                  ! e2 =               .
                                                           (1+ g m )m1


If the money supply expands, this reduces the return to saving between periods 1 and 2. In

particular:

                                                  ⎧ δ (1+ g n ) − (1+ g m ) ⎫
                                        ! s = max ⎨                        ,0 ⎬ .
                                                  ⎪⎩     δ (1+ g n )          ⎪⎭


If s > 0, then e1 = δ e2 , which means that e1 falls as gm rises; while if s = 0, then e1 is independent

of gm.

          To summarize, the incentives for token holders to save is a function of the expected growth

in demand for the product and the expected growth in the money supply. If ! g m < δ (1+ g n ) − 1 ,


then s > 0, while if g m ≥ δ (1+ g n ) − 1 , s = 0. Thus, by setting gm, the entrepreneur can determine


whether saving takes place between periods 1 and 2 or not. One choice the entrepreneur has is to

set ! g m = g n , in which case, ! e1 = e2 and ! p1 = p2 . This is the equivalent in this economy to the

Taylor Rule for monetary policy that keeps prices stable (Taylor, 1993). Note, however, that this

involves s = 0 as ! g m > δ (1+ g n ) − 1 .

          What about incentives to save between period 0 and period 1? First, note that there is no

demand for tokens in period 0 other than for saving purposes. Therefore, ! e0 = δ E[e1 ] . This also



                                                                                                           !15
means that expectations regarding e1 will determine the value of the tokens that the entrepreneur

issues in period 0. Is there any reason for the entrepreneur to set !m1 > m0 ? Suppose the


entrepreneur does this. Then their expected return is:

                                                       ⎧               δ E[nq] m1 = δ E[nq]
                                                       ⎪                    m1                                 s=0
           ! e0 m0 + δ E[e1 ](m1 − m0 ) = δ E[e1 ]m1 = ⎨                                                  if
                                                       ⎪ δ
                                                           2 (1+g n ) E[nq]
                                                                            m1 = δ 2 (1+ g n )E[nq] m12
                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                               s>0
                                                       ⎩           m2




The entrepreneur’s return is independent of m0. Thus, we can assume that m ≡ m1 = m0 in what

follows without loss in generality. Moreover, from this, we can also see that it is only the

intended gm (between periods 1 and 2) that matters and not the level of m per se.


ICO Stage

       At the ICO stage, the entrepreneur cannot launch the venture unless it expects to earn

enough from the ICO to cover development costs C, i.e. unless e0 m ≥ C . The value of e0 will

depend upon whether the token is expected to be saved between periods 1 and 2. Specifically,

! e0 = δ       E[nq] (when s = 0) or ! e0 = δ 2
           1                                              1+g n
           m                                               m2
                                                                  E[nq] (when s > 0). Thus, the ICO will be viable and


will finance start-up costs if:

                                             δ E[nq] ≥ C                   1+ g m ≥ δ (1+ g n )
                                    !                                for
                                        δ   2 1+g n
                                              1+g m
                                                      E[nq] ≥ C            1+ g m < δ (1+ g n )

It is easy to see that savings choices will be made in a way to maximize e0. The entrepreneur

will, therefore, only proceed with the ICO if either of these conditions is satisfied as competition

among token purchasers will ensure that ! e0 m = max{1,δ 1+g n }δ E[nq] .
                                                                                1+g
                                                                                  m




                                                                                                                     !16
      It is useful to note that a venture does not gain from retaining a share (a > 0) of tokens. We

already noted that there is no return to the entrepreneur from saving tokens between periods 0

and 1. This means that the value of retaining a share of tokens arises from the ability to hold on

to them from period 0 to period 2. Recall that the entrepreneur will always want to sell any

holdings in period 2. Therefore, if a is the share of initial tokens issued (m) that are retained by

the entrepreneur, the exchange rate in period 2 will be !e2 =               (1+g n ) E[nq]
                                                                              m(1+g m )
                                                                                             , and so the return to


retaining a share a would be ! δ 2 e2 − δ e1 , which is only non-zero if s = 0. In that case, the return to


retaining tokens equals to δ (δ                     − m(1−a)
                                   (1+g n ) E[nq]     E[nq]
                                     m(1+g m )
                                                             ) , which is negative when gm is high enough so


that s = 0. What this means is that retaining a share of tokens does not perform any function than

what would otherwise be performed by setting ! g m > 0 , and selling new tokens into the market

(e.g. through an auction) after the ICO stage and earning seigniorage. Thus, the committed

growth in the supply of tokens is the main instrument that can impact the value of an ICO. If s >

0, then e0 = δ 2 E[e2 ] , which means that e0 falls as gm rises. If s = 0, then e0 is independent of gm.

      What gm maximizes the returns to the entrepreneur? If g m < δ (1+ g n ) − 1 , then s > 0 and so

the total value of tokens issued in period 0 depends (negatively) on gm. This means that the value

of the ICO is driven in part by the anticipated growth in demand for the product. By contrast, if

g m ≥ δ (1+ g n ) − 1 , s = 0, then the total value of tokens issued in period 0 is independent of gm. In

addition, the value of the ICO is independent of anticipated demand growth. Interestingly, if

! g m < δ (1+ g n ) − 1 , then the value of the ICO with anticipated saving is greater than the value




                                                                                                                !17
without it, and that value is falling in gm. Thus, the value of the ICO is maximized with gm=0.11

This implies that the ICO will be viable so long as ! max{1,δ (1+ g n )}δ E[nq] ≥ C .


         However, we have to ask whether venture profits are maximized by keeping the money

supply fixed over time. Ignoring for the moment whether the ICO value covers C or not, net of

C, the expected profits of the venture when s > 0 are:

                                   e0 m + δ 2 E[e2 ](1− s + g m )m
                                            (1+ g n )E[nq] ⎛ (1+ δ (1+ g n ) ) (1+ g m ) ⎞
                                   != δ 2                  ⎜                             ⎟m
                                              (1+ g m )m ⎝          δ (1+ g n )          ⎠
                                   = δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ) ) E[nq]


By contrast, if ! g m ≥ δ (1+ g n ) − 1 , s = 0, then the expected venture profits are:


                                                       (1+ g m )m = δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ) ) E[nq]
                            E[nq]       (1+ g n )E[nq]
                       !δ         m+δ 2
                             m            (1+ g m )m


Thus, the outcomes with and without saving are equal and independent of gm. By setting gm = 0,

the venture can shift funds forward without changing the expected revenues from the product. Of

course, it may have other goals in mind such as price stability (which is necessary for facilitating

the use of a token as a medium of exchange). One way this can be achieved is by setting ! g m = g n

(thereby causing s=0). In this situation, the exchange rate and token-denominated price, p, will

be constant over time. The following proposition summarizes these results:

Proposition 2. The amount raised in an ICO is maximized by setting ! g m = 0 , while, conditional
on raising sufficient funds to cover C, the expected net present discounted value of venture profits
is independent of gm.




11   In Section 4 below, we show that the qualitative results of this section do not change if gm can be negative.

                                                                                                                     !18
Comparison with equity finance

     We are now in a position to compare the returns to an ICO with that of traditional equity

finance. Recall that the expected returns from an ICO are !δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ) ) E[nq] − C while the


returns from equity finance are ! δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))E[nq] − C . Thus, they are equivalent conditional

on each being viable. However, while equity finance is viable whenever the expected return of a

venture is positive, this does not hold for an ICO.

     To see this, recall that the maximum ICO funds will be:

                                        ⎧⎪ δ 2 (1+ g )E[nq]    1 < δ (1+ g n )
                               ! e0 m = ⎨            n
                                                            if
                                         ⎪⎩      δ E[nq]       1 ≥ δ (1+ g n )


What this implies is that the ICO could involve a shortfall relative to C even if total venture gross

profits would otherwise exceed C. Total venture revenues are ! δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ) ) E[nq] , which is the


present value of period 1 plus period 2 revenues, whereas the ICO is based on the greater of the

present values of period 1 and period 2 revenues. This arises because tokens that do not grant

their holders additional dividend, voting, and control rights do not entitle holders to a stream of

returns, but are instead ‘cashed in’ at a given point in time by investors. This issue is even more

stark when the venture has customers across more than 2 periods in the market stage (e.g. when

it plans to enter multiple industry verticals over time). For example, an infinitely-lived venture

(with no growth) will be viable if !δ n > (1− δ )C , whereas an ICO in which the tokens do not

constitute a crypto security will only raise! δ E[nq] at most.




                                                                                                    !19
     This illustrates a significant limitation of ICOs compared to equity finance that arises when

the venture is expected to be long-lived. This result is consistent with the observed use of pre-

ICO, equity-based funding rounds in this space, in which traditional VCs have funded crypto

startups before the venture and its tokens go live. The development of tokens that have similar

rights and features of traditional securities (i.e., crypto securities) may alleviate this problem,

although this also introduces new issues around the allocation of returns between token holders

and crypto equity holders which are beyond the scope of this paper.

     Founders may also decide to transform, when feasible, what is typically a series of

milestone-based rounds of funding for the same venture (e.g. from Series A to IPO) into multiple,

sequential ICOs across related protocols and products. An early example of this is Protocol Labs,

which is structured as an R&D team for multiple token-based projects in the internet

infrastructure vertical. With the launch of its first project, Filecoin (which focuses on data

storage), the Protocol Labs team raised capital for only a single component of what they hope

will become a much broader, modular stack for internet services.



4.     Extensions

Standard demand function

     The divide the money pricing rule is simple here because there are a number of consumers

in each period, nt, each of whom have the same value for the product. A natural question to ask is

what this rule looks like when the venture faces a smooth demand function that reflects

consumers who have different willingness to pay for the product.




                                                                                                !20
      Suppose the demand function is denoted by nt = D(et pt ) .12 In this scenario, what is the

optimal pricing choice for the venture at time t? If the available money supply is mt, then the

venture can target a particular nt (call it nt* ) by choosing pt* =
                                                                          mt
                                                                          nt*
                                                                                . At this price, for a given


exchange rate, et, the total dollar demand for tokens will be nt*et pt* = nt* D −1 (nt* ) , which must

                                                                                                    nt* D −1 ( nt* )
equal the dollar token supply of ! et mt , yielding an equilibrium exchange rate of ! êt =              mt
                                                                                                                       .


Given this, what ! nt* will the venture target? The venture’s dollar profits are ! nt* D −1 (nt* ) and, thus,

if it were to maximize the value of the tokens on issue, it will determine the quantity of

consumers at its revenue maximizing point which, in this case, is equivalent to a point where the

elasticity of demand is unity. Once again, as with Proposition 1, this is an equilibrium outcome

of the dynamic pricing game, but is not necessarily the unique outcome.


Retiring tokens

      Thus far we have assumed that tokens, once issued, cannot be retired and so ! gm ≥ 0 .

However, Proposition 2 shows that when the venture wants to encourage saving in order to

maximize capital raised at the ICO stage, it will want to raise the value of the tokens in the

second market period. This value depends on the amount of tokens on issue in that period. Thus,

the lower that gm is, the higher the value of the tokens in the last period. This suggests that there

might be value in committing to retire tokens between periods 1 and 2.

      The challenge with this approach, however, is identifying how many tokens to retire. If the

venture committed to retire all tokens, then there would be no benefit to saving after period 1 and

12Here we assume that the uncertainty regarding demand is with respect to some unknown but ex post realized
parameter of the demand function rather than q and n per se.

                                                                                                                 !21
hence, the ICO would be based on period 1 revenues — precisely the opposite of what is

intended by retiring tokens. Moreover, if tokens were saved, how would this retirement take

place in practice? It would look like an intentional debasing of the currency, and would require

some rationale to determine whose tokens should be retired.

      Suppose that the venture could commit to retiring tokens in its possession at the end of

period 1, i.e. those used to purchase its product in period 1. If the saving rate was s, this would be

equivalent to setting gm = −(1− s) . As s is endogenous and depends on gm, with this retirement

policy, the equilibrium savings rate (assuming ! 1+ g m < δ (1+ g n ) ) will be:

                                                            1− (1− s)            1
                                            ! s = 1−                   ⇒s=
                                                            δ (1+ gn )     1+ δ (1+ gn )


In this case, ! e2 =       1+gn
                       (1+δ (1+gn ))m   nq . Thus, the value of the ICO is:


                                      ⎧
                                      ⎪
                                             δ 2 (1+g n )
                                            1+δ (1+g n )
                                                            E[nq]        1 < δ (1+ g n ) (1+ δ (1+ g n ) )
                             ! e0 m = ⎨                             if
                                      ⎪⎩         δ E[nq]                 1 ≥ δ (1+ g n ) (1+ δ (1+ g n ) )



In this case, the maximum amount that can be raised by an ICO is less than what would arise if

the venture were to commit to gm = 0. While retirement encourages saving, that saving also

depresses the value of tokens in the second period. Furthermore, such a retiring strategy is likely

to be difficult to implement, as the venture may need those tokens to cover its operational costs,

and arbitrarily retiring tokens held by others is unlikely to be a viable option.




                                                                                                             !22
Ongoing costs

      While the divide the money pricing outcome is an equilibrium that implements a positive

ongoing value for the tokens, it rests on the venture being indifferent between maximizing profits

in each period and other goals such as supplying no one or everyone. Those latter goals,

however, will cause distortions to the equilibrium value of the tokens that harm the ability of the

venture to raise funds in an ICO.

      The indifference condition, furthermore, rests on there being no ongoing costs in supplying

products to token holders. Suppose that the marginal dollar cost of supplying a product to each

consumer is c > 0. For the moment, we assume that realized q exceeds c. (If it does not, the

venture will shut down even after sinking C). In this case, the venture at time t is no longer

indifferent between supplying the product to nt consumers versus another option. In particular,

since the venture has issued tokens to others in return for dollars, it receives no additional benefit

from supplying the product while it now incurs dollar costs of ! cnt . Clearly, in this situation, the

venture would prefer to supply no products at all. Anticipating this, the value of the token at the

ICO stage (or any other stage) would be zero.

      This is a potentially devastating outcome from a token value perspective. In this model, as

it involves finite time, the usual remedies to avoid such a collapse such as relational contracts do

not resolve this problem. That said, what if, at the beginning of any market stage t, but prior to

setting the token-denominated price of the product pt, the venture is required to hold a share a of

all tokens on issue? It could achieve this by either acquiring or holding on to those tokens at the

end of the previous stage, t-1.13 In this case, the expected dollar profit to the venture in that stage

13After it has set its prices for that period, the venture would be free to sell those tokens into the market in order to
facilitate transactions. The key condition is that it holds a share, a, when it commits to a token-denominated price.

                                                                                                                     !23
would be !aet pt nt − cnt . If ! pt =        , then !et =
                                        mt                  nt
                                        nt                  mt
                                                                 q and so expected dollar profits would be


! aqnt − cnt . Hence, so long as ! a ≥ qc , the venture would choose to supply the entire market using


the “divide the money” price.

      Interestingly, while by Proposition 2, conditional on being financed, the expected returns to

the venture are independent of gm, they are also unaffected by the requirement to hold a share of

tokens. However, also by Proposition 2, the requirement may limit the funds that can be raised in

an ICO, such that the venture may not be able to raise enough to cover its development costs C.

To see this, note that the maximum ICO funds would be:

                                        ⎧ (1− F(c,n) ) E[(1− c )δ 2 (1+ g )n(q + c) | q ≥ c]    1 < δ (1+ g n )
! (1− F(c,n) ) E[(1− a)e0 m | q ≥ c] = ⎪⎨
                                                             q           n
                                                                                             if
                                        ⎪⎩    (1− F(c,n)) E[(1− qc )δ n(q + c) | q ≥ c]         1 ≥ δ (1+ g n )




Which simplifies to:

        ! (1− F(c,n) ) E[(1− a)e0 m | q ≥ c] = (1− F(c,n) )δ max{δ (1+ g n ),1}E[n(q − c) | q ≥ c] .


Thus, the condition for whether the venture can proceed is:

                         ! δ max{δ (1+ g n ),1}(1− F(c,n) ) E[n(q − c) | q ≥ c] ≥ C


By contrast, when there are ongoing costs, the feasibility condition under equity finance is:

                           ! δ (1+ δ (1+ g n )) (1− F(c,n) ) E[n(q − c) | q ≥ c] ≥ C


In other words, even though tokens are only raised with respect to revenue drivers, the required

holding condition to prevent expropriation of token-holders means that the ICO is limited by the

profits from period one, rather than the flow of profits as in equity finance. This highlights the



                                                                                                              !24
importance of a lack of pricing commitment in constraining the amount that can be raised in an

ICO. Put simply, when there are on-going costs, the venture cannot be trusted not to expropriate

token-holders by setting a very high token-denominated price in later periods. If, using some

assumed mechanism, that commitment could be made so that the dollar denominated price was

constrained to be ! max{q,c} , the venture would not have to hold onto tokens at the ICO stage. In

this case, an ICO would be feasible if:

                         ! δ max{δ (1+ g n ),1}(1− F(c,n) ) E[nq | q ≥ c] ≥ C .


This says that for q sufficiently high, the venture will set a divide the money price and, given this

commitment, it will earn the maximum (discounted) expected revenue from one of the two

market periods.

     It is difficult in this general form to compare this to the feasibility condition under equity

finance. To simplify matters, suppose that n is known initially while q is uniformly distributed on

[0,1] with c < 1. In this case, !(1− F(c) ) nE[q | q ≥ c] = n 12 (1− c 2 ) and the amount that can be


raised in an ICO is δ! max{δ (1+ g n ),1}n 12 (1− c 2 ) . By contrast, the equity finance condition


becomes ! δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))n 12 (1− c)2 ≥ C . Comparing the RHS of these two conditions, it can be

seen that ICO financing has a more relaxed constraint than equity financing if:

                                          max{δ (1+ g n ),1} 1− c
                                      !                     ≥
                                           1+ δ (1+ g n )     1+ c


It is easy to see that this will hold only for c sufficiently high, while it does not hold as c gets

closer to 0. In other words, when a pricing commitment is possible and the venture does not have



                                                                                                  !25
to hold a share of tokens to prevent expropriation, it potentially has an easier time raising C

upfront than would be the case under equity finance.

        The question then becomes: would a venture want to raise this extra amount? Recall that

the ICO is based on the relatively lucrative market period revenues. However, the venture in this

scenario is also committed to paying for on-going costs. Thus, suppose that a venture would not

be financeable under equity finance but would be under an ICO. Then:

                        ! δ max{δ (1+ g n ),1}n 12 (1− c 2 ) ≥ C > δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))n 12 (1− c)2

In this case, if the venture proceeds it earns:

        δ max{δ (1+ g n ),1}n 12 (1− c 2 ) + δ min{δ (1+ g n ),1}n 12 (1− c 2 ) − δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))nc(1− c) − C
    !
        = δ (1+ δ (1+ g n ))n 12 (1− c)2 − C < 0


This shows that with price commitments, if on-going costs are sufficiently high, an ICO can do

as well as equity finance. This arises because the ICO allows the venture to raise funds based on

the best period of revenues, mitigating the relatively low profitability of other periods. When

there are no on-going costs there is no advantage to be gained from such revenue shifting.


Third-party products and products

        Thus far, we have explored a situation where the tokens are the exclusive medium of

exchange and consumers can only spend tokens to purchase products from the venture. This

represents a simplification of how the technology in used in practice, as tokens are issued to

crowdfund and bootstrap economic activity around digital ecosystems that are broader than the

venture itself. While the venture, especially in the early stages, often represents the key economic

actor within the ecosystem, its objective is to use incentives and market design to facilitate


                                                                                                                   !26
transactions that extend beyond its boundaries, and create the right conditions for other

participants to join its ‘economy’. The venture could design incentives in a way to crowdsource

talent and labor (e.g. Numerai), or other key resources the ecosystem needs to scale such as

computation (e.g. Bitcoin, Ethereum), storage (Filecoin, Sia), electricity (Grid+), digital content

and data (e.g. BAT), etc. For example, in the case of a token designed to create a competitive

marketplace for data storage and data services, hard drive manufacturers and data centers can

join the digital platform developed by the venture and sell their services directly to consumers in

exchange for tokens. Third-parties can also use the shared infrastructure deployed by the venture

to develop applications on top of it that take advantage of the underlying token to settle

transactions and allocate resources.

     Whereas until now we assumed that all these different types of third-parties are vertically

integrated with the venture, in this section we explicitly explore the case where they are separate

entities. To consider this, we return to the situation where there are no ongoing costs (i.e., c = 0

and the platform is purely digital) but assume that, in addition to the venture’s services, other

suppliers can accept tokens as payment in each period involving a market stage. To keep things

simple, we assume that there is a single third-party supplier who charges a token-denominated

price of wt. We assume that this supplier is the exclusive purchaser of products from the venture

and pays a token denominated price of pt to the venture to keep the platform running (e.g. so that

the venture can keep updating and maintaining the codebase). Last, to keep the model as close as

possible to our baseline, we assume that the third-party supplier’s customers place a value of q

on their product (which is initially unknown), and that there are nt such customers in each period.




                                                                                                 !27
      It is easy to see that, in each market stage, the total demand for tokens will be ! wt nt as the

third-party supplier’s customers and the supplier itself require tokens to transact on the platform,

but payment on the platform, pt, is purely internal so does not (on net) impact token demand.

Notice, however, that if the venture set its price before the third-party supplier sets its own, the

venture will set a divide the money price leaving the third-party to do the same. In this case, the

dollar demand for tokens will be ! qnt , and the exchange rate will be the same as in the baseline

model. In other words, this structure does not change the choices the venture faces or the

conditions required for a successful financing via an ICO.

      That said, if the third-party supplier has its own costs, c, it will need to earn tokens of

sufficient value to cover these costs. This will not happen if the venture sets a divide the money

price of ! pt = mt / nt . To encourage the third-party supplier, the venture could commit to receiving

a share, b, of the token payments made to the third-party, wt. In this case, the third-party will set a

divide the money price, ! wt = mt / nt , and will find it worthwhile to enter so long as ! (1− b)q ≥ c .


      Given this, the venture’s expected profits are: δ! max{δ (1+ g n ),1}E[nq | (1− b)q ≥ c] − C .

Note that these are decreasing in b and so will be maximized by setting b = 0. This is because, as

mentioned before, when the venture issues tokens, the initial demand for tokens is based on a

single period of token demand. So long as the third-party supplier enters, the venture will be able

to appropriate the full value of a seller for the period with the maximum discounted value of

tokens. Thus, its incentive is to ensure the third-party supplier enters for the widest feasible range

of q. This is achieved by foregoing future payments on the platform.




                                                                                                       !28
     Interestingly, this is related to what developers building on top of cryptocurrencies such as

Bitcoin and Ethereum refer to as “platform-level censorship resistance”: compared to traditional

digital platforms (e.g. iOS, Android etc.), platforms developed on top of crypto tokens may

provide better incentive alignment between platform architects and third-party developers of

complementary applications. While in a traditional platform the architect can expropriate ideas

and inventions from application developers and incorporate them into their offering, in a token-

based one it has no ability nor incentive to do so.



5.     Imperfect commitment

     The analysis so far has assumed that the venture can perfectly commit to (a) only accepting

tokens for access to the product; and (b) stating the supply of tokens upfront for each period and

not changing it under any circumstance. Whereas both commitments are fundamentally promises

by the founding team, they are typically reinforced by making the underlying codebase available

as open-source software and by hardcoding the money supply schedule within the software

protocol. Under such conditions, a fork of the network would be required to change the initial

commitments, and such fork would not be successful without the vast majority of the network

and stakeholders supporting it. We now explore the implications of relaxing the assumption that

such commitments are credible.


Money supply commitment

     It is a cornerstone of monetary economics that for money to perform its function, its supply

must be tightly controlled. The same is true for crypto tokens, but there is some nuance here.



                                                                                                 !29
      To begin, suppose that while the venture can commit to m0 and m1, it cannot commit to m2.

Suppose also that between periods 1 and 2 some saving is taking place (ie., s > 0). In this case,

the period 2 venture profits would be: ! e2 p2 n2 − e2 sm1 . Given that the venture still commits to

only accepting tokens in exchange for access to the platform, it uses a divide the money price of

! p2 = ( m2 + sm1 ) / n2 , while !e2 = n2 q / ( m2 + sm1 ) . Thus, its profit is !qn2 − m2 +sm
                                                                                           sm
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                n2 q , which is
                                                                                              1




increasing in m2. If s > 0 and the venture is uncommitted to m2, then it has an incentive to set m2

as high as possible. Put simply, it has an incentive to inflate prices precisely because it does not

appropriate any returns from past saving behavior. Given this, when the commitment to m2

cannot be credibly enforced, no saving will take place.

      It is useful to note that if the venture retained a share of m1, this would not remove its

incentive to expand the money supply. This is because the venture has an incentive to dispose of

such retained holdings in period 2, and these have the same profit impact as any expansion in m2.

Thus, regardless, the venture has an incentive to set m2 as high as possible if s > 0.14

      Being unable to commit to m2 can potentially impact the success of an ICO. Recall that

committing early to ! m1 = m2 , while not changing the expected return to the venture, shifts

forward earnings so that the venture can fund C upfront. In other words, a lack of commitment

may mean some otherwise viable ventures may not be funded through an ICO. Interestingly,

when this is not a constraint, a lack of commitment on the money supply is not a problem for the

venture. While that lack of commitment means that saving will be discouraged, there is an upside

to the absence of saving behavior. If the venture holds all of the tokens, it is free to change how it

14In practice, the use of an extremely long vesting schedule could delay this issue. However, this depends on the
commitment to the money supply over that time period, something that will be useful to explore in future work.

                                                                                                              !30
operates after the period in which investors have purchased tokens to fund C, and have recouped

it by selling their token to would-be users of the product. In other words, when there is no

function performed by saving tokens, there is no value to commitment and a lack of commitment

is not an obstacle for the venture going forward.

     A venture may, indeed, want to plan for such flexibility if it anticipates the need to raise

funds to finance activities that may grow the venture further. It may also find it advantageous if it

wants an exit through an IPO or acquisition that is not encumbered by previous commitments. In

summary, the conclusion here is that commitment is a cost the venture must incur in order to

shift funds forward to cover C. The less such revenue shifting is required, the less commitment is

needed. Whereas many have described ICOs as a potential substitute to traditional sources of

funding such as angel and venture capital, this highlights their complementary nature to them.


Medium of exchange commitment

     The other key commitment we discussed is that the token will constitute the only way to

access the product developed by the venture. Suppose that this commitment was not maintained

and the venture, in the market stage, sold products directly to consumers in exchange for dollars.

For any buyer, the effective dollar price would be the same regardless of whether they purchased

tokens to facilitate that transaction or not. As the venture sets its token-denominated price at the

beginning of a period in the market stage, it has no incentive to set a price other than the divide

the money price. With this price, it appropriates all the consumer value which is the most it could

get by setting a dollar-denominated price instead. That said, these pricing incentives may change

if, when it sets its price, tokens are held by others outside the venture. By setting a price above

the divide the money price, no consumers would purchase tokens and the value of the tokens

                                                                                                  !31
would depreciate (or completely collapse). In particular, this may arise if there is saving both

between periods, and between the ICO and market stage. In other words, as in the commitment

to not change the money supply, the medium of exchange commitment is critical whenever

tokens are held by others outside the venture. Imperfect commitment that allows the venture to

accept other means of payment for the product later would give the venture the incentive to set

the price so as to have payments not denominated in tokens (e.g. dollar payments) go directly to

the founding team. In this way, we can see the importance of this particular commitment for the

viability of ICOs.15



6.      Network Effects

      One of the purported benefits of ICOs is that they can assist ventures facing network effects

in avoiding coordination problems. Such problems arise when unfavorable expectations about a

network result in ventures having to use low pricing in order to generate adoption. By

comparison, a venture facing favorable expectations can price at a high level and still generate

adoption. Clearly, the more favorable the expectations for the venture and its future products, the

greater the profits for the venture. We therefore ask whether it is possible to use an ICO and

improve outcomes for ventures that would otherwise face unfavorable expectations.

      To explore this, we amend the underlying demand so that the value to a consumer from the

use of the venture’s platform is ! q(α + β nt ) with ! α , β > 0 ; that is, there is a one-sided network

effect whereby the value of the platform increases as more users join. In this situation, the price

15The venture, Quantstamp, recently became embroiled in controversy when it did not adhere to a medium of
exchange commitment for its platform for smart contracts and was accused of accepting other cryptocurrencies and
US dollars for its services (Milano and Odayar, 2018).

                                                                                                             !32
that the venture can charge for access to the platform in a given period depends critically on

consumers’ expectations regarding how many other users will also join the platform. Using the

terminology of Hagiu (2006), if expectations are favorable, then consumers expect others to join

(i.e., ! E[n1 ] = n1 ), and the venture can charge a price of ! p1 = q(α + β n1 ) in the first period. If


expectations are unfavorable instead (i.e., ! E[n1 ] = 0 ), then the venture can only charge a price of


! p1 = qα . Interestingly, at that price, all consumers join and receive a surplus of ! qβ n1 each. Note

that there is nothing that carries over to period 2, regardless of who uses the product in period 1,

so the same coordination problem for the venture exists in this context as well.

      What if expectations are unfavorable with ! E[n1 ] = 0 ? Are such expectations sustainable if

the venture uses an ICO? The short answer is no. We are aided here by the fact that it is common

knowledge that consumers know the true value of the product q. That means that if there are bids

for the tokens that fall initially above the reserve, it is because q is sufficiently high. In that case,

those bids will come from all consumers in period 1. Thus, the total bid volume, ! e0 m1 , would be

based on ! δ E[n]q(α + β E[n]) which implies that the exchange rate is a perfect signal of ! E[n] .


The only equilibrium outcome in the ICO stage, therefore, is where ! e0 = δ          q(α + β n1 ) .
                                                                                n1
                                                                                m1




      Note that unfavorable expectations is not an equilibrium outcome as it is based on

expectations that are not fulfilled in equilibrium. Because all participants can see trading in

tokens, this allows coordination to emerge.

      The same pattern can hold in period 2 where the period begins with the venture holding all

of the tokens and setting the price. The venture sets a divide the money price equal to ! m2 / n2



                                                                                                      !33
based on the assumption — fulfilled in any equilibrium — that if there are purchases they are

from all consumers. At this price, consumers bid for tokens with the unique equilibrium outcome

being ! e2 =        q(α + β n2 ) . Note that if, for some reason, the venture assumed that it would have
               n2
               m2




fewer than n2 consumers — say, n — then it would set p2 = m2 / n . At this price, the exchange


rate would adjust to ! e2 =     n
                                m2
                                     q(α + β n) . Thus, there would be rationing of customers. However, in


this model, the only rational expectations consistent with the assumption of consumer symmetry

are 0 and n2, and the venture is indifferent between pricing based on these two outcomes since it

expects 0 in either case. Therefore, the venture can set a price based on full adoption. To relate

this to the literature on network or platform pricing, note that the ICO makes the full price ! et pt

an insulating tariff (Weyl, 2010). This is a tariff that makes it a dominant strategy for each

consumer to adopt the product. That is, ! et pt ≤ q(α + β nt ) .




7.      Conclusion

      This paper shows that entrepreneurs have an incentive to use subsequent product pricing

choices to ensure that crypto tokens issued to fund start-up costs retain their value even when

they do not confer the typical rights associated with equity. Countering this are potential

commitment issues that arise when agents other than the entrepreneur hold tokens for any period

of time in the hope that the tokens will appreciate in value. While entrepreneurs will still price to

retain token value, they may be tempted to issue more tokens post-ICO, expropriating early

token holders. Thus, discretionary pricing is an important instrument in this context (as it allows



                                                                                                       !34
for price discovery), whereas discretionary monetary policy is a major concern. Such constraints

might bind if the entrepreneur needs to take advantage of expectations about future demand to

increase the value raised through an ICO and cover the development costs of a new digital

platform.




                                                                                             !35
References

Agrawal, A., C. Catalini, and A. Goldfarb (2013), “Some simple economics of
       crowdfunding,” Innovation Policy and the Economy, 14 (1), 63-97.

Athey, S., I. Parashkevov, V. Sarukkai, and J. Xia (2016), “Bitcoin pricing, adoption, and
        usage: Theory and evidence,” mimeo., Stanford.

Bakos, Y. and H. Halaburda (2018), The Role of Cryptographic Tokens and ICOs in
       Fostering Platform Adoption. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/
       abstract=3207777 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3207777

Benedetti, H. and L. Kostovetsky (2018), “Digital Tulips? Returns to Investors in Initial
        Coin Offerings,” mimeo., Boston College.

Biais, B., C. Bisiere, M. Bouvard and C. Casamatta (2017), “The blockchain folk theorem,”
         Working Paper No.17-817, Toulouse School of Economics.

Budish, E. (2018), “The Limits of Bitcoin and the Blockchain,” mimeo., Chicago.

Canidio, A. (2018), “Financial incentives for open source development: the case of
        Blockchain,” mimeo., Insead.

Catalini, C. and J.S. Gans (2016), “Some simple economics of the blockchain,” mimeo,
         MIT https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=2874598.

Catalini, C., J. Boslego, K. Zhang (2017), “Technological Opportunity, Bubbles and
         Innovation: The Dynamics of Initial Coin Offerings”, mimeo, MIT.

Chiu, J. and T.V. Koeppl (2017), “The Economics of Cryptocurrencies - Bitcoin and
        Beyond,” mimeo., Queens University.

Chod, J. and E. Lyandres (2018), “A Theory of ICOs: Diversification, Agency and
       Information Asymmetry,” mimeo., Boston College.

Cong, L.W., Y. Li and N. Wang (2018), “Tokenonomics: Dynamic Adoption and
       Valuation,” mimeo., Chicago.

de Bono, E. (1994), “The IBM Dollar,” Centre for the Study of Financial Innovation,
       London.

Fisch, C. (2018), “Initial coin offerings (ICOs) to finance new ventures: An exploratory
        study,” mimeo., Trier.

Hagiu, A. (2006), “Pricing and Commitment by Two-Sided Platforms,” Rand Journal of


                                                                                             !36
        Economics, 37 (3), pp.720-737.

Halaburda, H. And M. Sarvary (2016), Beyond Bitcoin: The Economics of Digital
       Currencies, Palgrave MacMillan.

Howell, S.T., M. Niessner and D. Yermack (2018), “Initial Coin Offerings: Financing
       Growth with Cryptocurrency Token Sales,” mimeo., NYU.

Li, J. and W. Mann (2018), “Initial Coin Offering and Platform Building,” mimeo., UCLA.

Milano, A. and T. Odayar (2018), “Quantstamp under Fire: Buyers say faith shaken in $65
        million token,” Coindesk (14 June); https://www.coindesk.com/quantstamp-fire-
        buyers-say-faith-shaken-65-million-token/

Momtaz, P.P. (2018), “Initial Coin Offerings,” Working Paper No.31, Hamburg Financial
      Research Center.

Nakamoto, S. (2008), “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” mimeo, unknown.

Sockin, M. And W. Xiong (2018), “A Model of Cryptocurrencies,” mimeo., Princeton.

Taylor, J.B. (1993), “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
        Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, pp. 195-214.

Weyl, E.G. (2010), “A price theory of multi-sided platforms,” American Economic
       Review, 100 (4), pp.1642-72.




                                                                                          !37
