NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A THEORY OF SMALL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
Laurent Bouton
Micael Castanheira
Allan Drazen
Working Paper 24413
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24413

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018

We greatly benefited from the insights, comments, and suggestions of anonymous referees, Scott
Ashworth, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Georgy Egorov, Anthony Fowler, Moritz Hennicke, Debraj
Ray, Howard Rosenthal, Keith Schnakenberg, Konstantin Sonin, Thomas Stratmann, Francesco
Trebbi, Richard Van Weelden, and seminar and conference participants at the Barcelona GSE
Summer Forum, Harris School of Public Policy (U. Chicago), Harvard, University of Konstanz,
LSE, University of Namur, NBER PE workshop, Ecole Polytechnique, Pompeu Fabra University,
Royal Holloway, UBC, Wallis Institute, University of Utah, Princeton University, Duke
University as well as from observations, in a previous step of this study, from audiences at
Georgetown, Warwick, Mannheim, the Priorat Workshop in Theoretical Political Science, and
EPSA. This project has received funding from the FNRS (Micael Castanheira) and the European
Research Council (Laurent Bouton) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme (grant agreement No 637662). Drazen gratefully acknowledges research
support from the National Science Foundation, grant SES 1534132. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Laurent Bouton, Micael Castanheira, and Allan Drazen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Small Campaign Contributions
Laurent Bouton, Micael Castanheira, and Allan Drazen
NBER Working Paper No. 24413
March 2018
JEL No. D72
ABSTRACT
We propose a theory of small campaign contributions driven by an electoral motive, i.e., the
desire to influence election outcomes. Though small donors take as given the actions of others,
strategic interactions induce patterns consistent with empirical findings, e.g., election closeness
and underdog effects. We also study different forms of campaign finance laws, and show why
caps should be combined with a progressive tax on contributions. Next, we introduce large
donors and show that several conclusions in the literature may be significantly modified by the
interaction with small donors. Throughout, we discuss the empirical implications of our findings.

Laurent Bouton
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
37th & O Streets, NW
Washington,DC 20057
and CEPR
and also NBER
boutonllj@gmail.com
Micael Castanheira
ECARES, ULB CP 114
50 Av. F.D. Roosevelt
1050 Brussels, Belgium
micael.casta@gmail.com

Allan Drazen
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
drazen@econ.umd.edu

An informed public of small contributors “would make the millions feel that it was
their government, as it is; and that you and your administration were beholden to the
many, not to the few.”— Lincoln Ste¤ens to Theodore Roosevelt, September 21, 1905
(Doris Kearns Goodwin, The Bully Pulpit, p. 417)

1

Introduction

The role of campaign contributions in elections is a central issue in democracies. Yet both
popular and academic discussions have mostly concentrated on large donors, despite the
fact that small donors account for a large fraction of total contributions. In the 2012 U.S.
presidential campaign for instance, the Federal Election Commission reported that out of a
total campaign spending of about $1.3 billion for the main candidates, small contributions
(less than $200 each) added up to $621 million, and those between $200 and $1000 to
another $243 million.1 The numbers tilted even further towards small contributions in the
2016 presidential race: Bernie Sanders, for example, raised 202 million dollars from small
contributions, out of a total campaign budget of 223 million, while Hillary Clinton and
Donald Trump also each received more than 2 million from small donors.
Small donors are important in other countries as well. In Canada, they represent
about a third of total funds raised for recent campaigns. This …gure is similar in the
United Kingdom, where a signi…cant share of party funding comes from membership dues
and small donations (the Labour party, for example, reported £ 19.2 million in donations
and £ 9.5 million in membership dues in 2015).2 In Germany, they likewise represented
about 53% of campaign resources in the 2012 cycle, about half that amount re‡ecting
party membership dues.3 Small contributions account for such a signi…cant fraction of
total funding due to the considerable number of small donors.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no formal model of small campaign contributions in the literature. Thus far, the focus has been on large donors with a policy in‡uence
motive for contributing.4 For small donors, a consumption motive is put forward almost

1
http://www.fec.gov/disclosurep/pnational.do;jsessionid=5E34A548A5EEB1D08BBECEA07049DF53.worker1
and http://www.fec.gov/disclosurep/pnational.do
2
http://search.electoralcommission.org.uk/Api/Accounts/Documents/17488
3
Most of the rest being public funding, while medium and large contributions represented about 9%
of the total.
4
The leading theoretical model is that of Grossman and Helpman (1994, 1996), although the empirical
literature …nds mixed support for an in‡uence motive (Stratmann, 1992; Ansolabehere, de Figueiredo and
Snyder, 2003; Gordon, Hafer, and Landa 2007; Chamon and Kaplan 2013, DellaVigna et al. 2016, Avis
2018). Hence, it is not clear to what extent large contributions “buy” policy favors.

1

by default.5 The basic reasoning is that when individual contributions are small, donors
cannot be motivated either by an attempt to “buy” in‡uence or by any e¤ect their contributions may have on election outcomes (an electoral motive).
Yet, as we discuss at length in the next section, there are compelling reasons why
an electoral motive for small donors deserves closer attention. Moreover, developing a
model of electorally-motivated contributions allows us to generate predictions that can
then be tested against patterns of contributions observed in real life. Indeed, we …nd
strong support for our results in the empirical literature.
In this paper, we thus propose a theory of small campaign contributions motivated
by the desire of either donors (Section 3 ) or candidates (Section 5) to in‡uence election
outcomes. By “small,”we mean that a donor takes as given both the policy of candidates
(i.e., there is no motive of trading contributions for policy favors) and the behavior of other
donors.6 However, electoral considerations necessarily produce strategic interactions: total contributions determine the in‡uence of money on outcomes, and hence individual
best responses. As a result, the comparative statics on individual and total contributions
are quite di¤erent than those implied by theories that ignore such interactions (e.g., a
basic theory of contributions driven solely by the pure consumption motive). These differences can help explain a number of empirical observations that seem anomalous when
contributions are viewed either as consumption or as an attempt to buy in‡uence.
We begin by developing a simple theory of small contributions with a model of small
donors only. After laying out the small-donors model of a two-candidate race in Section
3.1, we characterize the equilibrium in Section 3.2. Importantly, we show that equilibrium
contributions increase when the support for the two candidates is more even, that is, a
“closeness e¤ect,” and that relative contributions for the advantaged party are smaller
than their underlying advantage, that is, an “underdog e¤ect.” Although this result is in
line with a number of empirical …ndings on individual contributions, it contrasts with the
predictions under both the in‡uence motive and the consumption motive; the former would
lead to a “bandwagon e¤ect” in contributions, the latter would imply no such e¤ects.

5

Ansolabehere et al. (2003) have stressed this view, arguing that the “tiny size of the average contribution made by private citizens suggests that little private bene…t could be bought with such donations”
(p117). They support their claim with the …nding that “income is by far the strongest predictor of giving
to political campaigns and organizations, and it is also the main predictor of contributing to nonreligious
charities” like other normal consumption goods.
6
Hence, “small” may also characterize donations above any speci…c amount, such as $200, if these
criteria are satis…ed.

2

In addition, we study the e¤ects of income and income inequality on the contributions
to the two candidates. As with a consumption motive, donations are predicted to increase
in income (as well as the ideological proximity between candidates and donors). However,
strategic interactions also imply that income inequality has signi…cantly di¤erent e¤ects
if income inequality a¤ects the supporters of the leading instead of the trailing candidate.
In Section 3.3, we analyze the e¤ects of various campaign …nance laws on the behavior
of small donors. We …nd that a cap on individual contributions a¤ects all donors, including
those not directly hit by the cap. The cap generally favors the candidate with the largest
number of donors and works against the one with the richest donors, but these e¤ects
are not necessarily monotonic. Furthermore, we examine the e¤ects of public subsidy and
taxation schemes. We …nd that matching subsidies have limited or no e¤ects, and that
it is possible to eliminate the e¤ects of income inequalities on campaign contributions by
implementing a progressive tax on contributions.
We then study the interactions between small and large donors by embedding the smalldonors model into a dynamic game in which large donors have a …rst-mover advantage. We
consider the problem of a large donor who supports one of the candidates. She contributes
to a candidate at an early stage of the campaign, when candidate platforms are potentially
still ‡uid, and before small donors make their decisions (see discussion in Section 4). Thus,
when deciding how much to contribute, the large donor takes into account the e¤ect of
her contribution on the behavior of small donors in the next phase of the campaign. In
line with the …ndings in the literature, we allow for the donor to be motivated both by a
desire to curry favors (in‡uence motive) and by a desire to in‡uence the outcome of the
election (electoral motive).
The results of the small-donor-only model extend to the generalized model, but also
provide additional insights on the interactions between small and large donors. To this
regard, we document four novel …ndings. First, we identify a new indirect cost of contributing that arises speci…cally from the interactions with small donors. This induces
large donors to moderate their contributions, and their request for favors. Second, we …nd
that the importance of the two motives underlying large donors’ contributions moves in
opposite directions with the closeness of the election. As a consequence, our model predicts that policy favors should be more prevalent in lopsided elections. Third, we …nd that
capping small contributions during the electoral campaign, while not e¤ectively capping
large donors (e.g., because they can make their contributions through other, uncapped

3

conduits such as super PACs) has highly perverse e¤ects. Such a cap, even if it barely
a¤ects their contribution levels, limits the small donors’room for manoeuvre, e¤ectively
reducing the indirect cost. This boosts large donors’requests and favors extraction. Finally, capping contributions by large donors can end up boosting the electoral prospects of
the candidate most hit by the cap (due to the composition of his support among donors).
This again results from the interactions with small donors.
At various places throughout the paper, we show how our …ndings may inform empirical
research. First, the di¤erent motives for contributions produce qualitatively di¤erent donor
responses, which could be leveraged to further understanding of small donors’motivations
(see, e.g., Ansolabehere et al. 2003 and Barber et al. 2017). Second, our results also show
how estimates of the income elasticity of contributions (see, e.g., Gordon et al. 2007, and
Bonica and Rosenthal 2018) may be in‡uenced by aggregate, equilibrium, responses. We
also …nd that the direction of some e¤ects crucially depends on whether the candidate is
ahead or behind, as well as on the speci…cs of the income shock. Third, estimates of the
e¤ects of changes in campaign …nance laws (such as caps on individual contributions) on
electoral outcomes (see, e.g., Lott 2006, and Stratmann and Aparicio-Castillo 2006) are
also subtle. Our model predicts that such e¤ects are non-monotonic and may change sign
depending on the source of the di¤erence in popularity between candidates. Finally, caps
that only bind for some speci…c donors may also substantially a¤ect the behavior of other,
uncapped, donors.

2

On the Electoral Motive

Starting with Ansolabehere et al. (2003), signi…cant empirical e¤ort has been invested in
assessing the motives behind contributions, either those of individual donors or corporations (see, e.g., Bertrand et al. 2014 and DellaVigna et al. 2016). For small donations, it
has generally been argued that each contribution is far too small relative to the total to
have any e¤ect in in‡uencing either policy choices or election outcomes. Given the “almost
zero” e¤ect small donations are perceived to have, a consumption motive has thus been
put forward. An electoral motive has been largely omitted from these analyses, basically
by default, rather than due to empirical evidence of its absence.
We argue in this paper that the electoral motive should not, however, be dismissed out
of hand. In fact, there is substantial empirical evidence supporting the electoral motive.

4

First, in surveys, donors overwhelmingly list “to a¤ect an election outcome”as an important motive for giving (Brown et al. 1995; Francia et al. 2003; Barber 2016a). Second,
numerous studies …nd ideological proximity to be a strong determinant of contributor
behavior in di¤erent types of contests (see, e.g., McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal 2006;
Claasen 2007; Bonica 2014; Barber 2016a; Barber, Canes-Wrone, and Thrower 2017). We
will see that the distance between the ideological positions of donors and candidates does
also matter for donors who care only about election outcomes.7 Last but not least, as
discussed extensively in Section 3.2, three key predictions of our “rational-instrumental”
donor model are in line with empirical patterns in the literature: (i) closeness e¤ ect: donations are signi…cantly and positively a¤ected by the (perceived) closeness of the election;
(ii) underdog e¤ ect: relative contributions to the front-runner are always smaller than her
intrinsic advantage; (iii) income e¤ ect: donations are increasing in the wealth of donors.
While one cannot reject that these patterns may be consistent with another theory of
small campaign contributions, they show that electoral considerations must be part of
that theory. This is exactly what we do in Section 5, where we develop a demand-driven
model of small contributions that delivers the exact same predictions (more details below).
Why would electoral considerations be so important given the almost zero e¤ect of
individual small donations on the electoral outcome? There is of course a distinction
between the comparative static e¤ects we identify and the magnitude of these e¤ects.
Electoral considerations, and hence the qualitative predictions of our model, are identical
whether we view donors as fully rational or as behavioral. In contrast, quantitative implications are highly sensitive to the details of the utility and/or cost functions. We argue
that electorally-motivated behavioral factors may well yield signi…cantly larger empirical
e¤ects. For example, donors may overestimate the e¤ect of their contributions on the electoral outcome by orders of magnitude, which would be in line with the results of surveys
about donors’motivation.
Another possible explanation is that the electoral motive operates through the fundraising behavior of candidates. In Section 5, we formally show the equivalence between the
model developed in the core of the paper and a model in which “naive”donors respond to
their candidate’s fund-raising e¤ort. The relevant assumption is that candidates believe
that money is crucial to winning an election. This certainly seems to be the case: as Jesse
7

A related observation from Barber et al. (2017, p.283) is that contributions are made to legislators
who “will represent their professional interests, rather than due to expectations of legislative access or
an unsophisticated response to networking.” This too is consistent with an electoral motive rather than
simply a consumption motive for giving.

5

Unruh said when he was Speaker of the California State Assembly in 1966, “Money is the
mothers’milk of politics,”a view clearly supported by the enormous e¤ort candidates put
into fund-raising. Voters respond to such e¤orts: Magleby et al. (2018), for example, document large spikes in donations on days that candidates increase their fund-raising e¤ort.
(More generally, these are known as “moneybomb” events, a highly lucrative grassroots
fund-raising e¤ort over a brief period.)8
A remaining important issue is whether money actually matters for electoral outcomes.
The empirical literature can be divided into two sets of studies. The …rst focuses on the
e¤ect of speci…c campaign spending (e.g., TV ads) with recent studies, with well-de…ned
identi…cation strategies, …nding positive and signi…cant e¤ects (see, e.g., Da Silveira and
De Mello 2011; Kendall et al. 2015; Larreguy et al. 2018; Spenkuch and Toniatti 2018; and
Bekkouche and Cage 2020). The second analyzes the e¤ects of total spending. Here, however, the evidence is mixed: spending by challengers appears more e¤ective than spending
by incumbents and, for the latter, no consensus has been reached as to whether the effect of money is economically signi…cant (see, e.g., Levitt 1994; Erikson and Palfrey 1998,
2000; Gerber 2004; Benoit and Marsh 2008; Stratmann 2009; Bombardini and Trebbi
2011; and Kawai and Sunada 2015). A simple way to reconcile the apparent contradiction between these two sets of studies is provided by Sprick Schuster (2020). Using
detailed transaction-level data on candidate disbursements, he …nds systematic di¤erences
in the way incumbents and challengers allocate their campaign resources. In particular,
incumbents spend a smaller share of their total spending than challengers on “messages
to voters” (i.e., advertising and events), and a larger share on other types of spending,
such as refunding of contributions and donations to other campaigns. These latter types
of spending have arguably no e¤ect on their chances of winning their own race.

3

Small Donors

We begin by setting out our theory of electorally-motivated small contributions. Hence,
this section considers a simple model with small donors only. In Section 4, we embed this
model of small donors model into a dynamic game in which a large donor has …rst mover
advantage. We will see that the results of the simple model extend to the generalized
8

Note however that such a demand-driven model does not seem to fully capture the small contributions
phenomenon. Magleby et al. (2018, p. 357) …nd that “A third of those [small donors] who donated in 2008
reported they gave without being asked to do so, 37 percent for Obama, and 25 percent for McCain.”

6

model, although with additional and novel insights on the interactions between small and
large donors.

3.1

The Model

There are two candidates,  and , who need funding to …nance their electoral campaigns.
Our key assumption is that money a¤ects the outcome of the election (see discussion at the
end of Section 2). We summarize this through a contest success function.9 This captures
the idea that these funds are used to …nance activities such as get-out-the-vote e¤orts (see
Enos and Fowler, 2016) or advertising (as for example in Baron, 1994, Prat, 2002, Coate
2004a,b, and Morton and Myerson, 2012), which may increase a candidate’s vote totals.
As Cmar (2005) put it, “a political campaign is almost never successful unless its resources
are comparable to those of its opponents – and the most important of these resources is
money.”
Formally, given total contributions S = f   g 2 R2+ by small donors, ’s probability of winning the election is given by:
 (S)

=


1
=
 + 
1 + 

for max f   g  0, and
1999). Note that



 (S)

 with 0 



(1)

=  2 [0 1] for  =  = 0 (see Esteban and Ray,

is everywhere concave in  for

the presence of setup costs:

2

is then convex for   

1 Values of  1 capture
q
¬1
+1 ¬  In words,  ’s

campaign must reach  for additional contributions to have maximal e¤ect. Figure 2
illustrates the shape of



for

= 1 (dotted line),

= 2 (dashed), and

= 3 (solid) when

 = 1.
Small donors simultaneously and non-cooperatively select which amount  to conP
tribute to their preferred candidate, with   =  .10 Each small donor  has a two¬
dimensional type     , where  2 f g identi…es who is his preferred candidate/party
and   represents ’s income (which will in‡uence his willingness to contribute.) There are

 donors of type  , distributed in income classes  1      according to some (dis9

This is inspired by an increasingly large literature: see Tullock (1980), Hirshleifer (1989), Baron
(1994), Skaperdas and Grofman (1995), Esteban and Ray (2001), Epstein and Nitzan (2006), Konrad
(2007), Jia et al. (2013), Herrera et al. (2014, 2016), among others.
10
A similar setup with many individual players investing resources to collectively …ght over an issue has
been pioneered by Katz et al. (1990) for rent-seeking, and by Esteban and Ray (1999, 2001) for con‡ict
situations.

7

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

 (   )

Figure 1:

1

for  = 1 and

2

3

= 1 (dot),

= 2 (dash), or

= 3 (solid)

¬
¬
crete) cumulative distribution function    with  (0) = 0 and    = 1 The
¬
¬
¬
fraction of type- donors with income   is denoted    =    ¬   ¬1
0.

Given our focus on the electoral motive, we consider small donors who contribute to

in‡uence the election outcome. Each small donor contributes some amount  2 (0 ],

where  is the legal contribution limit. We thus concentrate on the intensive margin.11
Letting the costs of contributions being increasing and convex, i.e.
on the case

 1 (we will focus

= 2 in most of the paper), the objective function of a small donor is:
max




(S)  ¬

¬


(  )

=



(2)

where  is the utility that a small contributor attaches to his candidate  being elected.
The parameter

will determine the elasticity of contributions with respect to income: for

= 0, the cost of contributing is independent of income. For

 0, (total and marginal)

costs are strictly decreasing in   .

3.2

Equilibrium Analysis

For now, we abstract from potential contribution caps and show that there exists only
one candidate pure strategy Nash equilibrium of this contribution game, and we identify
su¢ cient conditions for existence. We then show that total contributions (1) increase in
11

Some donors could be at a corner solution, contributing exactly zero when they expect to have too
low an e¤ect on the election, and move to an interior solution when this e¤ect increases in magnitude. In
essence, this extensive margin is the focus of the turnout models discussed in Section 3.2. For the sake of
simplicity, and since these e¤ects are known, we abstract from them here.

8

the closeness of the election, (2) display a partial underdog e¤ect, and (3) increase with
income and income inequalities. Formally, the …rst two observations mirror existing results
on voter turnout. The novelty lies more in identifying how they match empirical patterns of
contribution behavior, both in observational and experimental settings. The comparative
statics about income and income inequalities are more novel from a theoretical standpoint.
They also …nd support in the data.
As a …rst step on the way to solving for the equilibrium, we derive a small donor’s best
response given the other donors’contributions. To this end, we take …rst order conditions
of the utility function (2) with respect to the individual donor’s contribution,  :
d  ¬


d  ¬
 =


 =

For types  :
For types  :

where we have used the fact that   = 1. The term d



(3)

 

(4)

 

embodies the electoral

motive for small donors. Put simply, donors with an electoral motive contribute more when
they perceive that their contribution has a higher impact on their candidate’s probability
of winning. (The other two elements in the best response function are discussed below)
Central to the electoral motive is the fact that it generates non-trivial strategic interactions: while each individual increases her contribution when 
combined responses of all donors also feed back into 

  .

 

increases, the

To evaluate these two-

way interactions, we aggregate small donors’best responses into their total contribution.
Adding up individual best responses and simplifying yields:


=

X   ¬



 =

2f g

where 

 

p


X
=1



¬
  

 (1

¬

¬


 )

(5)

=    

We will interpret  as the candidate’s intrinsic support among small donors, re‡ecting
their numbers ( ), intensity of preferences ( ), and distribution of income ( ). We
label  the candidate who is ahead and  the candidate who is behind, in the sense that


 .
Using this notation, we …nd that:

9

Proposition 1 Whenever a pure strategy equilibrium exists, it is unique and characterized
by the aggregate contributions:
(   ) =
(  )

with 

1+(  )

(1¬ 1 )
(1¬ 1 )

2

q

¬1 

q

¬1 

representing the closeness of the election.12 The associated

winning probabilities are:


( )

=
( )

¬1

¬1

+ ( )

¬1



(6)

Two su¢ cient conditions for the existence of a pure strategy equilibrium are: (1)
and, if

 , (2)   not too large

The proof of the …rst part of the proposition is straightforward: it consists of substituting for

0


in (5), and solving for the contributions that are consistent with best responses.

The second part is about ensuring that second order conditions are satis…ed. What we
…nd is that the solution to the …rst problem is unique, but it is only an equilibrium when
either (1) the problem does not display non-convexities or (2) the race is not too lopsided.
The equilibrium winning probabilities in (6) show that a candidate can only bene…t
from having higher intrinsic support  among her donors.13 This can result from receiving contributions from more donors, from higher income donors and/or donors with more
intense preferences. The e¤ect on the size of the campaign ( +  ) and on individual
contributions is however less than straightforward. We summarize them by studying three
important implications of Proposition 1. In the remainder of the paper, we restrict our
attention to the case
3.2.1

= 2 for the ease of readability.

Election Closeness

The …rst corollary of Proposition 1 is that, when the electoral motive shapes contributions:

12

Note that  is a direct transformation of  (1 ¬  )  but expressed in terms of the primitives of the
model. It is increasing in    8   1 and decreasing in   , 8   1 It is thus
maximized in  =   or  = 12
13
In a di¤erent context, Esteban and Ray (2001) show that this is partly due to the shape of the cost
function, and partly to winning the election acting as a public good. We use the quali…er “partly”because
they focus on the case in which = 1. For that value of , Esteban and Ray (2001, Proposition 3) identify
that free-riding e¤ects cannot dominate collective action when payo¤s are similar to that of a purely public
good, as we have here.

10

Corollary 1 Small donors’ contributions  increase in election closeness, as measured
p
  ¬ 1 or j  ¬ 12j.
by
This is similar to formal results in the literature on voter turnout, which say that voters
should be more likely to vote when they are more likely to a¤ect the election outcome,
i.e. when the election is close (see e.g. Palfrey and Rosenthal 1985, Castanheira 2003,
Feddersen and Sandroni 2006, or Herrera et al. 2014, 2016). Corollary 1 shows formally
how election closeness also in‡uences contributions by small donors.
Empirically, this e¤ect of (perceived) election closeness appears quantitatively important: combining survey data on US donors with FEC data, Barber et al. (2017, p.17) shows
that “a standard deviation increase [in competitiveness] raises the likelihood a donor gives
to that campaign by 43%.”Jacobson (1980, 1985) studies how the expected closeness of a
US congressional election, proxied by the winner’s share of the two-party vote in the last
election, a¤ected campaign contributions between 1972 and 1982. In line with Corollary
1, he …nds that the closer the race, the larger are contributions to both the challenger and
the incumbent. Culberson et al. (2019) focuses on small contributions and …nds similar
results for US House elections between 2006 and 2010. To control for hidden heterogeneity,
Mutz (1995) and Fuchs et al. (2000) study the dynamics of a given campaign to see how
shocks to perceived closeness and other events in‡uencing the marginal e¤ect of contributions a¤ect donor behavior. They consistently …nd that, when the race between the
front-runner and the runner-up narrows, contributions to both candidates increase.
3.2.2

Underdog E¤ect

A second implication of Proposition 1 is that equilibrium contributions are a¤ected by free
riding. The fact that  is ahead implies that the problem is more salient among -donors:
Corollary 2 In any equilibrium, the ratio of small contributions for  and  displays an
underdog e¤ect:


=


r











That is, relative contributions for  by small donors are always smaller than ’s intrinsic
advantage among small donors.
This underdog e¤ect results from individual free riding among small donors: since  is
ahead among small donors, each -donor will tend to contribute less ceteris paribus than
11

a -donor.14
The underdog e¤ect has also been identi…ed in theoretical models of turnout (see
e.g. Palfrey and Rosenthal 1985, Castanheira 2003, Feddersen and Sandroni 2006 and, for
models that use the contest success function, Herrera et al. 2014, 2016, and Kartal 2015).15
We are not aware of a similar …nding regarding political contributions; to the contrary,
the main rationale for strategic contribution is the policy in‡uence which would predict a
bandwagon e¤ ect (comparatively more contributions to the advantaged candidate) while
the “pure” consumption e¤ect would predict no e¤ect. As explained by Mutz (1995,
p1019), “[i]n fact, many studies of bandwagon phenomena have ended up demonstrating
strong underdog patterns rather than movement in the direction of majority opinion.”
The most direct piece of evidence of an underdog e¤ect comes from the …eld experiment
reported in Rogers and Moore (2014) and Rogers, Moore, and Norton (2017, pp. 12981300). They contacted more than 660,000 people on the fund-raising list of the Democratic
Governors Association and invited contributions to the campaign of Charlie Crist, the
Democratic candidate for governor in Florida in 2014. They divided the sample in two,
and sent two variants of an otherwise identical e-mail: one depicted the candidate as
leading in the polls, the other one as trailing behind. Their overall result is that people
are more motivated to support the candidate when he is presented as losing in the polls.
In particular “the losing message increased the number of donations among past donors
by 33% and raised 76% more money” (Rogers and Moore 2014, p16) and “controlling for
donor status, [recipients of the winning message] gave less money than [recipients of the
losing message]” (Rogers et al. 2017, p1299).
Another type of evidence comes from the analysis of candidate fund-raising strategies.
As explained by Mutz (1995, p1019): “Outside the context of direct-mail fund-raising, it
is also common for candidates to vie for the ‘underdog’role for similar reasons (see Adams
1983). [...] In the face of an imminent threat, [supporters] may be prompted to give money
by news that their candidate is threatened or losing ground.” Rogers and Moore (2014)
report similar …ndings in both the Obama and Romney campaigns: “when the campaign
messages communicate that the race is close, the majority of those messages assert that
the candidate is losing” (p24).
14
This is because the marginal return of contributing should be lower for the leading candidate, which
is actually the exact …nding of Erikson and Palfrey (2000). They …nd that the e¤ect of contributions on
the election outcome is larger for the trailing candidate unless the race is close.
15
In voting models, the underdog e¤ect results from pivot probabilities being higher for the underdog
(see among others Castanheira (2003), Myatt (2015), Agranov et al. (2014)).

12

This is not to say that there is no evidence of any bandwagon e¤ect for other types
of donors, PACs in particular (see e.g. Stratmann 1992), or for multicandidate races in
which some candidates’viability may be in doubt. In primaries for instance, most donors
want to focus on the top two or three candidates (Hall and Snyder 2014). This temporarily
creates signi…cant bandwagon e¤ects when the names mentioned for the top two or three
change over the course of the campaign, while the underdog e¤ect remains dominant for
the frontrunner (Mutz 1995, Fuchs et al. 2000, Feigenbaum and Shelton 2013).16
Finally, Bonica (2016, Figure 2) compares the behavior of small donors from other
donor types, in particular from Corporate PACs. Small individual contributions disproportionately ‡ow to underdogs: depending on the election cycle, only 48 to 55% of their
funds go to the winner, instead of 80-90% for Corporate PACs, to be compared to an average vote share of 60 to 65% — which could be used as a rough proxy for  ( + ).17
3.2.3

Income and Income Inequality

The literature typically approaches the issue of income and contributions from a di¤erent
angle: the focus is on how income skews policies towards the rich and unduly favors the
party with the richest supporters (see e.g. Coate 2004a,b, and Feddersen and Gul 2015). In
this section, we instead focus on how income inequality in‡uences campaign contributions
by small donors when platforms have already been chosen— the case of large, early donors
in‡uencing platforms, with consequences on small donors’ contributions, is analyzed in
Section 4.
Central to our analysis is the result that the income elasticity of contribution is positive
and equal to

(see (3) and (4)). The prediction immediately follows from the fact that

the marginal cost of contributions is lower for donors with higher income. There is a lot of
evidence that political participation in general, and campaign contributions in particular,
is heavily tilted towards high-income citizens (see e.g. Schlozman, Verba and Brady 1995,
2012, Bonica et al. 2013, Malbin 2013). Gordon et al. (2007) also report positive income
elasticities for the individual contributions of executives— note that, in the absence of
16

In a companion paper (Bouton et al. 2018), we analyze elections with more than two candidates, and
…nd that the electoral motive produces a bandwagon e¤ect for longshot candidates (these are abandoned by
instrumental donors when perceived as having too low a chance of winning the election), and an underdog
e¤ect for the top-two candidates.
17
Authors’ computation based on Bonica’s dataset (Bonica, Adam. 2016. Database on Ideology,
Money in Politics, and Elections: Public version 2.0. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Libraries.
https://data.stanford.edu/dime). We thank Moritz Hennicke for his thorough work on these data.

13

strategic interactions, their estimate would be a direct measure of

in our model; this

would be as high as 5 according to their main estimation (Table 1). Bonica and Rosenthal
(2018) instead obtain wealth elasticities “quite close to zero” for democrats, and slightly
below 1 for republicans. Although their interpretation is di¤erent, Ansolabehere et al.
(2003, p122) …nd an income elasticity slightly above one, and income growth explains
about 80% of the observed increase in contributions.
Arguably, all these empirical …ndings depict (i ) equilibrium behavior, with the proviso
that free-riding e¤ects may bias estimates of

downward; (ii) of very wealthy individuals,

due to lack of data on smaller donors. Yet, two remarks are in order: …rst, remember
that the de…nition of a “small donor” in the model has more to do with timing–small
donors move too late to in‡uence either other donors or the candidates’ platforms–than
with income. Second, as we will see in Section 4, our model predicts similar income e¤ects
for large donors who move early in the campaign, independently of their motive.
Another …nding is that income inequality tends to stimulate total contributions, with
a spillover e¤ect on the other group of donors:
Proposition 2 If and only if the income elasticity of contributions is larger than 1, a
mean-preserving spread:
(1) of the -donors’ income distribution increases  and decreases  .
(2) of the -donors’ income distribution increases both  and  .
We need two elements to clarify the intuition behind this result. The …rst is the connection between a mean-preserving spread and the income elasticity of contributions. If
and only if

is strictly larger than 1, contributions become a convex function of individual

income. Increasing within-group inequality then increases intrinsic support  . The second is the spillover channels across groups: Lemma 1 in the appendix shows that a same
increase in  has opposite spillover e¤ects depending on whether  is head or ehind.
The logic is as above: from Corollary 1, the reaction of donors for the other candidate will
depend on whether the election becomes closer or more lopsided.
Combining these two elements produces the proposition: increasing inequality within
the group of -donors increases their willingness to pay, and therefore ’s lead. This in
turn depresses contributions by -donors. A same increase among -donors instead makes
the election closer, which increases contributions by -donors. The same mechanisms can
be applied to changes in between-group inequality.
14

To the best of our knowledge, there is no empirical work on the reactions of small
donors to income inequality. Our results indicate that, because “income inequality” is
not a su¢ cient statistic to identify the direction of all these e¤ects, empirical work may
bene…t from carefully distinguishing between the di¤erent shocks to the overall income
distribution.

3.3

Campaign Finance Laws: E¤ects on Small Donors

Campaign …nance laws are, generally speaking, meant to limit the in‡uence of money in
politics (see, e.g., Ashworth 2006, Coate 2004a,b). One rationale is that contributions buy
policy in‡uence outside of any direct e¤ect on voting, that is, trading contributions for
policy favors in a “quid pro quo”(see section 4). Such a rationale, as important as it might
be for large and early contributions, plays essentially no role for small contributions.18
A second rationale to limit campaign spending is that it is like an “arms race”–what
is crucial in the end is the level of total contributions relative to those of one’s opponent.
Hence, the level of money ratchets up without giving either candidate a relative advantage
but draining resources nonetheless. Our small donor model captures well that feature of
campaign spending.19
A third argument is that a donor’s in‡uence on elections is determined by the size of
her contribution, so that larger contributions have undue e¤ect on electoral outcomes. In
that context, contribution caps are meant to ensure that the “voices of small donors” are
also heard–this is sometimes referred to as the “equalization”argument.20 This is central
to our paper, and we show here that this can happen even in the absence of the quid pro
18

Coate (2004a) considers such negative welfare e¤ects of contributions because they buy policymaker
in‡uence. In his setup, contribution limits may increase social welfare not only because they reduce such
in‡uence, but also – and because of this – such limits increase the information value of activities that
contributions …nance.
19
Another important factor is incumbency, which typically provides a substantial exogenous advantage,
that a challenger may …nd easier to overcome with money. See e.g. Lott (2006) and Bonneau and Cann
(2011).
20
The debate about campaign …nance in the United States, as re‡ected in U.S. Supreme Court decisions,
has been largely framed in terms of issues of ‘freedom of speech’. In the famous Buckley v. Valeo decision,
a majority held that limits on campaign spending and individual contributions in the Federal Election
Campaign Act of 1971 were unconstitutional because they violated the First Amendment provision on
freedom of speech, the argument being that a restriction on spending “necessarily reduces the quantity
of expression”. Arguments in favor of restrictions have also relied on such considerations. In Austin v.
Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990) the court had upheld previous limits on corporate spending, writing
“Corporate wealth can unfairly in‡uence elections.” Analogously, Justice Stevens, in the minority dissent
in Citizens United, reiterated the “unfair in‡uence” argument, writing that “unregulated expenditures
will give corporations ‘unfair in‡uence’ in the electoral process and distort public debate in ways that
undermine rather than advance the interests of listeners.”

15

quo component that we analyze in Section 4.1.
The main take away of our analysis is that, due to the strategic interactions highlighted
in Section 3.2, campaign …nance laws can have unintended consequences. Among other
things, small donors will be a¤ected even if they are not capped directly. To the best
of our knowledge, such indirect e¤ects have been ignored in the literature. Further, we
identify when aggregate e¤ects go the opposite direction of the direct e¤ect of the cap.
3.3.1

Caps on Individual Contributions

The diversity of possible e¤ects is illustrated in the following two propositions: the e¤ects
of contribution caps can go in exactly opposite directions, depending on whether the
advantage of  results from a larger number of donors (Proposition 3) or from wealthier
donors (Proposition 4). Moreover, the e¤ects need not be monotonic:
Proposition 3 Consider the case of identical income distributions and preference intensity ( ) for - and -donors, but    . In that case:
(1)



will be lowest when the cap is not binding;

(2)



will be highest when the cap constrains all donors;

(3) Depending on the shape of the income distribution, the e¤ ects of varying the cap can
be non-monotonic.
The main driver of the di¤erence between (1) and (2) is the underdog e¤ect (Corollary
2). With     free riding implies that an -donor with income   contributes less
than a -donor with the same income. A binding cap must therefore constrain -donors
more than -donors. Candidate  is thus better o¤ with a cap than with no cap, and
best o¤ when the cap is binding for all donors.
However, this still does not imply that the e¤ects of a cap are monotonic, as illustrated
in Figure 2.21 Indeed, capping high-income donors stimulates contributions by low-income
donors and impacts closeness – remember that closer elections stimulate contributions
in all groups. Thus, while the direct e¤ect of the cap favors  (-donors being more
constrained), indirect e¤ects tend to work in the opposite direction, and may dominate.
21
The simulation behind Figure 2 builds on a two-group income distribution with  = 3 and  = 10;
while we set = = 2, and  = = 1. The number of low- and high-income donors are:  = 60 
 = 30 and  = 20   = 10. That is, both income classes are willing to contribute about the
same amount (this proxies actual values in the 2015-16 US presidential elections), but there are twice as
many - as -donors, implying that  = 380 and  = 190.

16

Figure 2: Simulated e¤ect of an individual contribution cap (horizontal axis) on the probability of  winning the election (vertical axis) when    but the income distribution
is identical across donor groups.

As …gure 2 indicates, indirect equilibrium e¤ects dominate for intermediate caps. In
the example, this is due to the fact that small and comparatively large contributions
both represent a signi…cant fraction of the total (initially 50%), with no intermediate
contributions. This proxies what we typically observe in actual data, where there is a
huge number of very small contributions, and another mass at higher levels (typically
bunched at legal limits). Technically, when we move from lax to tighter caps, i.e. from
right to left in the …gure, the cap initially binds for high-income donors only, which corrects
for the underdog e¤ect among large contributions, but also increases the weight of small
contributions in the total. When the cap is intermediate (caps between 0.18 and 0.33 in
the …gure) the underdog e¤ect has been fully addressed among high-income donors, but
has been reinforced among low-income donors. Since the latter represent an increasing
fraction of the total, tighter caps now handicap . In contrast, both lax (above 0.33) and
tight (below 0.18) caps primarily reduce the underdog e¤ect, which bene…ts .
Now, contrast these results with the case in which the advantage of  is due to higher
donor income, rather than a numerically larger donor base:
Proposition 4 Consider the case in which  and  have equal popular support ( =  )
and preference intensity, but -donors bene…t from higher income, by a factor   1
¬
¬
(   =    ,  = 1  ). In that case, the e¤ ects of a cap are the opposite of the
ones in Proposition 3:
(1)



will be highest when the cap is not binding;

(2)



will be lowest when the cap constrains all donors;

(3) Depending on the income distribution, the e¤ ects can be non-monotonic.

17

The intuition and the mechanism of the proof are similar to those of the previous
proposition, with the di¤erence that, if -donors are richer but no more numerous than
-donors, they must be the …rst constrained.22 Hence, there are more type- than type-
constrained donors, and any unconstrained -donor contributes more than the equivalent
-donor. The logic is the same as above, although closeness and free-riding e¤ects now
work in the opposite direction: for high levels of the cap, i.e.  2 [051 07], the cap
only binds  high-income donors. This reduces the gap between contributions by  and
 high-income donors. The slope reversal for  2 [025 051] happens when both  and
 high-income donors are constrained: the only e¤ect left is the equilibrium response of
low-income donors, who weigh increasingly more in the total. Here, a marginal tightening
of the cap favors  because low-income -donors are richer. The local maximum at 0.25
is reached when low-income -donors start being capped, and the global minimum for
 2 (0 022] is reached when all donors are capped. Then, the income di¤erences that
favored  no longer de…ne contributions.

Figure 3: Simulated e¤ect of an individual contribution cap (horizontal axis) on the prob = 2  but the number of donors
ability of  winning the election (vertical axis) when 

is identical across donor groups.

The empirical literature on the e¤ects of caps on individual contributions …nds seemingly contradictory evidence. Stratmann and Aparicio-Castillo (2006) …nd that, for elections to US state Assemblies (lower house of a bicameral legislature) between 1980 and
2001, caps on individual contributions led to closer elections.23 Lott (2006) …nds the op22

This numerical example also builds on two income classes in each donor group:  = 6 and  = 20
 = 3 and  = 10; = = 2 and = 1 Thus -donors have twice the income of ’s, while their
numbers are identical:  = 30 and  = 10 8 . Hence, as in the previous example,  = 380 and
 = 190.
23
They also …nd that both the share and the absolute level of total contributions going to the incumbent
decrease signi…cantly. This is also in line with the result in Proposition 4. Stratmann (2006) …nd that, for
the same elections, campaign spending by candidates (both incumbents and challengers) are more e¤ective,
and converge one towards the other, in elections with campaign contribution limits. This is also in line

18

posite result for elections to US state Senates (upper house) from 1984 to 2002: caps led
to more lopsided elections.24
Propositions 3 and 4 suggest avenues to reconcile these …ndings. First, empirical
studies inevitably focus on the e¤ects of “local” changes in caps on contributions. But,
Propositions 3 and 4 show that such local e¤ects need not be monotonic. Estimates as
in Stratmann and Aparicio-Castillo (2006) and Lott (2006) may thus have opposite signs
simply because the speci…c cap changes under study a¤ect di¤erent parts of the distribution
of donors. Second, these propositions also highlight how the e¤ects of caps on individual
contributions change sign depending on the main source of di¤erences in support for the
candidates. Our model thus suggests to explore in more details these sources for US state
legislature elections. For instance, do we observe signi…cant di¤erences in the median
number and value of individual donations for the candidates in those elections?
3.3.2

Campaign Subsidies and Taxes

Consider now the e¤ects of campaign subsidies. We focus here on matching subsidies,
where for each dollar of contributions, the government adds (or subtracts in the case of a
tax on contributions)  dollars.2526 Total small contributions then become:
~ =


X

(1 + )  ; and ~ =

=1


X

(1 + )  

(7)

=1

We …nd that:
Proposition 5 A matching subsidy  that applies to contributions by small donors has
no e¤ ect on their behavior, nor on the outcome of the election.
The rationale behind this proposition is rather straightforward given winning probabilities follow a contest success function. Since the matching subsidy modi…es each (and
with what our model predicts when the cap on contribution has a positive (or nill) e¤ect on the closeness
of the race. Indeed, the marginal e¤ect of contributions increase when the total contributions to both
parties go down (because of the free-riding e¤ect), and their returns become more equal when  !  .
24
Similarly, Bonneau and Cann (2011) …nd that, in US state supreme court elections from 1990 to 2004,
campaign …nance restrictions (more broadly de…ned) hurt challengers more than incumbents.
25
Ashworth (2006) considers a situation that complements our analysis: in his model, incumbents may
have an unfair advantage in fundraising, and matching subsidies are then a way to correct the situation.
Yet, as he shows, welfare e¤ects may be less than straightforward even in such a situation.
26
In a previous version of the paper that omitted large donors, we also studied the e¤ect of block
subsidies, where the government gives a lump-sum to both candidates’ campaigns. We found that these
may increase or decrease small donors’total contributions (See Bouton et al. 2018).

19

hence total) small contributions by the same proportion  for both candidates, it has no
e¤ect on the relative position of the two candidates, nor on election probabilities. Matching subsidies may a¤ect outcomes for other speci…cations of the contest success function,
but the mechanism behind Proposition 5 makes clear why a general matching subsidy
will not have a major e¤ect. Analogously, there is no reason to anticipate that it should
systematically increase or decrease individual contributions.
On the other hand, a matching subsidy that only applies to contributions below a certain level will generally have an e¤ect.27 If the aggregate amount of matched contributions
(including the matched subsidy) rises, contributions of those above the matching threshold
will decrease. The overall impact on the election can then go either way, depending on
which candidate has the largest support among those who contribute below the threshold.
Turning to taxes on contributions, making them dependent on the size of the contribution acts like a negative conditional matching subsidy. Since contributions depend
positively on income, this would be like a di¤erential tax on contributions, that is a function of income. Such a tax has the possibility of reducing–or even eliminating–the e¤ect
of income on contributions:
Proposition 6 A progressive tax on small contributions equal to

h¬


the e¤ ect of income inequalities from equilibrium small contributions.

2

i
¬ 1  removes

The tax considered in Proposition 6 increases with income in such a way that all donors,
rich and poor, eventually face the same marginal cost of contribution. As a consequence,
the size of individual contributions depends only on preference intensity (and the features
of the electoral environment, such as the closeness of the race).
Though such a tax may seem distant from what is observed in current campaign …nance
regulations across countries, a regulation broadly mimicking such a policy was actually
in place in the U.S. between 1972 and 1986 (Cmar 2005). It is still in line with existing
tax laws, for example in the U.S., in the following sense. Suppose campaign contributions
were deductible from income tax liabilities (including perhaps a subsidy as in the footnote
27, that is, “negative deductibility”), but where the allowed deduction was a decreasing
function of income. In the United States, for example, allowed itemized deductions as a
whole fall with income for high income taxpayers, with deductions in speci…c categories
27

In New York City campaigns, for example, donations up to $175 from New York City residents are
matched at a rate of 6:1. In 2013, small donations and matching funds accounted for 71 percent of the
individual contributions in the city’s elections. See https://nyccfb.info/program/impact-of-public-funds

20

di¤erentially limited by income. Suppose further that an income-adjusted deductibility
speci…cally for political contributions as described in the sentence above were combined
with an increase in tax rates overall. The net e¤ect would be a tax on campaign contributions that increases with the size of the contribution. For examples of similar tax
incentives in various U.S. States, see Cmar (2005) and Magleby et al. (2018).
The next question is of course the political feasibility of such a change. Any proposal
framed as a tax on contributions that increases with income would have little prospect of
being adopted in the U.S. In contrast, deductibility of contributions that gets phased out
as income increases should be far more politically viable. For a thorough discussion of the
feasibility and implementability of such a federal tax (or tax credit), see Rosenberg (2002)
and Cmar (2005).

4

Large Donors

We now consider “large”donors who make contributions in an early stage of the campaign,
before small donors enter in. There are therefore two stages in the campaign: in the …rst,
“large” donors make contributions; in the second, “small” donors give to the campaign.
The sequential nature of large and then small donations is consistent with the observation that collecting a large number of small contributions requires a more developed
infrastructure (and hence …nancing the construction of this infrastructure) than collecting
a small number of large contributions. (See, for example, the discussion in Magleby et al.
2018). Thus, it is not surprising that even though small contributions play a major role
in campaign …nance today, candidates tend to tap wealthier donors …rst. As Magleby et
al. (2018, p. 248) write, “In fact, almost every campaign in 2008 and 2012 received larger
donations earlier and smaller donations later.” (See also their …gure 8.2 on the declining
average donation size as a campaign progresses.) Similarly, EMILY’s list recognized at
its founding that early money was crucial to a campaign, where successful fund-raising
early in the race aids in attracting other donors later on. EMILY is an acronym for Early
Money is Like Yeast, i.e. it makes the dough rise:28 early and large contributions allow a
campaign to “get o¤ the ground”.
Note further that a …rst-stage donor takes into account the e¤ect of her contribution on
the behavior of second-stage donors. Conversely, a second-stage donor is one who assumes
28

https://www.emilyslist.org/pages/entry/our-history

21

his contribution has no e¤ect on the behavior of other donors. Hence, second-stage donors
are “small” not simply perhaps in the size of their contributions, but crucially in the fact
that they do not internalize any e¤ects they have on other donors. (Second-stage donors
still di¤er in their income, so that some donations can be large relative to others, but such
donations are small relative to total second-stage donations.)
Large donors may be driven by at least two di¤erent motives: an in‡uence motive,
that is, a desire to a¤ect a candidate’s policy platform, and an electoral motive, similar
to small donors. Hence, contributions of the …rst-stage donor may a¤ect small donor
decisions in two ways: (i) positively, as small donations would have less of an e¤ect if a
large “campaign-starting” donation had not been made; (ii) negatively, as the in‡uence
e¤ect moves policy away from the small donors’preferred policy. To disentangle the e¤ects
of these two motives, we analyze them in isolation, before discussing their combined e¤ect.
In each case, the focus is mainly on the interactions with small donors.

4.1

Large Donor: In‡uence Motive

Here, we focus on a pure in‡uence motive and assume away the direct e¤ects of large
donors on electoral prospects. Hence, all electoral e¤ects are mediated by the reactions of
small donors, which is the connection we want to scrutinize.29 Direct electoral e¤ects will
be considered below in section 4.2.
4.1.1

Conceptual setup

There is of course a signi…cant literature on the “trade”of contributions for policy in‡uence
(Grossman and Helpman 1994, Prat 2002, Coate 2004a,b, Drazen and Limão 2008, among
others). Our interest is not in the mechanism of such a trade per se (the papers just
mentioned model this), but in the possible implications of such in‡uence buying on the
behavior of small donors. This would include how their choice problem itself is a¤ected,
as well as how the level of small donations, both individually and in aggregate, would be
impacted.
The real-world relevance of such e¤ects turn on two observations: …rst, the extent to
which participants in the electoral process perceive that large contributors “bias” policy
away from their bliss point; and, second, the possibility that in‡uence-buying by large
29

In our model, candidates are passive: it is large, early donors who are aware of such e¤ects, and adjust
their behavior accordingly.

22

donors a¤ects small-donor behavior. On the …rst, there can be no doubt of this, and it
has been widely accepted as a part of existing models of in‡uence buying.30
On the second point, candidates rejecting large donations in favor of small ones is a
clear trend. For example, in the 2018 US campaign cycle, over 140 candidates campaigning for Congress “pledged to at least reject corporate PAC funding, and a handful of them
have rejected all PAC money”.31 Uniformly, they chose to rely on small donations. Note,
however, that the argument is more than simply relying on small donations. By rejecting
PAC money these candidates wanted to signal that if elected, their policy choices would
not be in‡uenced by large donors wanting to buy policy favors. And, crucially, the expectation is that such a signal would encourage small donors, as evidence strongly suggests.
(The discussion in the article referenced in the previous footnote is but one example.)
Conversely, the e¤ectiveness of the charge by small-donation …nanced campaigns that opponents have been bought by large donors (for example, in a wine cellar in Napa Valley32 )
provides evidence of a strong reaction by supporters of opposing candidates.
4.1.2

Formalization of the In‡uence Motive

We formalize the above by considering a “large” donor who must choose her level of
contributions  to candidate . We treat the equivalent contribution  as given for
simplicity.33 This large donor is a Stackelberg leader: she moves before small donors, who
will observe  before choosing their own contributions.
Since this section focuses on the in‡uence motive, we let the contributions  induce
candidate  to modify her platform in a way that bene…ts such large donors and increases
her utility di¤erential between electing candidate  over . Formally, denoting this utility
di¤erential

( ), we have 

( )   0 For tractability, we simply assume the

30

Becker (1983) is perhaps the …rst model, albeit in reduced form. Grossman and Helpman (2001), Prat
(2002), Coate (2004a,b) and others all stress how special interest group contributions bias policy away from
social welfare.
31
https://eu.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2018/06/17/more-democrats-limiting-even-rejectingspecial-interest-donations/702907002/
32
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/19/us/politics/wine-cave.html
33
We could also study the strategic interactions between this rich donor, and another one who supports
 as in the literature on “lobby competition ”(Grossman and Helpman 1994), or consider multiple donors
on each side of the political spectrum. However interesting, such interactions have already been studied
and integrating all of them into this model would blur our focus, which is on the interactions with small
donors and whether it modi…es or reinforces previous …ndings.

23

following functional form:
( ) = + R  with

2 (0 1),

(8)

and where

 0 captures how much the large donor prefers  over  before any policy

favor, and

captures the sensitivity of the utility di¤erential to  (it can, for instance,

represent the bargaining power of the in‡uence-buying donor, as studied in Drazen and
Limão 2008).
A key implication of in‡uence buying is that the induced policy distortions happen at
the expense of the rest of the electorate. Formally, the value  that small  donors put
on ’s election falls:  
on  getting elected:  

0 By the same token, small  donors put a higher value
0. Being a Stackelberg leader, early large donors take

the (re)actions of Stackelberg followers–small donors–into account.
Given this section’s focus on a pure in‡uence motive, winning probabilities are still
de…ned by (1). (Later, we generalize



to the case in which contributions by large donors

impact winning probabilities directly.) From Proposition 1, it is straightforward to show
that:
 ( ) =

1+

=

1+




q

¬1

 
 

=

1+

( )

q

¬1




 with

¬1

 with  =    ( )

( ) =

p

 ( )  ( ) 

(9)

The novelty is that   is now increasing in  : this connects in‡uence buying by the
large donor, and the small donors’stake in the election.
Let

0

( )

d ( )  ( 0) denote the …rst derivative of

and focus on the relative change in valuations by small donors, i.e.

with respect to  ,
0

( ) = ( ). The

higher is this relative change, the “more reactive”small donors are to in‡uence buying. For
the sake of interpretability in representing this reaction, we summarize it parametrically
as:
:=

0

( ) = ( )  8 

Letting   denote the income of the large donor, her optimization problem is:
max


 ( )

( ) ¬

24

( )2 2
(  )



(10)

4.1.3

Equilibrium Analysis

We are now in a position to characterize the equilibrium and prove some comparative
statics. Some of these comparative statics are in line with previous results in the literature,
while those re‡ecting the interaction of large and small donors are novel:
Proposition 7 For



as de…ned in (9), there is a unique equilibrium   0 such that:

(i)  is weakly increasing in , and   ;
(ii)  is weakly decreasing in , , and

 

 

To understand the comparative statics, it is useful to examine the …rst order condition
associated with (10):

(  )

=



 
 ( )
+



( ) 

(11)

The LHS of (11) is the direct marginal cost of contributions, which is weakly decreasing
in the large donor’s income (  ). This drives the result that  is weakly increasing in   .
On the RHS of (11), the …rst term captures the direct bene…t of contributing to :
conditional on  winning, a higher contribution translates into a more valuable policy.
This implies that our model recovers the standard prediction of a “bandwagon e¤ect” for
large donors: a higher



increases the marginal bene…t of her contribution  , everything

else equal. This is because the more likely one’s preferred candidate is to win, the larger
is the value of moving her platform in the desired direction.
However, everything else is not equal, and this modi…es the behavior of the large
donor. This is captured by the second term on the RHS of (11)  which is the indirect
cost of contributing. It increases with the small donors’ reaction to  . Interestingly,
this reaction by small donors reinforces the “standard”bandwagon e¤ect discussed above.
Remember that the e¤ect of a small contribution is maximal when the election is close,
i.e. when



is close to 1/2. Thus, a given reaction by small donors to a large donor’s

contribution has a larger electoral impact when



is low (close to 50%) than when it

is large. The larger the impact, the less the large donor contributes in equilibrium. This
means that the small donors’reaction steepens the bandwagon e¤ect for the large donor.
This indirect cost of  a¤ects many of our comparative statics. For instance, it is
the sole driver of the e¤ect of  i.e., how much the large donor prefers  over  before
any policy favor. The higher  the less such a donor contributes in equilibrium. This
is because, when she prefers  over  more, a defeat of  becomes more costly. She
25

then prefers not to extract too many favors in order not to alienate small donors. The
e¤ect of , the percentage change in intrinsic support in favor of the opponent by small
donors, goes through a similar mechanism. The larger , the bigger the electoral pushback
resulting from favor buying, hence the lower  .
The e¤ects of

and

Consider the e¤ect of

 
 

are a combination of the two terms on the RHS of (11).

, the parameter capturing the e¤ectiveness of the contributions

of the in‡uence-buying donor. A higher

means a higher direct return on contributing

(higher …rst term), but also a higher indirect cost of contributing because, due to the
increased e¤ectiveness of contributions, the large donor has stronger preferences for .
Proposition 7 shows that the …rst e¤ect always dominates. For the e¤ect of

 

 

which

measures the balance in support for the two candidates among small donors, the two terms
reinforce one another. A higher     reduces the probability that  wins (smaller
bene…t of contributing), and increases the e¤ect of the reaction by small donors because
the election is closer (larger indirect cost of contributing).
This indirect cost of large contributions is also relevant for Tullock’s (1980) “missing
money”puzzle. The self-moderation of large donors meant to limit the electoral “backlash”
that we identify here may be an additional reason why money ostensibly used to buy
in‡uence is not more abundant in electoral politics. Even if there is a signi…cant direct
marginal bene…t of contributing (as suggested by various empirical estimates, see Avis
(2018) and references therein), large donors may prefer not to increase their contributions
because the indirect cost o¤sets this e¤ect. This indirect cost also complements the results
in Coate (2004): the negative electoral e¤ect of favors to large donors can come from a
direct reaction of voters (as in Coate) or through a reaction of small donors who then a¤ect
voters (as in our model). Moreover, our result shows that the presence of small donors
can make the backlash so strong that it reverses the electoral boost of large contributions.
These results produce at least two empirical predictions. First, while contributions by
large, early donors have an indeterminate e¤ect on total small contributions ( +  ),
they have an unambiguous e¤ect on small contributions to both candidates who receive
these large contributions and their opponents. That is, the e¤ect of  on  is negative,
while the e¤ect of  on  is positive. We are not aware of existing empirical evidence
relevant to that prediction. Second, note the contrast between the underdog e¤ect for small
donors and a strong bandwagon e¤ect for the large donors who care about in‡uence. This
…nds empirical support in Bonica (2016, …gure 2): PACs contribute almost exclusively,

26

and lobbies and Fortune 500 executives largely, to ex post winners. Remember that, by
contrast, barely 48 to 55% of small contributions ‡ow to ex post winners (see Section
3.2.2).
4.1.4

Campaign Finance Laws

What are the e¤ects of campaign contribution caps when we include large donors with a
…rst-mover advantage? Consider …rst the case in which caps on individual contributions
constrain small donors only. That is, large donors can …nd ways to in‡uence policy that are
not a¤ected by legal limitations, for example, via lobbying expenditures or contributions
to political action committees (PACs).
Suppose that the income distribution is identical for the small  and the small 
donors:  (  ) =  (  ) for every income group  Candidate  draws her advantage
from having a larger number of small donors. In that case:
Proposition 8 Consider a cap on individual contributions by small donors. As the cap
starts binding, contributions  by the large donor increase discontinuously.
The intuition is that as soon as the cap starts binding on small  donors, the latter
can no longer react to  by further increasing their own contributions. Thus, although
the just-binding cap does not a¤ect the level of small contributions, it does reduce the
sensitivity of small  donors: this produces a discrete drop in

. Hence, the optimal

contribution of the large donor not only rises; it does so by a discrete amount.
This result is stronger than the critique that if large donors can circumvent limitations
on contributions, such limitations will not reduce their disproportionate in‡uence. It shows
that, once the interactions between large and small donors are taken into account, some
caps may have an e¤ect opposite to the intended one. They may increase in‡uence buying,
a possibility that cannot be captured by analyses that ignore large-small interactions.
Consider now a cap speci…cally on what large donors can give, hence on their ability
to in‡uence policy. This was certainly one of the intents of the McCain-Feingold Act
regulating contributions by corporations or labor unions, subsequently overturned in the
controversial “Citizens United” decision. Many other countries, such as France in 1995,
banned contributions by corporations and other legal entities, but not private citizens.34
34

Law 95-65 of the 19th of January 1995, modifying Art.
https://bit.ly/2Um4GCu.

27

52-8 of the electoral code.

See:

We …nd that such a restriction to limit the in‡uence of large donors on campaign
platforms increases the probability that their preferred candidate gets elected:
Proposition 9 Consider a law that limits the contribution of large donors to . As that
constraint becomes increasingly binding, candidate  becomes more likely to win.
Proof. Immediate from the fact that  ( )  ( ) is strictly decreasing in  
The rationale for this e¤ect is straightforward. Remember that we are still considering
the case in which contributions by large donors only buy in‡uence and do not have any
direct e¤ect on winning probabilities. In this case, such contributions produce a relative
drop in the small contributions to candidate , and hence lower her probability of winning;
a cap reverses that e¤ect.
This is another case in which legislation may have unintended consequences. Limitations on contributions by large donors are meant to reduce not only their in‡uence on
policy after the election – as stressed by the models of in‡uence discussed above – but
also their in‡uence on election outcomes. Proposition 9 identi…es a trade-o¤ between the
two objectives. For example, a key provision of the McCain-Feingold Act prohibited “electioneering communications” de…ned as broadcast ads within 60 days of a general election
paid for by a corporation, non-pro…t issue organization, or union. Proposition 9 shows
that, when e¤ective, such prohibition should boost small donors’ contributions for the
party most a¤ected by the cap, which can enhance its electoral support. For the sake
of the example, imagine that contributions from corporations go mainly to a right-wing
party. Capping their contributions does make the right-wing party less radical, but it also
increases its probability of winning the election. Hence, the implemented policy may move
to the right.

4.2

Large Donor: Electoral Motive

So far, we focused on the case in which a candidate’s probability of winning only depends
on the contributions received during the later phase of the campaign, which we de…ned
as “small”. While this assumption is restrictive, it allowed us to identify the e¤ects of a
“pure” in‡uence motive. Here, we turn to the other main reason why candidates tend
to accept early contributions from large donors: these can help set up their campaign
infrastructure or, more generally, be used to boost their electoral prospects.

28

4.2.1

Formalization of the Electoral Motive

To focus on a pure electoral e¤ect, we shut down the in‡uence channel in this section. That
is, we set

( ) =

, 8 . Conversely, we now allow both the early/large and the small

donors’ contributions to in‡uence winning probabilities. Capturing this electoral e¤ect
for large donors requires only a minimal modi…cation of our original set-up. Consider the
same model as in Section 3.1, but let the contest success function become:



() =


, with  :=  (   ) 
 + 

(12)

with   0 and   0 where we retain the assumption that contributions
 are made before aggregate  . We can think of  as a candidate’s …nancial capacity,
which is a strictly increasing function of  and   That is, contributions by both large
and small donors positively a¤ect winning probabilities. We also assume decreasing returns
to each type of contribution:  2 2

0 and  2  2 

0, so that possible convexities

in the winning probability are still entirely captured by the parameter 
Given that the large donor is a Stackelberg leader, she will need to take account of
the small donors’ reaction function. Obviously, we cannot obtain closed-form solutions
for any function . For this reason, this section focuses on the Cobb-Douglas aggregator
function:35
 (   ) =  1¬ 

(13)

We will return to a general  function in Section 4.3, where we combine the in‡uence and
electoral e¤ects.
4.2.2

Equilibrium Analysis and Campaign Finance Laws

Solving by backward induction, it is easy to show that the equilibrium in small donors
contributions, for a given  , is:
(   ) =
implying

:

q
(1 ¬ )
0



= 1 @1 +

 

"

 




35

q

(1 ¬ )



1¬
2

 

 

#¬ 1
A=1¬



If instead the aggregator function displayed strategic substitutabilities (respectively complementarities),  would be decreasing (resp. increasing) in  . See Section 4.3 for the general case.

29

The problem of the large donor to candidate  then becomes:
max


1+







¬

¬

1¬
2

2


2 (  )



and her …rst order condition:
 (1

¬

)

=

2


(  )



This FOC is similar to the one we found for small donors. Hence:36
Proposition 10 When the large donor’s contributions are only motivated by the electoral
motive, there exists a unique equilibrium   0 such that:
and   ;

(i)  is increasing in
(ii)  is decreasing in




i¤









1¬
2

, i.e.



 12

In essence, this proposition shows that the results on small donors are robust to introducing dynamic electoral e¤ects in the model. For instance, the e¤ects of preference
intensity ( ) and income (  ) are identical to the small donors’ case. The e¤ect of
is also similar but with a twist: what matters is the combined e¤ects of
election closeness. When









1¬
2




and







on

  is the overall runner-up. In this case, an

increase in ’s advantage among small donors makes the election closer, which stimulates
initial contributions by the large donor. The opposite holds when









1¬
2

, in

which case  is the overall front-runner. This e¤ect is closely related to the underdog
e¤ect for small contributions discussed above. We are not aware of any empirical work
exploring this interaction.
From Proposition 10, it is also straightforward that a cap on small contributions could
lead to an increase in contributions by the large donor. By Corollary 1, this happens when
the cap makes election closer. Conversely, combining Propositions 1 and 10 shows that
capping large donors will impact small contributions, and the direction of the e¤ect will
again depend on whether it makes the election closer. For instance, a cap on  leads to
36
Beyond the Cobb-Douglas case, if  and  become substitutes, then  will be lower than in the
Cobb-Douglas case, since every additional dollar of contribution by the rich translates into a reduction in
contributions by small  donors. Conversely, if the function  displays complementarities between  and
, contributions by the rich  stimulate additional contributions by the small , which increases the rich’s
“return on contribution”.

30

an increase in small donations (to both candidates) when  has more support among both
small and large donors.

4.3

Large Donors: Both Motives Combined

These in‡uence and electoral motives can now be combined to get a sense of how the results
in Propositions 7–9 interact with that of Proposition 10. We saw that the direction of
some of the predictions are reversed between these. Thus, intuitively, while key mechanisms
remain valid, eventual predictions are a priori less clear-cut.
Formally, let us return to a generic function  (   ), as introduced in (12)  The
equilibrium behavior of small donors can then be implicitly determined through the FOC:


=

q



 (1

where
where







¬

)


 

(14)

 

 

is the elasticity of variable  with respect to . The only di¤erence with the

FOC in the initial model with only small donors (Section 3.2) is that, there,




was

equal to 1. In the Cobb-Douglas model we just discussed (Section 4.2), it was 1 ¬ .
By contrast, in this generalized setup,




can be larger or smaller than 1, and may

vary with the contributions of the large donor. In particular, strategic complementarities
would imply that




is increasing in   and decreasing in the presence of strategic

substitutabilities.
Moving to the …rst stage of the contribution game, the large donor  must take account
of both direct and indirect e¤ects of her contribution:

(  )
where

=
:

 ( )
 
+
( )


h
 
 (1 ¬  )

=
 +



(15)



 
 

¬

 
  

i



(16)

The left-hand side of (15) is, as before, the marginal cost of contributions, which is decreasing in the income of the large donor,    when

 0. The …rst term on the right-hand

side captures the direct bene…ts of buying favors. The second term is the (now direct and
indirect) e¤ects of  on the probability of winning, given

( ). Turn to (16): the

…rst term between square brackets captures the direct electoral e¤ects of the large donor’s
contribution. The second and third terms capture the small donors’ reactions, mediated
31

through the impact of their contributions on the probability of winning (


 ).

In contrast

with the pure in‡uence case, contributions by the large donor can potentially increase or
decrease relative support for .37
While we cannot obtain closed-form solutions, inspection of (15) and (16) leads to
several insights. First, note that the two terms on the RHS move in opposite directions
with the closeness of the election (i.e., how close



is to 12): the …rst term, which

captures the in‡uence motive, decreases whereas the second term, which captures both
the bene…ts of the electoral motive and the indirect cost of the in‡uence motive, increases
(because

 (1

¬

)

is maximized in



= 12). This suggests that the in‡uence motive

should dominate when the election is lopsided, and the electoral motive should dominate



when the election is close. In particular, if the elasticities
condition for the in‡uence motive to dominate is that



are all bounded, a su¢ cient

is su¢ ciently large.

We are not arguing that empirical studies of the in‡uence of money on policy should
primarily focus on lopsided elections. Indeed, the in‡uence motive could also dominate
in close elections when there are caps on individual contributions by small donors. As we
have noted before, such a cap reduces–potentially eliminates–the ability of small donors to
push back against the favors obtained by large donors. If that reduction is large enough,
the in‡uence motive could also dominate in close elections.
Second, condition (15) highlights that a shift in (expected) support among small donors
should have an opposite e¤ect on a large donor who contributes to the candidate who
is ahead (typically, the incumbent) rather than the one who is behind (typically, the
challenger). Consider an election that becomes increasingly lopsided among small donors,
producing a drop in both

 (1

¬

)

and in 1 ¬

.

The …rst drop tilts the large donor

who supports  towards additional contributions for favors, and less for electoral purposes.
The e¤ect on  is thus indeterminate. For a large donor who is a supporter of , the
total e¤ect would be unambiguous: she would reduce her contributions on both counts.

37

The Cobb-Douglas benchmark of the previous section implied that the second and third terms added
up to zero. Therefore, if the aggregator function  displays strategic complementarities, larger contributions by  would reduce (or possibly reverse) the underdog e¤ect identi…ed for electorally motivated
contributions. That is, the second and third terms would add up to a positive amount, inducing higher
contributions  than in the Cobb-Douglas case. The opposite holds in the case of strategic substitutabilities.

32

5

A Demand-Side Model of the Electoral Motive

One may argue that modeling small donors as highly calculating and perfectly informed
actors lacks realism. In particular, small donors may miscalculate the impact of their
contribution, or be responding to basic psychological motivations or to their candidates’
requests (Mutz 1995, Rogers et al. 2017). For example: donors may mechanically react to
media attention and/or candidate fund-raising e¤orts. In this section, we show that our
results about small donors’behavior (Section 3.1) are fully consistent with such behavioral
motivations. What is more, the amount of e¤ort candidates put into raising funds from
small donors suggests that candidates are quite aware of this.
Here, we show that a reasonable functional representation of behavioral responses leads
to the same …rst-order conditions, and hence identical results as in the model with instrumental small donors. Hence, whether individual behavior is driven by rational donors who
are instrumentally motivated, or by the strategic behavior of candidates, the implications
of electoral considerations for contributions as identi…ed in the previous sections hold.
To formalize this point, we assume in this section that small donors mechanically respond to party requests for contributions. Candidates, on their side, need to exert a costly
e¤ort in order to induce their supporters to contribute to their campaign. This change
in perspective transforms our model into a “demand-side” model in which candidates,
who care about winning the election, are the strategic actors, rather than a “supply-side”
model in which donors were the strategic actors.
Consider  donors of type  , distributed in income classes  1      according
¬
to the a distribution function     that satis…es the same assumptions as in Section

3.1. We assume that donor  reacts mechanically to his candidate’s (costly) fund-raising
e¤ort, denoted  . His contribution  is increasing and concave in both  and   . We
represent this functionally by:

where

For types  :

 =

For types  :

 =

¬


¬


 
 

1
2

1
2

(17)


(18)

parameterizes the donors’elasticity of contributions exactly like in the instrumen-

tal model. The Cobb-Douglas speci…cation is chosen both for simplicity and to relate to
the main model.
Candidates choose  to maximize their probability of winning net of the cost of fund33

raising (where, for simplicity, we let the cost of soliciting a donor be  ):
X

¬
 
 + 

X
  =
 

 maximizes :



It follows that:



 =

 

2

2¬



 

Substituting these equilibrium levels of candidate e¤ort into the donors’contribution functions (17) and (18) yield:


=



=

d

 

¬


2
d   ¬ 

2

 
 

which is identical (but for the factor 21 ) to (3) and (4).
In other words, there exists some form of response by behavioral donors and strategic
candidates such that the equilibrium level of individual and aggregate contributions are
the same as with strategic donors and passive candidates. Hence, although it is a perfectly
valid empirical question to ask, “How rational are small donors?”, allowing them to be
“behaviorally motivated” rather than fully rationally instrumental does not qualitatively
change our …ndings on how electoral motives (here on the part of candidates) in‡uence individual contributions, nor on how economic variables and legal constraints would in‡uence
total contributions and the feedback loops between aggregate and individual contributions.

6

Conclusions

Small contributions to political campaigns have become extremely important. Conventional wisdom is that such contributions are a consumption good to the donors. In large
part this is a conclusion by default, the basic reasoning being that because each donation
is so small relative to total campaign donations, small donors cannot be motivated either
by an attempt to buy in‡uence nor by any e¤ect they may have on election outcomes. In
this paper, we instead argue that contributions by small donors can be better explained by
an electoral motive, either on the part of donors (for instrumental or behavioral reasons),
or on the part of candidates.

34

Our model of small donors predicts patterns of contributions that are in line with a
number of empirical …ndings in the literature, and that contrast with explanations of contributions relying on a simple consumption motive or on an in‡uence motive. There is, for
instance, a “closeness”e¤ect in which equilibrium contributions increase when the support
for the two candidates is more even, as well as an “underdog e¤ect”, whereby equilibrium
relative contributions for the advantaged candidate are smaller than their underlying advantage. (These are in contrast to a “bandwagon” e¤ect under an in‡uence motive, and
no predicted e¤ect in the simple consumption motive.) The model also makes novel predictions about the e¤ects of increases in income inequality on campaign contributions and
election outcomes depending on the source of inequality.
Our model gives insights into the e¤ects of campaign …nance laws. We …nd that a
cap on individual contributions a¤ects all donors, including those not directly hit by the
cap. This introduces complications for empirical analyses. The cap generally favors the
candidate with the largest number of donors and works against the candidate with the
richest donors, but these e¤ects are not necessarily monotonic. Instead, matching subsidies
have limited, or no e¤ects. It is possible to eliminate the e¤ects of income inequalities on
campaign contributions by implementing an income-contingent tax on contributions.
We also study the interactions between small and large donors. We consider the
problem of a large donor who contributes to a candidate at an early stage of the campaign,
when candidate platforms are potentially still ‡uid, and before small donors make their
decisions. We allow for the donor to be motivated both by a desire to curry favors,
that is, an in‡uence motive, and to in‡uence the outcome of the election, that is, an
electoral motive. This augmented model produces various additional insights. First, we
identify a new indirect cost of contributing that arises speci…cally from the interactions
with small donors. This induces large donors to moderate their contribution, and their
request for favors. Second, we …nd that policy favors should be more prevalent in lopsided
elections. Third, due to interactions between small and large donors, cap on contributions
can have additional unintended e¤ects. For instance, capping small contributions during
the electoral campaign, while not e¤ectively capping large donors may end up boosting
the large donors’requests and favor extraction.
We view this paper as a …rst step to better understanding small political contributions
by moving away from the common view that they must be a consumption good for the
donors. As discussed in the paper, we believe an electoral motive for such contributions

35

is not only theoretically sensible, it also can better explain several empirical regularities,
as well as provide some guidance to further empirical work.

36

References
[1] Ashworth, Scott (2006) “Campaign Finance and Voter Welfare with Entrenched Incumbents”, American Political Science Review, 100(1): 55-68.
[2] Agranov, M., J. Goeree, J. Romero, and L. Yariv (2018). What Makes Voters Turn
Out: The E¤ects of Polls and Beliefs, Journal of the European Economic Association,
16(3): 825-856.
[3] Ansolabehere, S., J. de Figueiredo, and J. Snyder (2003). Why Is There so Little
Money in U.S. Politics?, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1): 105-130.
[4] Avis, E. (2018). Interest Groups, Campaign Finance and Policy In‡uence: Evidence
from the U.S. Congress, mimeo.
[5] Barber, M. (2016). Donation Motivations: Testing Theories of Access and Ideology,
Political Research Quarterly, 69(1): 148-159.
[6] Barber, M., B. Canes-Wrone, and S. Thrower (2017). Ideologically Sophisticated
Donors: Which Candidates Do Individual Contributors Finance?, American Journal of Political Science, 61(2): 271-88.
[7] Baron, D. (1994). Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed Voters,
American Political Science Review, 88: 33-47.
[8] Becker, G. (1983). “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political
In‡uence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (3): 371-400.
[9] Bekkouche, Y. and J. Cagé (2019). The Heterogeneous Price of a Vote: Evidence
from France, 1993-2014, CEPR Discussion Paper, 12614.
[10] Benoit, K. and M. Marsh (2008). “The Campaign Value of Incumbency: A New
Solution to the Puzzle of Less E¤ective Incumbent Spending”, American Journal of
Political Science, 52: 874-90.
[11] Bertrand, M., M. Bombardini, and F. Trebbi (2014). Is It Whom You Know orWhat
You Know? An Empirical Assessment of the Lobbying Process. American Economic
Review, 104(12): 3885-3920.
[12] Bombardini, M. and F. Trebbi (2011). Votes or Money? Theory and Evidence from
the US Congress, Journal of Public Economics, 95(7-8): 587-611.
[13] Bonica, A. (2014). Mapping the Ideological Marketplace, American Journal of Political Science, 58(2): 367–386.
[14] Bonica, A. (2016). Avenues of In‡uence: On the Political Expenditures of Corporations and Their Directors and Executives, Business and Politics, 18(4): 367-394.

37

[15] Bonica, A., N. McMarthy, K. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (2013). Why Hasn’t Democracy
Slowed Rising Inequality? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3): 103-124.
[16] Bonica, A. and H. Rosenthal (2018). Increasing Inequality in Wealth and the Political
Expenditures of Billionaires, mimeo.
[17] Bonneau, C. and D. Cann (2011). Campaign Spending, Diminishing Marginal Returns, and Campaign Finance Restrictions in Judicial Elections, Journal of Politics,
73(4): 1267-80.
[18] Brown, C., W. Cli¤ord, L. Powell, and C. Wilcox (1995). Serious money: Fund-raising
and contributing in presidential nomination campaigns, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[19] Castanheira, M. (2003). Victory Margins and the Paradox of Voting, European Journal of Political Economy, 19: 817-841.
[20] Chamon, M. and E. Kaplan (2013). The Iceberg Theory of Campaign Contributions:
Political Treats and Interest Group Behavior, American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 5(1):1-31.
[21] Claassen, R. (2007). Campaign Activism and the Spatial Model: Getting Beyond
Extremism to Explain Policy Motivated Participation, Political Behavior, 29(3): 369–
390.
[22] Cmar, T. (2005). Toward a Small Donor Democracy: The Past and Future of Incentive
Programs for Small Political Contributions, Fordham Urban Law Journal, 32(443):
101-160.
[23] Coate, S. (2004a). Pareto-improving Campaign Finance Policy. American Economic
Review, 94(3): 628-655.
[24] Coate, S. (2004b). Political Competition with Campaign Contributions and Informative Advertising. Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(5): 772-804.
[25] Culberson, T., M. McDonald, and S. Robbins (2019). Small Donors in Congressional
Elections. American Politics Research, 47(5): 970-999.
[26] Da Silveira, B. and J. De Mello (2011). Campaign Advertising and Election Outcomes:
Quasi-natural Experiment Evidence from Gubernatorial Elections in Brazil, Review
of Economic Studies, 78(2): 590-612.
[27] DellaVigna S., R. Durante, B. Knight, and E. La Ferrara (2016). Market-based Lobbying: Evidence from Advertising Spending in Italy, American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 8(1): 224-56.
[28] Drazen, A. and N. Limão (2008) A Bargaining Theory of Ine¢ cient Redistribution
Policies. International Economic Review 49(2): 621-657.
38

[29] Enos, R. D., and Fowler, A. (2016). Aggregate e¤ects of large-scale campaigns on
voter turnout. Political Science Research and Methods, 1-19.
[30] Epstein, G. and S. Nitzan (2006). The Politics of Randomness, Social Choice and
Welfare, 27: 423–433.
[31] Erikson, R. and T. Palfrey (1998). Campaign Spending and Incumbency: An Alternative Simultaneous Equations Approach, Journal of Politics, 60(2): 355-373.
[32] Erikson, R. and T. Palfrey (2000). Equilibria in Campaign Spending Games: Theory
and Data, American Political Science Review, 94(3): 595-609.
[33] Esteban, J. and D. Ray (1999). Con‡ict and Distribution, Journal of Economic Theory, 87: 379-415.
[34] Esteban, J. and D. Ray (2001). Collective Action and the Group Size Paradox, American Political Science Review, 95(3): 663-672.
[35] Feddersen, T. and F. Gul (2015). Polarization and Income Inequality: A Dynamic
Model of Unequal Democracy, mimeo.
[36] Feddersen, T. and Sandroni, A. (2006), A Theory of Participation in Elections, American Economic Review P&P 96: 1271-1282.
[37] Feigenbaum, J.J., and C.A. Shelton (2013). The Vicious Cycle: Fundraising and Perceived Viability in US Presidential Primaries. Quarterly Journal of Political Science
8 (1):1-40.
[38] Francia, P., P. Herrnson, J. Green, L. Powell and C. Wilcox (2003). The Financiers of
Congressional Elections: Investors, Ideologues, and Intimates, New York: Columbia
University Press.
[39] Fuchs, E.R., E.S. Adler, and L.A. Mitchell (2000). WIN, PLACE, SHOW. Public
Opinion Polls and Campaign Contributions in a New York City Election. Urban Affairs Review, 35(4): 479-501.
[40] Gerber, A. (2004). Does Campaign Spending Work?: Field Experiments Provide
Evidence and Suggest New Theory, American Behavioral Scientist, 47: 541-574.
[41] Gordon, S., C. Hafer, and D. Landa (2007). Consumption or Investment: On Motivations for Political Giving, Journal of Politics 69(4): 1057-1072.
[42] Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1994). Protection for Sale, American Economic
Review, 84(4): 833-850.
[43] Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1996). Electoral Competition and Special Interest
Politics, Review of Economic Studies, 63: 265-286.

39

[44] Hall, A., and J. Snyder (2014). Information and Wasted Votes: A Study of U.S.
Primary Elections, Quarterly Journal of Political Science 10(4): 433-459.
[45] Herrera, H., M. Morelli, and T. Palfrey (2014). Turnout and Power Sharing, Economic
Journal, 124(574): F131-F162.
[46] Herrera, H., M. Morelli, and S. Nunnari (2016). Turnout Across Democracies, American Journal of Political Science, 60(3): 607-24.
[47] Hirshleifer, J. (1989). Con‡ict and Rent-Seeking Success Functions; Ratio vs. Di¤erence Models of Relative Success, Public Choice 63: 101-112.
[48] Jacobson, G. (1980). Money in Congressional Elections. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
[49] Jacobson, G. (1985). Money and Votes Reconsidered: Congressional Elections, 19721982, Public Choice, 47: 7-62.
[50] Jia, H., S. Skaperdas, and S. Vaidya (2013). Contest functions: Theoretical foundations and issues in estimation, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 31:
211-22.
[51] Kartal, M. (2015). A Comparative Welfare Analysis Of Electoral Systems With Endogenous Turnout, Economic Journal, 125(September): 1369-92.
[52] Katz, E., S. Nitzan, and J. Rosenberg (1990). Rent-Seeking for Pure Public Goods,
Public Choice, 65(1): 49-60.
[53] Kawai, K. and T. Sunada (2015). Campaign Finance in U.S. House Elections, mimeo.
[54] Kendall, C., T. Nannicini, and F. Trebbi (2015). How Do Voters Respond to Information? Evidence from a Randomized Campaign, American Economic Review, 105(1):
322-53.
[55] Konrad, K. (2007). Strategy in Contests –an Introduction, WZB-Markets and Politics
Working Paper, SP II 2007-01.
[56] Larreguy, H., J. Marshall, and J. Snyder (2018). Leveling the Playing Field: How
Campaign Advertising Can Help Non-Dominant Parties, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 16(6) :1812-1849.
[57] Levitt, S. (1994). Using Repeat Challengers to Estimate the E¤ect of Campaign
Spending on Election Outcomes in the U.S. House, Journal of Political Economy,
102(4): 777-798.
[58] Lott, J. (2006). Campaign Finance Reform and Electoral Competition, Public Choice,
129: 263-300.

40

[59] Magleby, D., Goodli¤e, J., and Olsen, J. (2018). Who Donates in Campaigns?: The
Importance of Message, Messenger, Medium, and Structure. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
[60] Malbin, Michael J. (2013). “Small donors: Incentives, economies of scale, and e¤ects”.
The Forum. Vol. 11 De Gruyter pp. 385–411.
[61] McCarty, N., K. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (2006). Polarized America, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
[62] Morton, R. and R. Myerson (2012). Decisiveness of Contributors’Perceptions in Elections. Economic Theory, 49: 571-590.
[63] Mutz, D. (1995). E¤ects of Horse-Race Coverage on Campaign Co¤ers: Strategic
Contributing in Presidential Primaries, The Journal of Politics, 57(4): 1015-42.
[64] Myatt, D. (2015). A Theory of Voter Turnout, mimeo.
[65] Palfrey, T. and H. Rosenthal (1985). Voter Participation and Strategic Uncertainty,
American Political Science Review, 79: 62-78.
[66] Prat, A. (2002). Campaign Advertising and Voter Welfare, Review of Economic Studies, 69(4): 999-1017.
[67] Rogers, T. and D. Moore (2014). The Motivating Power of Undercon…dence: “The
Race is Close but We’re Losing”. Harvard Kennedy School RWP14-047.
[68] Rogers, T., D. Moore, and M. Norton (2017). The Belief in a Favorable Future,
Psychological Science, 28(9): 1290-1301.
[69] Rosenberg, D. (2002). Broadening the Base - The Case for a New Federal Tax Credit
for Political Contributions, American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.
[70] Schlozman, Kay Lehman, Sidney Verba, and Henry E. Brady (2012). The Unheavenly
Chorus: Unequal Political Voice and the Broken Promise of American Democracy.
Princeton University Press.
[71] Skaperdas, S. and B. Grofman (1995). Modeling Negative Campaigning, American
Political Science Review, 89: 49–61.
[72] Spenkuch, J. L. and D. Toniatti (2018). Political advertising and election outcomes,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(4): 1981-2036.
[73] Sprick Schuster, S. (2020). Does Campaign Spending A¤ect Election Outcomes? New
Evidence from Transaction-Level Disbursement Data, Journal of Politics, forthcoming.
[74] Stratmann, T. (1992). Are Contributors Rational? Untangling Strategies of Political
Action Committees, Journal of Political Economy, 100(3): 647-664.
41

[75] Stratmann, T. (2006). Contribution Limits and the E¤ectiveness of Campaign Spending, Public Choice, 129: 461-474.
[76] Stratmann, T. (2009). How Prices Matter in Politics: The Returns to Campaign
Advertising, Public Choice, 140(3/4): 357-377.
[77] Stratmann, T. and F. Aparicio-Castillo (2006). Competition Policy for Elections: Do
Campaign Contribution Limits Matter?, Public Choice, 127: 177-206.
[78] Tullock, G. (1980). E¢ cient Rent Seeking, In: Buchanan, J., R. Tollison, and G.
Tullock (eds.), Toward a Theory of the Rent-Seeking Society, Texas A&M University
Press, College Station: 97–112.

42

Appendix
Appendix 1. Proofs for Section 3.2
Lemma 1  is increasing in   8 2 f g For    ,  is increasing in  , whereas
 is decreasing in   For      is decreasing in  , and  is increasing in  
Proof of Lemma 1. The proof focuses on the case    . By symmetry, the complementary
case amounts to a labeling swap between  and .
From Proposition 1 and the de…nition of , we have:
1

1

¬ 1

 =

and  =

¬ 1

Taking derivatives and simplifying yields:

0,






1
2

1+

and


 0 , 


¬1

 

¬1





The latter is always satis…ed.  is necessarily positive for
: For
 , we need to
invoke the second order condition for equilibrium existence: we saw that it can be approximated
by:  ¬   1 in the proof of Proposition 1. Substituting for  , this condition becomes:

1
1
 Since  1 condition garantees that   0
  2 1+
Next,

_ 


¬1

( + ) + 

¬1

( ¬ ) and


_ 


¬1

¬ 

¬1



where the former is always positive and the latter always negative.
Proof of Proposition 1. We are focusing on pure strategies. Even when the pure strategy
equilibrium does not exist, there must be a mixed strategy equilibrium (MSE), since payo¤ functions are continuous and bounded above. We are not interested in such MSE, because they are
not realistic in our context.
Di¤erentiating the probability of winning (1) with respect to an individual contribution 
yields:
0

0


 
=








(1 ¬

)

=







and,



(20)

Plugging (19) and (20) into (5)  then taking the ratio between  and  shows that



(19)

¬1




=

in a pure strategy equilibrium Substituting for  when we solve for the equilibrium

43

value of  as a function of the parameters  ,   and , we have:


0 1( ¬ 1)
)

= 

(

= 

0
B
@
0
B
@

= 

= 


 + 



¬1

 +  (  )
(  )



1

C
2A

¬1

1 + (  )

1
¬1

= 



(1+ )2

 is derived following the same steps, and from the fact that
implies that  is identical for  and for .

1
¬1



1
¬1

C
A

¬1

 +  (  )

¬1

1

¬1

 (  )




1( ¬ 1)


 + 

1

¬ 1

=

¬ 
.
(1+¬  )2

=



The latter

Second, equilibrium existence of a pure strategy equilibrium depends on the second order
conditions being satis…ed for this vector of total contributions. After some simpli…cations, the
SOC for type- donors can be expressed as:
 
2


¬
which is always satis…ed since
¬
Noting that

( (

 



¬



¬





 
2


¬

 ))  ( ¬ 1)

¬2

(  )



A similar condition must hold for  donors:38

(1 + (



¬

 ( ¬ 1)

 ))

¬


¬2

(  )



(21)

= , we can rewrite this condition as follows:

)

¬ 1)  ( ¬ 1)
¬

( (

( (

(1 + (

¬


)

( ¬1

(



¬

0


1¬

)

1
¬1

2


(  )

 ) ¬ 1)  ( ¬ 1)

¬ 1)  ( ¬ 1)
)

¬


(  )
(  )

¬1




= ( ¬ 1)

¬1

1
¬1
2

¬ 1  ( ¬ 1)

38

P

¬ ¬
     
(  )

2( ¬ 1)

( ) 
2( ¬ 1)

( ) 

¬1

¬1

2

( ) 

2( ¬ 1)

2

(  )
1¬

(  )

1
¬1

1¬

1
¬1

0 1¬
)

(

¬1

¬1

= ( ¬ 1)

(


(  )

¬1

¬ 1) 

Second order condition amounts to looking at di¤erent points of the contest function for  and for
 donors. Since  donors perceive a higher winning probability than , their SOC is automatically
satis…ed: they are in the concave part of the CSF. Instead,  donors may be in a spot in which the
CSF is convex. That is, a slight decrease in their contribution base would also decrease their individucal
incentives to contribute. For su¢ ciently high values of , this would reinforce the drop in individual
incentives so markedly that total contributions may be driven to 0. In that case, there is no pure strategy
equilibrium. The proposition shows that this can never happen if is no larger than , or –for larger–
if the contribution bases are not too asymmetric.

44

This is automatically satis…ed for
other value of

(since



¬

1), and when





¬



1 for any

and .

¬
 . A mean¬
P

preserving spread of the income distribution is such that   
 = ¬    
¬
   where  is the subgroup with mean income in group  , and    is the change in den¬
¬
P

  

sity of each income class. If and only if  1 this implies that

¬
¬
P
 
and hence that  increases. Applying the proof of Lemma 1 in the


Proof of Proposition 2.

Remember that 

P

( ) 
P

=1
¬

¬
  

appendix then demonstrates the result.

Proof of Proposition 3. First, we show that, for any given level of total contributions  and
 , the marginal return of contributing to  is larger than that of contributing to  i¤    :
 


 

and hence

 




 


¬ ¬1

= ¬

2


=

2


=

 

¬

1¬

(  )

 

=

(1 ¬ )  

(¬ ) (  )



(1 ¬ )

(1 ¬ )

1


1


1




i¤    

Next, remember that   2   with   0 and  positive and …nite, and that we are still
focusing on the case = 2. In that case, there exist two cuto¤s 0 and 1 for the cap on individual
contributions , such that: 8  1 , no small donor is constrained and 8  0 all small donors are
constrained. By Proposition 1, for   1 , the ratio of total small contributions must be:

=


1
2




=

1
2






and winning probabilities are the ones in Proposition 1:



0

= 1 @1 +

"




1
2

#¬ 1
A

For   0 , all small donors contribute . Therefore,  =   and  =  . The contribution

ratio is then 
, and it is immediate to derive that ’s winning probability is then
0



= 1 1 +


¬

!



For  2 (0  1 ),  must always be strictly larger than  , otherwise, individual best responses
¬
¬
would be such that   
    8  , which would in turn imply    , a contradiction
If follows that:

45

(1) there is a (possibly empty) set of income levels   such that neither  nor -donors are capped:
  
(2) there is a non-empty set of income levels   such that -donors are uncapped and -donors
are capped:    = 
(3) there is a (possibly empty) set of income levels   such that both  and -donors are capped,
 =  = 
Parts (1) and (2) imply that



0


() must be strictly less than

The fact that proportionately

more -donors than -donors are capped when   0 implies that their joint contribution capacity
is reduced more than ’s. This amounts to letting  drop because of a reduction in top 
incomes. Following Proposition 1, this increases



() above



The proof of non-monotonicity

is provided by the example in the main text.


8 = 1  , and order income groups such that
= 
Proof of Proposition 4. De…ne 
+1

   . Remember that, for any two donors  and  who support the same candidate and
¬
 The equilibrium is
are unconstrained by the cap, we must have:     =  
thus fully characterized by two income cuto¤ levels  () and  () and two “lowest contribution
¬1
¬1
levels”  
and  
such that:

for 

for



¬
¬ ¬
  ()    =  1  1
¬
  ()    = 



¬
¬
First, we show that  
  
for all unconstrained donors of some income group ,
and hence that more - than -donors will be constrained. To prove this, note that a necessary
condition for the fraction of constrained -donors to be smaller than that of -donors is to have
 ()   (). This would require that  ( ())   ( ()) =   ( ()), and hence
¬
¬
        for any     ()  But this leads to a contradiction: such contributions would
aggregate into  ()   (), which would produce best-response contributions  ( ()) 
 ( ())  because of free riding.
¬
¬
This establishes that  
 
for all  = 1  , and the inequality must be strict
for some . Then, following the same steps as for the proof of Proposition 3 leads to Proposition
4.
Proof of Proposition 5. First, we note that (7) can be rewritten as:
~ = (1 + )  .
Plugging that into candidate ’s probability of winning, we get:



~
S

=

=

¬

(1 + ) 
1+
(1 + ) 
!¬ 1
¬

1+
=


46

!¬ 1




(S)

As a consequence, incentives, and therefore the equilibrium, are the same for any  7 0
Proof of Proposition 6. With this tax, the cost of contributing  for a donor with income  
becomes:
h¬ 2
i
i ¬ 2
2 h¬
 +  
¬ 1     2 =  2

which is independent of   .

Appendix 2. Proofs for Section 4
Proof of Proposition 7. Plugging (8) and (9) in the FOC (11)  and rearranging, we obtain:

¬ 1 ¬

q

1+

 
 

q

( )

 
 

( )

h

i

+ R ¬
(  )

1+

q

 
 

( )

= 0

(22)

 is such that this condition is satis…ed and the LHS is locally strictly decreasing in   There
is at least one solution to (22) because the LHS goes to 1 when  ! 0 and goes to ¬1 when
 ! 1 The equilibrium is generically unique because, even if there were multiple solutions to
(22), the large donor would pick the global maximum.
Comparative statics follow. First,  is strictly decreasing in : following an increase in 
the second term of (22) becomes more negative. Thus the LHS must increase to restore equality,

which requires  to decrease. The proof follows the same steps for ;  
 and   
Second,  is strictly increasing in . To prove this, note that (22) implies:
¬ 1

¬

q

1+

 
 

q

 
 

( )
( )

R  0

since the LHS of this expression amounts to adding strictly positive terms to (22)  Hence, an
increase in

must increase the LHS of (22)  implying that the LHS must decrease to restore

equality. This requires  to increase.
Proof of Proposition 8. Start from the equilibrium vector of contributions: f     g 
P
with  =    (  ;  )  Since    , we have that  (  )   (  ), 8. The sum of
these contributions determine the winning probability:


¬1

= (1 + (  ) )

( 12)

In the absence of a cap on individual contributions, the response of these  with respect to 
is:
X   (  ;  )

=
 




 (  ; )

with    0. In the proof of Proposition 7, we found that the stronger these responses,
the less the large donor to  contributes in equilibrium.

47

¬
Now, set the cap on individual contributions at  =    , such that, at  =  , this cap
¬
does not modify small donor contributions. Yet, 
 =
 donors now have a response  
0 for any    . Hence




drops by a discrete amount, proportional to 
  This reduces

the marginal cost of  by the same discrete amount (this corresponds to a discrete drop in

in

(22)). Accordingly,  must increase discontinuously.
Proof of Proposition 10. The FOC of the large donor to  is:

¬


2

=

¬

1¬
2







1+

¬

1¬
2







!2 

(23)

Note that, when  tends to 0 the LHS tend to 0 and the RHS tends to in…nity When  tends
to in…nity, the LHS tends to in…nity and the RHS tends to 0 This directly implies that   0
After some simple but tedious manipulation, (23) becomes
"

¬


1





1¬
2

#¬

0

"

2 @
= 
 +

1





1¬
2

#¬ 12
A 

Note that the LHS does not depend on  and the RHS increases in  . Hence,  is strictly
¬
increasing in and  
1¬
2


We now want to determine the e¤ect of  := 
on  :=

this notation:
¬
¬

[  ]
2
 =
2
2

¬
1 + [  ]

which boils down to

v
u
u
=u
t

¬

(  )
2


[  ]


 

Let’s rewrite (23) with

2

¬

1 + [  ]

Di¤erentiating both sides with respect to  obtains:


1
=¬

2

( )
2

( () )

+1

() + W () ¬ 1 0
2
1
+1)
( ( ()
)

v
u
u
t

¬2

( )
2

( () ) ( () )

Note that 1 ¬

2

 0 because

2 and

() + W () ¬ 1 0
3
1
+1)
( ( ()
)

(  )
2


( () )

2

1
( ( ()

which boils down to


=

2 1+

+1

)

+1)

¬

1 ¬ (  )

2

¬

+ (  )

¬
1¬

 1 The sign of

48

2



is thus the same as that of

¬

1 ¬ (  )

 Hence,  is decreasing in  if and only if
¬

1  (  )
which boils down to







,

1¬
2

or

49



 12

