                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF JOB-SEARCH ASSISTANCE:
          EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE USING ADMINISTRATIVE TAX DATA

                                    Dayanand S. Manoli
                                    Marios Michaelides
                                       Ankur Patel

                                     Working Paper 24422
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24422


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




This paper is derived from a project titled “The Effects of Employment and Earnings on Tax
Filing and Tax Liability: Evidence on Short-term and Long-term Effects Using Administrative
Tax Data.” This project is based on data collected by IMPAQ International, LLC (IMPAQ) as
part of a study funded by the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL). The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not represent any official views or opinions of DOL,
IMPAQ, the United States Treasury, the United States Internal Revenue Service, any other
government agency, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to numerous
people for helpful comments and suggestions, including DOL and IMPAQ staff, conference and
seminar participants, and for funding from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Dayanand S. Manoli, Marios Michaelides, and Ankur Patel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Effects of Job-Search Assistance: Experimental Evidence Using Administrative
Tax Data
Dayanand S. Manoli, Marios Michaelides, and Ankur Patel
NBER Working Paper No. 24422
March 2018
JEL No. I38

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper uses administrative tax data to examine the long-term effects of an experimental job-
search assistance program operating in Nevada in 2009. The program required randomly-selected
unemployed workers who had just started collecting unemployment insurance (UI) benefits to
undergo an eligibility review and receive personalized job-counseling services. The program led
to substantial short-term reductions in UI receipt, and to persistent, long-term increases in
employment and earnings. The program also affected participants’ family outcomes, including
total income, tax filing, tax liability, and home ownership. These findings show that job-search
assistance programs may produce substantial long-term effects for participants and their families.


Dayanand S. Manoli                              Ankur Patel
Department of Economics                         Department of the Treasury
University of Texas at Austin                   Ankur.Patel@treasury.gov
2225 Speedway Stop C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
dsmanoli@austin.utexas.edu

Marios Michaelides
University of Cyprus
mariosm@ucy.ac.cy
I.       Introduction

     Unemployment insurance (UI) programs typically require unemployed workers to actively

search for employment while collecting benefits. Over recent decades, job-search assistance

programs which are intended to help UI recipients meet these requirements have become

common in the United States and other developed countries. These programs typically involve

monitoring activities to ensure that UI recipients are conducting an active job-search and

provision of job-search assistance services to connect them with available jobs (Meyer, 1995;

Wandner, 2010; Card et al., 2010; Kahn, 2012). These requirements are expected to reduce UI

recipients’ negative incentives (moral hazard) and to improve the effectiveness of their job

search. Job-search assistance programs have become a larger part of the menu of government-

subsidized employment and training programs, accounting for more than one-half of one percent

of the government budget and serving nearly one in every twenty workers in OECD countries

(Wandner and Eberts, 2014; Crepon and van den Berg, 2016).

     Understanding the long-term effects of job-search assistance programs is important for

policymakers and academic researchers.1 However, because of data limitations and other factors,

most prior studies (which we discuss in more detail below) have focused on the programs’ short-

term impacts on unemployment duration, employment, and earnings, and provide limited

evidence on long-term effects. From a policymaker perspective, it is important to consider the

long-term impacts of these programs on participants’ earnings and tax outcomes when measuring

their cost-effectiveness. In particular, it is useful to consider whether these programs create


1
   In addition to the motivation described here, we note that this paper is also relevant for tax policy. In particular,
this paper is derived from an original project titled “The Effects of Employment and Earnings on Tax Filing and Tax
Liability: Evidence on Short-term and Long-term Effects Using Administrative Tax Data.” Since forecasting tax
filing and tax liabilities are central components of tax policy, this project aims to understand how changes in
employment and earnings affect changes in tax filing and tax liabilities. This project exploits exogenous variation in
employment and earnings to estimate the causal effects of changes in employment and earnings on tax filing and tax
liabilities.

                                                        Page 1
permanent increases in employment and earnings, and hence, increase state and federal income

tax bases. From an academic research perspective, it is important to establish whether job-search

assistance helps unemployed workers overcome barriers to reemployment (fixed costs) thereby

producing persistent increases in employment and earnings. Alternatively, the programs may

have transitory effects on employment, earnings, and income tax bases if their only impact is to

help treated individuals to find jobs faster than they would have in the absence of the programs.

   This paper examines the long-term effects of an intervention implemented by the state of

Nevada in the second half of 2009. The intervention provided UI recipients with personalized

job-search assistance at the beginning of their UI spells. The Nevada program examined here is

a compelling case study because it used random assignment to determine which UI recipients

would be subject to program requirements (treatment group) and which would be exempted from

the program (control group). The program required individuals assigned to the treatment group

to meet with program staff at the early stages of their UI spells to undergo an eligibility review,

in which they provided information about their job-search activities. Those who failed to show

up for the review and those who were identified during the review as not conducting an active

job-search, as required by state UI laws, were disqualified from collecting UI benefits. Those

deemed eligible during the review, received personalized job-counseling services during the

same meeting, which focused on assessing their occupational skills, helping them develop a job-

search plan, providing resume development assistance, and providing direct referrals to local

employers with relevant jobs.

   The empirical analyses use 2001-2015 administrative tax records for all UI recipients who

were subject to random assignment for participation in the program (treatment and control

groups) during the study period. The data allow us to construct measures of individual earnings,



                                              Page 2
UI receipt, and other outcomes based on third-party reported tax documents. In addition, we

measure tax filing and other family-level outcomes, such as tax liability, total income and home

ownership, based on filed tax returns. This information allows us to examine the program’s

effects on participants’ individual and family outcomes for a six-year period after entry into the

program.

   Results indicate that the treatment had significant, long-term effects on wage employment

and earnings. The program increased the employment rates of participants in the year after the

intervention by about 8 percent relative to the control group, an effect that declined somewhat

over time, but remained in the 4-7 percent range over the subsequent five years. As a result, the

program increased participants’ earnings in the range of 11 to 14 percent over the entire six-year

follow-up period. These persistent, long-term effects suggest that the program increased

employment among individuals who would not have found jobs in the absence of the

intervention, as opposed to getting individuals who would have ultimately found jobs in the

years following the intervention to find them earlier. The program also led to a substantial

reduction in UI benefits collected in the two-year period after the intervention, when benefits

were still available under the claim associated with assignment into the program. In contrast,

there is limited evidence that the program affected self-employment rates or receipt of disability

benefits.

   Results based on filed tax returns show that, in addition to affecting individual employment

and earnings, the program affected family-level outcomes. Treated individuals were more likely

to file tax returns and had higher total family income and tax liability relative to the control

group. These results are consistent with the program’s effects on employment and earnings, but

also indicate that the treatment may have had some positive spillover effects on spousal



                                              Page 3
employment and earnings. Additionally, we find that individuals in the control group

experienced a steeper decline in home ownership rates in the three-year period following the

intervention than did treatment cases. As a result, treated individuals had significantly higher

home ownership rates than control individuals following the intervention. Treated individuals

may have been less likely to sell their homes or default their mortgages as a result of increased

employment and earnings.

      The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the institutional background of the

Nevada program and the data used in the analyses. Section III presents our methodology for

estimating program effects and the results of our analyses. Section IV compares our findings

with those of previous studies of U.S. job-search assistance programs, and discusses the possible

mechanisms behind the effects. Section V summarizes our findings and conclusions.



II.      Background and Data

A.       The Nevada REA Program

      There are two primary job-search assistance programs operating in the United States – the

Worker Profiling and Reemployment Services (WPRS) and the Reemployment and Eligibility

Assessment (REA) programs. Both programs target unemployed workers who start collecting

UI benefits, excluding those on temporary layoff, active in employment or training programs,

and attached to union hiring halls. The WPRS program, established in 1993, refers UI recipients

to public employment offices to obtain information about available job-search services and

referrals to specific services that would aid their job-search (Dickinson et al., 1999; Wandner,

2010). The program’s objective is to help participants find jobs quickly and produce savings for

the UI program. WPRS is federally-mandated and has been operational in all 50 states since



                                              Page 4
1996.

    REA was established in 2005 by the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) to conduct in-person

eligibility reviews to confirm that UI recipients who are not served by the WPRS program are

actively searching for a job, as mandated by state UI laws (Benus et al., 2008). REA’s objective

is not to provide job-search assistance to UI recipients, but rather to reduce UI fraud by

disqualifying those who are not conducting an active job-search (Poe-Yamagata et al., 2012).

While WPRS is federally mandated, REA is voluntary, with DOL providing annual grants to

encourage states to implement the program. In 2009, which includes the period of our study, all

50 states were implementing WPRS while REA was fully operational in only nine states,

including Nevada. Since then, REA has expanded dramatically, and currently 33 states operate

the program.

    The approach that Nevada used to implement the REA program differed from the approaches

of other states that operated both WPRS and REA. Instead of referring UI recipients not served

by WPRS to eligibility reviews, Nevada essentially combined WPRS with REA, creating an

REA program that required participants to participate in both the eligibility review and job-

search services. Specifically, the Nevada REA program required participants to meet with

program staff in the first few weeks of their UI spell to undergo an eligibility review and, if

deemed eligible, to receive mandatory job-counseling services. The Nevada REA program

operated in the workforce regions covering the Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise and Reno

metropolitan areas, while WPRS operated in the rest of the state.2

    The Nevada REA program operated as follows. Each week, the Nevada UI agency randomly




2
 The two metropolitan areas where REA operated, covered about 87 percent of unemployed workers in the state in
2009 (source: authors’ tabulations of the 2009 American Community Survey).

                                                   Page 5
assigned REA-eligible recipients into the treatment or control group.3 A notification letter was

sent out to treatment cases asking them to attend a meeting, typically scheduled in weeks 2-4 of

their UI claim, to undergo the review and receive job-counseling services. The letter informed

participants that failure to show up for the meeting would result in loss of UI benefits.

Individuals assigned to the control group did not receive such a letter or other program

communications, nor were they subject to any program requirements; however, they were subject

to the usual UI work-search requirements.

    Individuals in the treatment group who did not show up for the meeting without a reasonable

justification were immediately disqualified from collecting additional UI benefits.4 Participants

who showed up for the meeting and were deemed to be noncompliant with UI work-search

requirements were also disqualified. Those who passed the review, were offered job-counseling

services during the same meeting, including an individual skills assessment, development of a

job-search plan focusing on jobs that were compatible with the participant’s skills, assistance in

developing a resume and other job application materials, and direct referrals to employers with

compatible job vacancies. These services were offered as needed, and not all participants

received all services. At the end of the meeting, participants were informed that, although they

were not required to receive additional services or attend follow-up meetings, they were expected

to continue actively searching for employment, as mandated by state UI laws. Poe-Yamagata et

al. (2012) report that dividing the total funding used to administer REA by the number of treated

individuals in 2009, yields a $201 average estimated cost per treated individual.




3
  The proportion of REA-eligible UI recipients assigned to the treatment varied slightly on a weekly basis according
to the capacity of public employment offices to provide services in participants. Generally, each week, about 15
percent of eligible recipients were assigned to the treatment and 85 percent to the control group.
4
  Participants who had found employment, participated in job-search or training services, or discontinued benefit
receipt were exempted.

                                                      Page 6
B.       Prior Evidence

     A number of experimental studies have examined the effects of U.S. job-search assistance

programs, including the Nevada REA program examined here. Previous work focusing on the

United States has relied on participant data provided by state UI agencies. These data include: (1)

UI claims records, which report the number of weeks and UI benefit amounts collected under the

UI claim associated with program assignment; and (2) quarterly wage records, which report

quarterly earnings from private-sector employers in the program state. Based on available data,

previous work has generally focused on whether job-search assistance programs reduced the

duration of participants’ current UI spells and increased participants’ short-term employment and

earnings. In most cases, program effects on these outcomes were estimated for up to six quarters

after the intervention, and thus evidence on the program’s long-term effects is limited.

     Meyer (1995) reported that programs targeting UI recipients in South Carolina, New Jersey,

and Washington during the 1980s reduced average UI spells, but had substantively small effects

on short-term employment and earnings. Studies of programs that operated in the mid-1990s

showed that requiring UI recipients to receive job-search assistance services reduced UI duration

and benefit amounts collected (Decker et al., 2000; Klepinger et al., 2002; Black et al., 2003).

This work provided mixed evidence about whether these programs affected participants’

earnings.

     Prior studies have also established that the Nevada REA program was effective in improving

the short-term outcomes of UI recipients (Michaelides and Mueser, 2017; 2018). These studies

used Nevada UI data on all unemployed workers who started collecting UI benefits in the second

half of 2009, and who were subject to random assignment for participation in the program.5


5
  During that period, the Nevada unemployment rate averaged over 12 percent, peaking at nearly 14 percent in 2010,
the highest in the state in 25 years. As a result, UI recipients were eligible for up to 99 weeks of UI benefits: 12-26

                                                        Page 7
Both studies found that the program led to large reductions in UI spells and benefit amounts

collected and to substantial increases in employment and earnings. Michaelides and Mueser

(2017) compared the results of the Nevada REA program with the results of the WPRS program

in Florida and the REA programs in Florida and Idaho. Results showed that all four programs

reduced UI duration and increased earnings, but that the Nevada REA program was by far the

most effective.

     There are also numerous experimental studies of job-search assistance programs operating in

many European countries, including Belgium (Cockx et al., 2017), Denmark (Graversen and van

Ours, 2008; Maibom et al., 2017), France (Behaghel et al., 2012), Germany (Krug and Stephan,

2013), the Netherlands (Gorter and Kalb, 1996), Sweden (Hägglund, 2011), and the United

Kingdom (Dolton and O’Neill, 2002). The European literature is nicely reviewed by Card et al.

(2010), Kahn (2012), and Crepon and van der Berg (2016). The programs studied by this work

have typically involved more intensive requirements than U.S. programs, requiring participants

to engage in job-search monitoring and job-counseling activities throughout their UI spells. By

comparison, U.S. programs typically require participants to engage in such activities only once,

at the beginning of their UI spells, with no requirements thereafter. The European studies have

found that job-search assistance programs are often very effective in increasing unemployment

exits and reemployment rates. However, lack of data did not allow in most cases examination of

effects on individual earnings or tax outcomes.



C.      Data

     Our study sample consists of all individuals who started collecting UI from July through


weeks under the regular UI program, 26-53 weeks under the Emergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC)
program, and 10-20 weeks under the Extended Benefits (EB) program.

                                              Page 8
December 2009 and were subject to random assignment for participation in the program. The

total sample size is 32,751 individuals, from which 4,673 individuals were assigned to the

treatment and the remaining to the control group.6 The analysis is based on two datasets: (1)

Nevada REA program data, provided by the Nevada Department of Employment, Training, and

Rehabilitation, and (2) administrative tax data, collected by the United States Internal Revenue

Service. The Nevada REA program data provide the following information for individuals in the

study sample: treatment status, birth date, gender, five-digit zip code, and quarterly earnings

from private-sector employers in Nevada from 2008 through 2011.

    Our empirical analyses are based on identifying treatment and control group individuals from

the Nevada REA program in the administrative tax data. This identification is done using birth

date, gender, zip code, and annual wage earnings in 2009. These variables allow us to match

each individual in the Nevada REA sample to a unique individual in the administrative tax data.

The matching procedure is as follows. First, we use the administrative tax data to identify all

individuals who received UI benefits (i.e., had a 1099G tax form) from Nevada in 2009. For this

pool of individuals, we use the tax data to observe their date of birth, gender, zip codes, and

annual earnings. Then, we match individuals from the Nevada REA sample to the individuals in

the administrative tax data pool based on birth date, gender, zip code, and annual earnings.

    Using this process, we are able to match all treatment and control group individuals from the

Nevada REA sample to unique individuals in the administrative tax data. To assess the validity

of the match, we compare short-term differences in the likelihood of employment (i.e., having


6
  Note that this is the same sample used by Michaelides and Mueser (2018). As reported in that study, 956 (20
percent) of the 4,673 treatment cases did not undergo the review; of these, 34 were disqualified for failure to
undergo the review and the remaining 922 were exempted because they had already found a job or they had already
received job-search or training services. The remaining 3,717 (80 percent) treatment cases underwent the review; 34
of these were disqualified during the review because they were not conducting an active job search. Our study
sample includes all 4,673 treatment cases, regardless of whether they underwent the review, were disqualified, or
were exempted. Similarly, our study sample includes all individuals who were assigned to the control group.

                                                      Page 9
positive W-2 wage income) and earnings amounts based on both the Nevada REA program data

and the administrative tax data. These results are presented in Appendix Figure 1. Overall, we

find that short-term treatment-control differences in earnings from the Nevada REA program

data appear to be consistent with differences in the administrative tax data. We conclude that the

matching appears valid and proceed with the empirical analyses of the panel data constructed

from the administrative tax data.

    To assess whether there is treatment-control group equivalence in the matched sample, Table

1 presents summary statistics for the treatment and control groups and treatment-control

differences based on characteristics available in the tax data. As seen, treatment and control

cases were generally similar, with few substantive differences, which could be attributable to

chance. Moreover, Appendix Table 1 presents results from a regression model that estimates the

likelihood of treatment assignment based on pre-treatment covariates (reported in 2008) from the

administrative tax data. Overall, the pre-treatment covariates do not consistently predict

treatment assignment. As we discuss below, we confirm that the estimated treatment effects are

robust to controlling for pre-treatment characteristics and outcomes.

    Lastly, we create a panel dataset based on administrative tax records for years 2001 through

2015. The administrative tax records include information reported by third parties, such as W-2

earnings and 1099-MISC tax forms,7 and information from filed tax returns. Using the third-

party-reported information, we measure W-2 employment (whether an individual had W-2

earnings) and W-2 earnings amounts (as reported on Form W-2). We also measure whether



7
 IRS Forms W-2 and 1099-MISC are tax forms that employers are required to submit to individuals and the IRS.
The W-2 document records annual wage, salary and tip income paid by the employer to the employee. The 1099-
MISC document records annual payments in excess of $600 to non-employees such as independent contractors.
Similarly, IRS Forms 1099-G and 1099-SSA record unemployment insurance and disability payments paid from
government agencies to individuals, and these forms are also reported to the IRS by state agencies and the Social
Security Administration respectively.

                                                    Page 10
individuals had contractor employment (based on 1099-MISC forms), whether they collected UI

benefits (based on 1099-G forms), and whether they collected disability benefits (based on 1099-

SSA forms). For each of these income sources, we also observe amounts paid. Additionally,

home ownership is observed based on third-party reported mortgage interest statements.

Specifically, for each individual who owns a home and has mortgage payment to a lender, a 1098

Mortgage Interest statement is reported by the lender to the IRS for any mortgage interest

payment in excess of $600. Moreover, using filed tax returns, we measure additional outcomes at

the family-level, including whether the individual filed or was claimed on a tax return, spousal

earnings, self-employment income, total family income, tax liability, and tax balance due. We

note that, in contrast to outcomes based on third-party reported information documents,

outcomes based on filed tax returns are self-reported by individuals who file tax returns.



III.      Empirical Analyses

A.        Regression Specification

       Because individuals were randomly assigned to treatment and control groups, we are able to

estimate causal effects on participants’ outcomes using a standard Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)

regression specification. Using      to denote an outcome of interest for individual i in year t, we

estimate treatment effects based on the following regression specification:

                            1                                         ∗1                     .

In this specification, the estimated coefficients   capture differences between the treatment and

control groups in each year. The analyses focus on differences between the treatment and control

groups in the years prior to random assignment into the program, as well as the short-term and

long-term differences between the treatment and control groups after random assignment.

                                               Page 11
Examining whether there were any pre-existing differences between the treatment and control

groups provides a check to assess the validity of the random assignment. Treatment-control

differences after random assignment estimate the program’s average intent-to-treat treatment

effects on outcome variables. This regression specification is estimated using panel data on

multiple outcome variables, as discussed below.8

B.      Results

     Figure 1 presents the first set of results for W-2 employment outcomes, based on third-party

reported tax forms. W-2 employment indicates whether the individual had a W-2 form with

earnings from an employer, and W-2 earnings measures the total amount of W-2 earnings from

all employers.9     Each plot presents the estimated treatment effects for each year and the

corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals (corresponding to the left vertical axis). The plots

also present the means of the outcome variable in each year for the treatment and control groups

(corresponding to the right vertical axis), facilitating a comparison of the treatment effects to the

relevant baseline means of the outcome variable.

     Results in Figure 1A indicate that the program increased the likelihood of employment in

2010, the first year after program entry, by 5.3 percentage points, compared with a base

employment rate of 68.4 percent for the control group. Treatment effects on employment faded

slightly in subsequent years, ranging from 3.2 to 4.8 percentage points. The graphical evidence

indicates that this fade-out does not appear to be driven by a declining employment rate for the

treatment group. Instead, the employment rate for the control group appears to increase slightly

more over time relative to the rate for the treatment group, indicating that some individuals in the

control group who did not find jobs in the first year after the treatment may have ultimately

8
  Appendix Tables 2A-E present the means of selected outcomes for treatment and control groups, and treatment-
control differences in the mean values.
9
  Individuals with no W-2 form are included with values of zero for both employment and earnings amounts.

                                                   Page 12
found jobs in subsequent years. Nevertheless, program effects on wage employment from 2011

through 2015 were positive and statistically significant, and do not appear to be statistically

different from the 2010 short-term effect. These results indicate that the program increased

employment rates in the entire six-year follow-up period. More specifically, the results indicate

that the employment rate for individuals in the control group did not fully catch up to the

corresponding measures in the treatment group. Thus, the program appears to have increased

employment among individuals who would not have found jobs in the absence of the treatment,

as opposed to getting individuals who would have ultimately found jobs to find them earlier.

     Figure 1B illustrates that the program had positive and statistically significant treatment

effects on W-2 earnings in the six-year follow-up period. The program increased W-2 earnings

in 2010 (the year following program entry) by $2,076, compared with a base of $14,320 for the

control group. This effect appears persistent across the subsequent years, ranging from about

$2,369 to about $2,800, which represents an 11 to 13 percent improvement over the control

group mean.10 In addition to these outcomes, we also examined whether individuals in the

treatment group were more likely to move from their ZIP codes in 2008 (i.e. their ZIP codes at

the times of the treatment) following the intervention. We did not find any statistically

significant differences between the rates of moving for the treatment and control groups, so it

appears that the treatment increased W-2 employment and earnings within individuals’ initial

local labor markets.

10
  We have also examined W-2 earnings conditional on employment. Appendix Figure 2 presents these results. The
results highlight that even beyond increasing employment, the intervention may have increased earnings conditional
on being employed. Specifically, average earnings conditional on employment appear to be roughly $1,500 higher
for the treatment group relative to the control group. Note that mean earnings conditional on employment for the
control group is roughly $30,000. These results suggest that the program may have helped participants find better
(higher-paying) jobs or that it may have been particularly effective at getting high-wage individuals to find jobs.
Similar to effects on employment, the effects of the intervention on earnings conditional on employment remain
persistent for up to six years after the intervention. However, we also acknowledge that these results may provide
biased estimates of the program’s impacts on conditional earnings because there could be unobserved differences
between treatment group individuals who became employed and control group individuals who became employed.

                                                     Page 13
   Figure 2 presents program effects in other forms of annual employment and income based on

third-party reports. Contractor employment indicates whether the individual had a contractor

1099-MISC form. Receipt of UI benefits indicates whether the individual collected UI benefits,

and amount of UI benefits measures the amount of UI benefits collected during the year. Receipt

of disability benefits indicates whether the individual collected disability benefits, and broad

individual income is the total amount of individual income based on third-party reports,

measured as the sum of earnings, contractor income, UI benefits, and disability benefits.

   Figure 2A provides little evidence of substantive treatment-control differences in contractor

employment following the intervention. This result indicates that control group individuals did

not engage in self-employment activities to compensate for lost W-2 earnings at a higher rate

than did the treatment group. Figure 2B highlights that treatment cases were less likely than

control cases to have collected UI in 2010 and 2011, the period following the intervention, when

regular UI, EUC, and EB benefits under the original claim were still available. Expectedly, UI

benefit receipt declined for both groups after this period, possibly because benefit durations had

expired for most individuals and many of them did not qualify for subsequent UI claims.

Although treatment cases remained less likely than control cases to collect benefits, differences

lack statistical significance. Figure 2C shows that the program significantly reduced UI benefit

amounts collected from 2009 through 2011, the period when benefits were available under the

original claim, although only the 2010 effect was statistically significant. Overall, the program

reduced UI benefits collected a total of $818 from 2009 through 2011. The program did not

affect UI receipt outcomes in 2012 or later. These results indicate that the program’s effect on UI

receipt was short-lived and that, in fact, treatment cases were at least as likely as control cases to

return to UI in subsequent years. Figure 2D indicates that, while there were increases in the



                                               Page 14
likelihoods of receiving disability benefits for both the treatment and control groups, there were

no statistically significant differences in the likelihoods of collecting disability benefits between

the groups after the intervention.

   The broad individual income variable allows us to examine program effects in the total of all

these income measures (see Figure 2E). Results are similar with the W-2 earnings results

(Figure 1B), in that we get positive effects in the entire follow-up period. The smallest effect on

broad income – and the only one that lacks statistical significance – is observed in 2010, when

the substantial positive effect on earnings was partly offset by the large reduction in UI benefit

amounts collected. In each year after 2010, the intervention had large and statistically significant

effects on broad income, in the $2,000-2,500 range. The magnitude of the effects on broad

income in this period largely correspond to the program’s effects on W-2 earnings (see Figure

1B).

   Our analyses now turn to examining program effects on outcomes based on filed tax returns,

so that we can assess whether the program affected outcomes at the family (tax-filing unit) level.

Figure 3 presents estimated effects on indicator variables based on filed tax returns: file tax

return indicates whether the individual filed a tax return or was included on a filed tax return;

spousal W-2 employment indicates whether the individual had a spouse with positive W-2

income on a filed tax return; has self-employment income indicates whether the individual had

income from self-employment reported on a filed tax return; and home ownership indicates

whether an individual or spouse (on the filed tax return) received a 1098 Mortgage Interest

statement indicating home ownership.

   Figure 3A shows that the treatment group had a slightly higher likelihood of filing a tax

return in the years immediately following the intervention, with large and statistically significant



                                               Page 15
effects in 2013, 2014, and 2015. These results suggest that, perhaps due to the program’s effect

on employment and earnings, treated individuals were more likely to file tax returns than control

individuals. Figure 3B shows a noticeable increase over time in treatment-control differences in

the likelihood of having a spouse with W-2 earnings. Program effects are not statistically

significant, except for 2015, when the 3.7 percentage-point effect is significant at the 10 percent

level. These results provide some evidence that the program may have had some positive

spillovers on spouses of treated individuals. Figure 3C shows no statistically or economically

significant impacts on the likelihood of reporting self-employment income on filed tax returns.

Importantly, it does not appear that individuals in the control group were more likely to turn to

self-employment to offset reductions in wage earnings relative to the control group.

   Figure 3D indicates that the program may have had some positive impacts on home

ownership through increased employment and earnings. In particular, after the intervention,

home ownership rates declined more sharply for the control group than the treatment group.

Intuitively, individuals in the treatment group may have been less likely to sell their homes than

individuals in the control group because they were more likely to find employment and hence be

able to continue paying their mortgages. This evidence is consistent with recent evidence of

impacts of UI on housing markets (see Hsu et al., 2018).

   Building on the above analyses, Figure 4 presents results using amounts from filed tax

returns, including individual W-2 earnings, spousal W-2 earnings, total family income, tax

liability, and the tax balance due. Because outcomes from tax returns are only available for

individuals who filed tax returns, for each of these outcomes, we use values based on filed tax

returns for tax filers, and we use values based on third-party reported information for non-filers.

Specifically, for W-2 earnings, we use earnings amounts reported on IRS Form 1040 for filers



                                              Page 16
and total individual W-2 wages for non-filers; for total family income, we use total income

reported on IRS Form 1040 for filers and total broad income for non-filers; for tax liability, we

use total tax liability before credits on IRS Form 1040 for filers and total W-2 withholdings for

non-filers; for tax balance due, we use the balance due (or refund if negative) on IRS Form 1040

for filers and 0 for non-filers.

     Results show that individuals in the treatment group had higher W-2 earnings than

individuals in the control group over the entire follow-up period. Spousal earnings also appear to

be higher for the treatment group, although effects are significant only in years 5-6 after the

intervention and at the 10 percent level. Figure 4C indicates that treated individuals had higher

total family income than control individuals following the treatment. In particular, the treatment

effects on family income are larger than the treatment effects on individual earnings because of

the positive effects on spousal income. Quantitatively, the results indicate that the treatment-

control difference in total family income increased from roughly zero in 2009 to roughly $4,400

in 2015. Finally, Figure 4D shows that treatment cases had higher tax liability than control cases

in the entire follow-up period, particularly in years 4-6, when effects are statistically significant.



C.      Robustness Checks

     In some cases, there are differences in outcomes between the treatment and control groups in

the period prior to the intervention. For example, treatment cases were more likely than control

cases to have positive W-2 earnings from 2002 through 2005 (see Figure 1A). Similarly, there

are some treatment-control differences prior to the intervention in receipt of UI benefits, receipt

of disability benefits, home ownership, and spousal W-2 earnings. Because of these differences,

we verify that estimated effects on each outcome after the intervention (2010 and later) are



                                                Page 17
robust to controlling for individual characteristics and outcomes prior to the intervention (before

2009).

      Specifically, for each outcome, we estimated differences between the treatment and control

group in each year with no controls for pre-treatment characteristics or pre-treatment outcomes,

with controls for pre-treatment characteristics in 2008, and with controls for pre-treatment

characteristics and pre-treatment outcomes in 2001-2008. Table 2 presents results for four

selected outcomes: W-2 employment, W-2 earnings, broad individual income, and total family

income. Results show that estimated effects are all robust to a variety of controls. Similar results

are obtained for other individual and household outcomes – results are available upon request.

These checks add credibility to interpreting the post-intervention differences between the

treatment and control groups as causal effects of the program.



IV.      Discussion

      To put the current results in context, we compare them with the results from earlier studies of

the Nevada REA program and from experimental studies of other job-search assistance programs

in the United States. The estimates from earlier studies are summarized in Table 3. Starting with

comparisons to earlier studies of the Nevada REA program (Table 3A), Michaelides and Mueser

(2017 and 2018) found that, in the first four quarters after program entry, the program increased

earnings by $1,854 and $1,740, respectively. The results in the present study indicate effects on

earnings that were higher at $2,076 in 2010 (a period which roughly corresponds to the four-

quarter follow-up period of the earlier studies). Michaelides and Mueser (2018) also report

earnings effects of $752 in quarters 5 and 6 after entry, which is consistent with our finding that

the program increased earnings by $2,127 in 2011 (a period which roughly corresponds to



                                                Page 18
quarters 5-8 after entry of the earlier studies). These comparisons show that the results of the

two earlier studies are within the 95 percent confidence intervals of estimates from the present

study.11

     Estimated effects on UI receipt are similar between the current study and earlier studies of

the Nevada REA program. Previous studies showed that the Nevada REA program reduced UI

benefits collected under the claim associated with random assignment into the program by about

$1,145 and $976. Estimates from the current study indicate that effects on UI benefits were

lower ($818) based on the total differences in UI benefit amounts from 2009 through 2011.

     Tables 3B and 3C presents estimated impacts from other experimental job-search assistance

programs that operated in the 1980s and 1990s respectively. Comparing the current estimates to

estimates from programs examined by these earlier studies highlights that the Nevada REA

program appears to have been more effective. As shown in Table 3B, Meyer (1995) reported

that programs targeting UI recipients in South Carolina, New Jersey, and Washington during the

1980s reduced benefit amounts collected by $68 to $150. These programs, however, did not

have any impacts on earnings in the year after program entry (all programs) or two to three years

after entry (New Jersey program).12 In percentage terms, the estimated reductions in UI benefit

amounts collected for these earlier programs are comparable to those for the Nevada REA

program, but earnings effects for the Nevada REA program are substantially larger and more

persistent.


11
   Disparities between the present estimates and the prior estimates may be due to a variety of factors. For example,
prior estimates did not account for out of state employment or employment with public employers. Furthermore,
some individuals who receive W-2s may not be covered by UI; the current estimates are based on W-2s whereas the
prior estimates are based on UI data.
12
   These three demonstration programs were implemented by DOL. The same study reports the results of programs
in Nevada and Wisconsin, which were designed and evaluated by state UI agencies. Results show that the Nevada
and Wisconsin programs reduced UI duration by 31 and 4 percent, respectively, but provide no analyses of earnings
effects. However, the author notes that the “DOL experiments are more carefully designed, implemented and
evaluated than the state experiments. Thus, their results should be accepted with greater confidence.”

                                                      Page 19
     Table 3C summarizes results from programs that operated in the mid-1990s and required UI

recipients to receive job-search assistance services (Decker et al., 2000; Klepinger et al., 2002;

Black et al., 2003). All four programs examined by this work led to significant reductions in UI

benefit amounts collected. But this work found mixed evidence about whether these programs

affected participants’ earnings. Decker et al. (2000) found that the job-search assistance

demonstration program in Washington, DC improved earnings by about 10 percent, while the

Florida program had no earnings effects. Black et al (2003) found that the Kentucky WPRS

program had positive but short-lived effects on earnings and Klepinger et al., (2002) found that

the Maryland work-search demonstration program had no effects on earnings. Overall, the

effects of the Nevada REA program on UI benefits collected are larger than the effects of

programs that operated in the mid-1990s. Also, with the partial exception of the Washington, DC

JSA program, the effects of the Nevada REA program on earnings are generally larger and more

persistent than the effects of these other programs.

     There are a variety of factors that may explain the Nevada REA program’s large and

persistent effects on employment and earnings, and why the program was more effective than

other U.S. job-search assistance programs. First, the Nevada REA program may have involved a

more intensive treatment than programs examined by prior experimental studies. Michaelides

and Mueser (2018) report that more than 68 percent of Nevada REA participants received job-

counseling services, with 56 percent receiving a skills assessment and assistance in developing a

job-search plan, and 21 percent receiving a direct job referral during the meeting.13 The same

study reports that other U.S. programs have provided a much lower level of services to

participants, with very small proportions receiving individualized job-counseling. In fact, based


13
  Individuals in the control group could, on their own initiative, access these services. Michaelides and Mueser
(2018) report that fewer than 10 percent of control cases received job-counseling services.

                                                    Page 20
on comparisons with job-search assistance interventions in Florida and Idaho that did not include

job counseling, Michaelides and Mueser (2017) concluded that the Nevada REA’s job-

counseling services provided direct aid to participants’ job-search efforts.14

    The value of job counseling has also been established by many experimental studies of

programs implemented in Europe (e.g, Gorter and Kalb, 1996; Dolton and O’Neill, 2002;

Hägglund, 2011; Crepon and van den Berg, 2016). Intuitively, intensive job counseling may

improve the long-term outcomes of participants by helping them to develop more effective job-

search strategies and obtain sustainable jobs. Job counselling may guide participants who would

have otherwise conducted a more general (and less efficient) job search to focus their job search

efforts on jobs that are consistent with their skills. Job counseling may also provide direct job

referrals which, in some cases, may lead to the immediate reemployment of participants in jobs

that are compatible with their skills. Job counseling may also improve participants’ basic job-

search skills (e.g., use automated job banks, develop professional resumes, and improve

interviewing skills), thereby reducing barriers or fixed costs to job-search. Lastly, job counseling

may reduce the psychic costs of job search and motivate participants to conduct a more active

search, particularly those who in the program’s absence may have lacked motivation or may

have been discouraged by lack of job options.

    Another potential explanation why the Nevada REA program was more effective is that it

operated in a different labor market context than the programs examined by other studies.

Nevada REA was implemented during the Great Recession, a period when unemployment



14
   Michaelides and Mueser (2017) compared the results of the Nevada REA with the results of REA programs in
Florida and Idaho. The REA programs in Florida and Idaho included UI eligibility reviews similar to the Nevada
REA, but in contrast to the Nevada REA treatment, the Florida and Idaho REA programs did not include job
counseling services. The comparison indicates that the Nevada program had larger short-term effects on UI spells,
employment, and earnings than the Florida and Idaho programs, suggesting that the additional job counseling
services offered by the Nevada program were a significant factor behind the larger estimated treatment effects.

                                                    Page 21
duration and the potential duration of UI benefits was much higher for Nevada REA participants

than it was for participants in previous programs.15 Thus, individuals in the control group in the

Nevada REA program may have been more likely to remain unemployed longer than control

group individuals in other programs. This implies that, compared with other programs, effects

produced by the early exit of some participants to avoid requirements in the Nevada REA

program may have been particularly large compared to similar effects from other programs.

However, Michaelides and Mueser (2017; 2018) indicate that much of the effect of the Nevada

REA program on UI exits appears to have emerged after participants received job counseling

services, rather than the threat or notification of program requirements.

     Our findings also shed light on how the effects of job-counseling programs may affect other

individual and family outcomes.            There is no evidence that the program affected contractor

employment and self-employment, indicating that the program did not increase self-employment

at the expense of W-2 employment, nor did lack of salary job options pushed control cases to

resort to self-employment. We also find no evidence that the program affected receipt of

disability benefits, indicating that the reductions in UI receipt were not offset by increases in

receipt of disability benefits.         Compared with control group individuals, treatment group

individuals had higher total family income, were more likely to file a tax return, and had higher

total tax liability. The results also indicate positive – but statistically insignificant – effects on

spousal earnings, suggesting that the lessons learned from program participation may have been

transferred to other family members.             A key finding of this study is that treatment group

individuals experienced a smaller decline in home ownership in the first three years after entry

into the program than did individuals in the control group.               As a result, home ownership was

15
   Whereas UI recipients participating in previous job-search assistance programs were typically eligible for up to
26 weeks of benefits, treatment and control cases in the Nevada REA studies were, on average, eligible for about 87
weeks of benefits (23 under regular UI, 46 under EUC, and 18 under EB).

                                                     Page 22
significantly higher for treatment cases throughout the six-year period following the intervention.

This finding indicates that the program’s treatment effects on salary employment and earnings

may have helped participants to avoid selling their homes or defaulting their mortgage debt.

   Finally, we note that recent work on the effects of labor market policies have focused on

displacement effects.    These effects are based on the possibility that programs may help

treatment group individuals find jobs and improve their overall outcomes by displacing

individuals who were not served by the program but were also looking for jobs during the same

period. The empirical analyses presented here do not explicitly account for such displacement

effects. Because the experimental sample for the Nevada REA program was small relative to the

population of job seekers in Nevada at the time of the program, the estimated program effects

may not be affected by such displacement effects.          However, if the program were to be

implemented on a larger scale, it is possible that, due to displacement effects, the program’s

actual effects could differ from the estimated effects presented here.

   There is mixed empirical evidence on this issue. Some studies provide direct evidence that

job-search assistance programs might have substantial displacement effects, particularly among

the long-term unemployed youth (Crepon et al., 2013; Feracci et al., 2010; Gautier et al., 2018).

Other studies suggest that the modest effects of regulations requiring increased job-search efforts

among UI recipients may also be due to displacement effects (Toohey, 2015; Lise et al., 2004).

In contrast, Graversen and van Ours (2008) observe that when a relatively small portion of the

target population is served by the intervention, it is unlikely that estimated effects are biased due

to displacement effects altering the outcomes of those not served by the program. Other studies

find that job-search assistance and employment subsidies have substantial positive impacts even

when they are provided to a large share of unemployed workers, suggesting the displacement



                                               Page 23
effects are minor (Blundell et al., 2004; De Giorgi, 2005). Further, Martins and Possoa e Costa

(2014) conclude that displacement effects are not important and that targeted groups which

benefit from job-search assistance might not do so at the expense of other groups.



V.      Conclusion

     Understanding whether job-search assistance creates permanent increases in employment or

if the effects are temporary is important for policymakers and academic researchers. This study

uses administrative tax data to examine the long-term effects of job-search assistance on

employment, earnings, and tax outcomes. The analyses focus on the Nevada REA program

which was administered in Nevada in 2009. Examining long-term effects of job-search

assistance in this context is compelling for a number of reasons. The Nevada REA program used

random assignment to determine whether program-eligible UI recipients would be assigned to

the treatment or the control group, provided a wider range of services to participants than most

U.S. programs studied to date, and prior evidence has indicated significant short-term effects on

participants’ individual employment, earnings, and UI receipt.

     Our findings indicate that the Nevada REA program led to substantive increases in individual

employment and earnings, which were sustained for at least six years after program entry. This

suggests that the intensive job-counseling services provided by the program helped individuals

who would not have found jobs in the absence of the program to become employed and increase

their earnings. Results also show that the program led to substantial reductions in UI benefit

amounts collected, with UI savings exceeding program costs by more than four times. The

program did not affect receipt disability benefits, suggesting that reductions in UI receipt were

not offset by increases in receipt of other types of government assistance. Another key finding is

that the program had impacts on participants’ household-level outcomes including total income,

                                             Page 24
tax filing, tax liability, and home ownership.     Overall, our findings show that job-search

assistance programs may produce substantial long-term effects for participants and their families

that extend beyond any short-term effects on employment and earnings for the individuals

directly receiving services.




                                             Page 25
References

Benus, J., Poe-Yamagata, E., Wang, Y., & Blass, E. (2008). Reemployment and Eligibility

Assessment Study, ETA Occasional Paper 2008-02, U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, DC.

Black, D. A., Smith, J. A., Berger, M. C., & Noel, B. J. (2003). Is the Threat of Reemployment

Services more Effective than the Services Themselves? Evidence from Random Assignment in

the UI System. The American Economic Review, 93(4), 1313-1327.

Blundell, R., Meghir, C., Cost Dias, M., & Van Reenen, J. (2004). Evaluating the Employment

Impact of a Mandatory Job Search Program. Journal of the European Economic Association, 2,

569–606.

Card, D., Kluve, J., & Weber, A. (2015). What Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent Active Labor

Market Program Evaluations. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.

w21431.

Cockx, B., Dejemeppe, M., Launov, A., & van der Linden, B. (2017). Imperfect Monitoring of

Job Search: Structural Estimation and Policy Design. Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Crepon, B., Duflo, E., Gurgand, M., Rathelot, R., & Zamora, P. (2013). Do Labor Market

Policies have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered Randomized Experiment.

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 531-580

Crepon, B., & van den Berg, G.J. (2016). Active Labor Market Policies. IZA Discussion Paper

No. 10321, October 2016.

Decker, P.T., Olsen, R.B., Freeman, L., & Klepinger, D.H. (2000). Assisting Unemployment

Insurance Claimants: The Long-Term Impacts of the Job Search Assistance Demonstration,

Mathematica Policy Research, No. 8170-800.

De Giorgi, G. (2005). Long-term Effects of a Mandatory Multistage Program: The New Deal for



                                           Page 26
Young People in the UK. Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper No. 5.

Dickinson, K.P., Decker, P.T., Kreutzer, S.D., & West, R.W. (1999). Evaluation of Worker

Profiling and Reemployment Services, Research and Evaluation Report 99-D, U.S. Department

of Labor, Washington, DC.

Dolton, P., & O’Neill, D. (2002). The Long-Run Effects of Unemployment Monitoring and

Work-Search Programs: Experimental Evidence from the United Kingdom, Journal of Labor

Economics, 20(2), 381-403.

Feracci, M., Jolivet, G., & van der Berg, G. (2010). Treatment Evaluation in the Case of

Interactions within Markets. IZA Discussion Paper Series, No. 4700.

Gautier, P., Muller, P., van der Klaauw, B., Rosholm, M., & Svarer, M. (2012). Estimating

equilibrium effects of job search assistance. Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Gorter, C., & Kalb, R. J. K. (1996). Estimating the Effect of Counseling and Monitoring the

Unemployed Using a Job Search Model, Journal of Human Resources, 31(3), 590-610.

Graversen, B.K, & van Ours, J.C. (2008). How to Help the Unemployed Find Jobs Quickly:

Experimental Evidence from a Mandatory Activation Program, Journal of Public Economics,

92(10-11), 2020-2035.

Hägglund, P. (2011). Are There Pre-Programme Effects of Active Placement Efforts? Evidence

from a Social Experiment, Economics Letters, 112(1), 91-93.

Hsu, Joanne W., David A. Matsa, & Brian T. Melzer (2018). Unemployment Insurance as a

Housing Market Stabilizer. American Economic Review, 108(1), 49-81.

Kahn, L. (2012). Labor Market Policy: A Comparative View on the Costs and Benefits of Labor

Market Flexibility. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 31(1), 94-110.

Krug, G., & Stephan, G. (2013). Is the Contracting-Out of Intensive Placement Services More



                                            Page 27
Effective than Provision by the PES? Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment, IZA

Discussion Paper No. 7403.

Klepinger, D. H., Johnson, T. R., & Joesch, J. M. (2002). Effects of Unemployment Insurance

Work-Search Requirements: The Maryland Experiment. Industrial Relations and Labor

Review, 56(1), 3-22.

LaLonde, R. J. (2003). Employment and Training Programs. In Means-tested Transfer Programs

in the United States (pp. 517-586). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Lise, J., Seitz, S., & Smith, J. (2004). Equilibrium Policy Experiments and the Evaluation of

Social Programs. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10283.

Maibom J., Rosholm, M., & Svarer, M. (2017). Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Early

Meetings and Activation, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 119(3), 541-570.

Martins, P. S., & Pessoa e Costa, S. (2014). Reemployment and Substitution Effects from

Increased Activation: Evidence from Times of Crisis. IZA Discussion Paper No. 8600.

Meyer, B. (1995). Lessons from the U.S. Unemployment Insurance Experiments, Journal of

Economic Literature, 33(1), 91-131.

Michaelides, M., & Mueser, P. (2017). The Labor Market Effects of U.S. Reemployment

Programs during the Great Recession. University of Cyprus, Department of Economics, Working

Paper 08-2015.

Michaelides, M., & Mueser, P. (2018). Are Reemployment Services Effective? Experimental

Evidence from the Great Recession. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, forthcoming.

Poe-Yamagata, E., Benus, J., Bill, N., Michaelides, M., a&nd Shen, T. (2012). Impact of the

Reemployment and Eligibility Assessment (REA) Initiative. ETA Occasional Paper 2012-08,

U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, DC.



                                             Page 28
Toohey, D. (2015). Job Rationing in Recessions: Evidence from Work-Search Requirements.

Newark, DE: University of Delaware.

Wandner, S.A. (2010). Solving the Reemployment Puzzle: From Research to Policy, Kalamazoo,

Michigan: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan.

Wandner S.A., & Eberts, R.W. (2014). Public Workforce Programs during the Great Recession.

Monthly Labor Review, July 2014.




                                         Page 29
         Table 1: Summary Statistics by Treatment Status

                              Treatment    Control   p-value

Age < 25                         0.179      0.177     0.833
                                (0.383)    (0.382)
Age 26-34                        0.222      0.222     0.956
                                (0.416)    (0.415)
Age 35-44                        0.223      0.229     0.324
                                (0.416)    (0.420)
Age 45-54                        0.241      0.207     0.000
                                (0.428)    (0.405)
Age 55-64                        0.108      0.120     0.015
                                (0.310)    (0.325)
Age > 64                         0.027      0.044     0.000
                                (0.163)    (0.206)
Female                           0.422      0.433     0.172
                                (0.494)    (0.496)
Filed return                     0.940      0.927     0.001
                                (0.238)    (0.260)
Single                           0.386      0.386     0.968
                                (0.487)    (0.487)
Joint                            0.371      0.351     0.007
                                (0.483)    (0.477)
Head of Household                0.165      0.174     0.147
                                (0.372)    (0.379)
Filing, other                    0.017      0.016     0.666
                                (0.129)    (0.126)
1(claimed EITC)                  0.191      0.203     0.058
                                (0.393)    (0.402)
EITC                             $427       $458      0.081
                                (1,111)    (1,156)
1(Self Employed)                 0.098      0.097     0.841
                                (0.297)    (0.295)
1(Dependents age < 25)           0.396      0.388     0.301
                                (0.489)    (0.487)
Table 1 (continued): Summary Statistics by Treatment Status

                                         Treatment          Control         p-value

1(has W-2 wages)                            0.974            0.971           0.269
                                           (0.159)          (0.168)
W-2 wage amount                           $34,037          $33,323           0.152
                                          (31,804)         (29,711)
1(has 1099-MISC)                            0.068            0.070           0.508
                                           (0.251)          (0.256)
1099-MISC amount                            $934             $853            0.516
                                           (7,958)          (7,628)
1(has 1099-G UI)                            0.289            0.269           0.005
                                           (0.453)          (0.444)
1099-G UI amount                           $1,229           $1,184           0.311
                                           (2,834)          (2,788)
1(has 1099-SSA disability)                  0.005            0.005           0.860
                                           (0.071)          (0.070)
1099-SSA disability amount                   $52              $50            0.883
                                            (916)            (851)
1(has 1099-SSA retirement)                  0.030            0.048           0.000
                                           (0.170)          (0.213)
1099-SSA retirement amount                  $415             $672            0.000
                                           (2,632)          (3,313)
Broad income                              $36,668          $36,081           0.250
                                          (32,513)         (30,367)
Observations                                4,675           27,153


 Notes: Sample means are reported with standard deviations in parentheses below the
 corresponding means. The p-value for a test of equality in the means across treatment
 and control groups is reported in the right column. Summary statistics are based on
 tax year 2008. Age is age as of January 1, 2008. Broad income is defined as the sum
 of W-2 wages, 1099-MISC amount, 1099-G UI amount, and 1099-SSA disability and
 retirement amount. Dollars are CPI adjusted to 2015 dollars.
         Figure 1: Effects on Individual W-2 Employment and Earnings
                        based on Third-Party Tax Forms
                                                                                     A. W-2 Employment




                                                               .08




                                                                                                                                       1
                            Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                                               .06




                                                                                                                                       .9
                                                               .04




                                                                                                                                               Mean
                                                                                                                                       .8
                                                               .02




                                                                                                                                       .7
                                                               0




                                                                       2001   2003     2005      2007    2009     2011   2013   2015
                                                                                     Treatment          Control    Difference



                                                                                        B. W-2 Earnings




                                                                                                                                       35000
                                                               4000
                                                               3000




                                                                                                                                       30000
                            Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                                               2000




                                                                                                                                       25000
                                                                                                                                               Mean
                                                               1000




                                                                                                                                       20000
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                       15000
                                                               -1000




                                                                       2001   2003     2005      2007    2009     2011   2013   2015
                                                                                     Treatment          Control    Difference




Notes: Black dots represent treatment-control differences in outcomes, with 95 percent confidence intervals shown
in vertical bands. Standard errors are clustered by individual. Red and blue dotted lines present outcome means
for the treatment and control group, respectively.
                                                                   Figure 2: Effects on Non-Wage Sources of Income
                                                                           based on Third-Party Tax Forms
                                   .02              A. Contractor Employment                                                                                                                                                        B. Receipt of UI Benefits




                                                                                                                                                         .09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                   .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                                                                                                                Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .02
                                                                                                                                                         .08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .6
                                                                                                                                                                 Mean
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                         .07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .4
                                   -.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                                         .06
                                   -.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                           2001    2003     2005      2007    2009                                    2011               2013     2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2001      2003      2005      2007            2009     2011   2013   2015
                                                          Treatment          Control                                         Difference
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Treatment                   Control    Difference


                                                  C. UI Benefit Amounts Collected                                                                                                                                           D. Receipt of Disability Benefits
                                                                                                                                                         10000
                                   500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .04
                                                                                                                                                         8000
Difference (Treatment - Control)




                                                                                                                                                                                Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .03
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                         6000
                                                                                                                                                                 Mean




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                         4000
                                   -500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .01
                                                                                                                                                         2000
                                   -1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.01
                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                           2001    2003     2005      2007    2009                                    2011               2013     2015                                                                     2001      2003      2005      2007            2009     2011   2013   2015
                                                          Treatment          Control                                         Difference                                                                                                     Treatment                   Control    Difference



                                                                                                                                            E. Broad Individual Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40000
                                                                                                                          4000
                                                                                                                          3000
                                                                                       Difference (Treatment - Control)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         35000
                                                                                                                          2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mean
                                                                                                                          1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30000
                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25000
                                                                                                                          -1000




                                                                                                                                  2001     2003     2005                2007     2009                                         2011      2013      2015
                                                                                                                                                  Treatment                    Control                                            Difference


     Notes: Black dots represent treatment-control differences in outcomes, with 95 percent confidence intervals shown
     in vertical bands. Standard errors are clustered by individual. Red and blue dotted lines present outcome means
     for the treatment and control group, respectively.
                                                                    Figure 3. Effects on Household-Level Outcomes
                                                                              based on Filed Tax Returns
                                                          A. File Tax Return                                                                                              B. Spousal W-2 Employment
                                   .06




                                                                                                          .95




                                                                                                                                                            .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .3
Difference (Treatment - Control)




                                                                                                                       Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                   .04




                                                                                                          .9




                                                                                                                                                            .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .28
                                                                                                                Mean




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mean
                                   .02




                                                                                                          .85




                                                                                                                                                            .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .26
                                                                                                          .8
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .24
                                                                                                                                                            0
                                   -.02




                                                                                                          .75
                                          2001   2003     2005      2007    2009     2011   2013   2015                                                            2001   2003     2005      2007    2009     2011   2013   2015
                                                        Treatment          Control    Difference                                                                                 Treatment          Control    Difference



                                                    C. Has Self Employment                                                                                    D. Home Ownership (own or spouse)

                                                                                                                                                            .06
                                                                                                          .14
                                   .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .34
                                                                                                                         Difference (Treatment - Control)
Difference (Treatment - Control)




                                                                                                          .13




                                                                                                                                                            .04
                                   .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .32
                                                                                                          .12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mean
                                                                                                                Mean




                                                                                                                                                            .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .3
                                   0




                                                                                                          .11
                                   -.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .28
                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .26
                                                                                                                                                            -.02
                                   -.02




                                          2001   2003     2005      2007    2009     2011   2013   2015                                                            2001   2003     2005      2007    2009     2011   2013   2015

                                                        Treatment          Control    Difference                                                                                 Treatment          Control    Difference



     Notes: Black dots represent treatment-control differences in outcomes, with 95 percent confidence intervals shown
     in vertical bands. Standard errors are clustered by individual. Red and blue dotted lines present outcome means
     for the treatment and control group, respectively.
                                                                                      Figure 4. Effects on Income based on Filed Tax Returns

                                                                                      A. W-2 Earnings                                                                                                                                                     B. Spousal W-2 Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12000
                                                            6000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                  45000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1500
                         Difference (Treatment - Control)




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                                            4000




                                                                                                                                                                                  40000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        11000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1000
                                                                                                                                                                                          Mean




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mean
                                                            2000




                                                                                                                                                                                  35000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10000
                                                                                                                                                                                  30000
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                  25000
                                                            -2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -500
                                                                    2001    2003      2005      2007      2009                                          2011     2013     2015                                                               2001      2003      2005     2007            2009     2011   2013   2015
                                                                                    Treatment           Control                                          Difference                                                                                           Treatment                  Control    Difference



                                                                                                                                                                     C. Total Family Income
                                                                                                                                              6000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50000
                                                                                                           Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                                                                                                                              4000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          45000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mean
                                                                                                                                              2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40000
                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          35000
                                                                                                                                              -2000




                                                                                                                                                      2001     2003     2005          2007        2009                                         2011       2013     2015
                                                                                                                                                                      Treatment                  Control                                            Difference



                                                                                       D. Tax Liability                                                                                                                                                          E. Tax Balance Due
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                                                               4500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1600
                                    800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1800
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Difference (Treatment - Control)
                                    600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
Difference (Treatment - Control)




                                                                                                                                                                               4000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2000
                                    400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                               3500
                                                                                                                                                                                      Mean




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2200
                                    200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -100
                                                                                                                                                                               3000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2400
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2600
                                                                                                                                                                               2500
                                    -200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2001      2003      2005     2007            2009     2011   2013   2015
                                                              2001         2003      2005      2007     2009                                          2011     2013     2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Treatment                  Control    Difference
                                                                                   Treatment           Control                                          Difference


Notes: W-2 earnings are earnings reported on the 1040 if filer, W2 earnings if not. Total family income is total
income reported on 1040 if filer, broad income (defined above) if not. Tax liability as calculated on the 1040 if
filer, W2 withholdings if not. Tax balance due as calculated on the 1040 if filer (negative values are refunds), 0 if
did not file. Black dots represent treatment-control differences in outcomes, with 95 percent confidence intervals
shown in vertical bands. Standard errors are clustered by individual. Red and blue dotted lines present outcome
means for the treatment and control group, respectively.
  Table 2: Treatment Effects with and without Controls, Selected Outcomes
                          W-2 Employment                  W-2 Earnings

Treat * I(2001)       0.012     0.012                -$604     -$604
                     (0.007)   (0.007)                (514)     (514)
Treat * I(2002)       0.020     0.020                -$605     -$605
                     (0.007)   (0.007)                (537)     (537)
Treat * I(2003)       0.014     0.014                -$487     -$487
                     (0.007)   (0.007)                (475)     (475)
Treat * I(2004)       0.010     0.010                  -$14      -$14
                     (0.006)   (0.006)                (461)     (461)
Treat * I(2005)       0.012     0.012                -$217     -$217
                     (0.005)   (0.005)                (460)     (460)
Treat * I(2006)       0.004      0.004               -$277     -$277
                     (0.005)   (0.005)                (428)     (428)
Treat * I(2007)       0.001      0.001               -$379     -$379
                     (0.004)   (0.004)                (376)     (376)
Treatment             0.003     -0.005      -0.007    $714      $147     -$105
                     (0.003)   (0.003)     (0.002)    (499)     (493)     (370)
Treat * I(2009)       0.006      0.006       0.006     $81       $81       $81
                     (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.004)    (355)     (355)     (355)
Treat * I(2010)       0.051      0.051       0.051   $1,361    $1,361    $1,361
                     (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (456)     (456)     (456)
Treat * I(2011)       0.045      0.045       0.045   $1,413    $1,413    $1,413
                     (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (456)     (456)     (456)
Treat * I(2012)       0.041      0.041       0.041   $1,932    $1,932    $1,932
                     (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (529)     (529)     (529)
Treat * I(2013)       0.033     0.033       0.033    $1,666    $1,666    $1,666
                     (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (460)     (460)     (460)
Treat * I(2014)       0.029     0.029       0.029    $1,656    $1,656    $1,656
                     (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (464)     (464)     (464)
Treat * I(2015)       0.034     0.034       0.034    $2,087    $2,087    $2,087
                     (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (483)     (483)     (483)

R²                    0.054     0.078     0.144       0.031     0.108     0.276
Observations         477,420   477,420   254,624     477,420   477,420   254,624

Static Controls                  X                               X
Pre-Treat Controls                           X                             X
Table 2 (continued) : Treatment Effects with and without Controls, Selected Outcomes
                                  Broad Individual Income                         Total Family Income

   Treat * I(2001)             -$504         -$504                               -$128         -$128
                                (521)         (521)                              (942)         (943)
   Treat * I(2002)             -$437         -$437                               -$482         -$482
                                (547)         (548)                              (930)         (931)
   Treat * I(2003)             -$419         -$419                               -$201         -$201
                                (482)         (482)                              (897)         (897)
   Treat * I(2004)             -$186         -$186                               $591           $591
                                (470)         (471)                              (943)         (943)
   Treat * I(2005)             -$400         -$400                                $19            $19
                                (469)         (469)                              (849)         (849)
   Treat * I(2006)             -$264         -$264                                $38            $38
                                (444)         (444)                              (791)         (791)
   Treat * I(2007)             -$363         -$363                               -$114         -$114
                                (388)         (388)                              (694)         (694)
   Treatment                    $586          $246            $22                $952          -$123          -$361
                                (510)         (501)          (371)               (870)         (810)          (736)
   Treat * I(2009)             -$125         -$125          -$125                -$216         -$216          -$216
                                (332)         (332)          (332)               (475)         (475)          (475)
   Treat * I(2010)              $347          $347           $347               $1,076        $1,076         $1,076
                                (404)         (404)          (404)               (959)         (959)          (959)
   Treat * I(2011)             $1,309        $1,309         $1,309              $1,526        $1,526         $1,526
                                (424)         (424)          (424)               (844)         (844)          (844)
   Treat * I(2012)             $1,618        $1,618         $1,618              $1,240        $1,240         $1,240
                                (519)         (520)          (520)              (1,079)       (1,080)        (1,080)
   Treat * I(2013)             $1,725        $1,725         $1,725              $2,267        $2,267         $2,267
                                (449)         (449)          (449)              (1,162)       (1,162)        (1,162)
   Treat * I(2014)             $1,588        $1,588         $1,588              $3,139        $3,139         $3,139
                                (468)         (468)          (468)               (870)         (870)          (870)
   Treat * I(2015)             $1,993        $1,993         $1,993              $3,414        $3,414         $3,414
                                (492)         (492)          (492)               (883)         (883)          (883)

   R²                          0.015         0.107          0.283               0.008          0.125         0.232
   Observations               477,420       477,420        254,624             477,420        477,420       254,624

   Static Controls                              X                                                 X
   Pre-Treatment Controls                                      X                                                X

    Notes: The table reports estimated regression coefficients with standard errors cluster on individual in
    parentheses below the corresponding estimates. Specifications with static controls defined in 2008 include:
    indicators for age bin (<26, 26-34, 35-44, 45-54,55-64, >64), gender, age bin by gender, 2-digit NAIC, 3-digit zip
    code, filing status, SSA-1099 receipt for disability or retirement, and 1099-MISC receipt. Specifications with pre-
    treatment controls defined in 2001-2008 include indicators for 10-year age bins and gender, and, for each year
    between 2001 and 2008, indicator variables for: SSA-1099 receipt, W-2 employment, spousal W-2 employment,
    1099-MISC receipt, 1099-G receipt, filing status (single, joint, head of household, or missing separately), EITC
    receipt and for $10k increments of W-2 earnings.
                                          Table 3A: Experimental Evidence on the Effectiveness of U.S. Reemployment Programs
                                              Nevada REA                      Florida WPRS                      Florida REA                       Idaho REA                       Nevada REA
                                        Michaelides and Mueser           Michaelides and Mueser           Michaelides and Mueser           Michaelides and Mueser           Michaelides and Mueser
Study
                                                (2017a)                         (2017b)                          (2017b)                          (2017b)                          (2017b)
Study Period                                July – Dec. 2009                 Aug. – Nov. 2009                 Aug. – Nov. 2009                 Aug. – Nov. 2009                 Aug. – Nov. 2009

Participants                                All UI recipients                All UI recipients                All UI recipients                All UI recipients                All UI recipients

Urate (state, national)                      12.1%, 9.7%

                                      Interview, eligibility review,                                                                                                      Interview, eligibility review,
Services                                                             Orientation, referral to services        Eligibility review           Online eligibility review
                                             job-counseling                                                                                                                      job-counseling

Effects on UI

 UI Duration (weeks)                         4.40 [-12%]***                    -.70 [-2%]**                    -1.89 [-5%]***                   -1.38 [-4%]***                   -3.74 [-10%]***

  UI Benefits Collected ($)                -1,145 [-10%]***                   -159 [-2%]***                    -453 [-5%]***                     -290 [-3%]**                     -976 [-9%]***

  Exhausted Benefits (rate)                 -.104 [-15%]***                   -.012 [-2%]***                   -.036 [-5%]***                   -.037 [-5%]***                   -.092 [-13%]***

Effects on Earnings

 Quarters 1-4†                             +1,854 [+21%]***                      85 [+1%]                        370 [+4%]                       455 [+6%]**                    1,740 [+21%]***

 Quarters 5-8††                             +752 [+13%]***                           --                               --                               --                               --

 Quarters 9-12†††                                   --                               --                               --                               --                               --

Note: Reported is the estimated treatment effect; in brackets, is the estimated effect as a percentage of the control group mean, where available; ***, **, *= statistically significant at the 1, 5, 10
percent level.

Control group means for UI duration, in program order: 36.5, 40.2, 40.2, 32.0, and 36.7 weeks. Control group means for UI benefits, in program order: $11,119, $9,190, $9,190, $8,336, and
$11,188.
† = Control group means, in program order: $8,655, $9,045, $9,045, $7,776, and $8,284.
††= Available only for quarters 5 and 6 for the Nevada program. Control group mean: $5,798 (Nevada, quarters 5 and 6 only).
†††= Not available
                                          Table 3B: Experimental Evidence on the Effectiveness of U.S. Reemployment Programs
                                                                                                             Charleston Claimant
                                      Nevada Claimant Placement        Wisconsin Eligibility Review                                      New Jersey UI Reemployment Washington Alternative Work
                                                                                                          Placement and Work Test
                                              Program                         Pilot Project                                                     Demonstration           Search Experiment
                                                                                                               Demonstration
Study                                         Meyer (1995)                     Meyer (1995)                     Meyer (1995)                     Meyer (1995)                     Meyer (1995)

Study Period                             Feb. 1977 – Mar. 1978               Mar. – Aug. 1983                 Feb. – Dec. 1983              July 1986 – June 1987            July 1986 – Aug. 1987

Participants                                All UI recipients                All UI recipients                All UI recipients                All UI recipients                All UI recipients

Urate (state, national)                       6.2%, 6.9%                      10.6%, 9.9%                       9.6%, 9.5%                       4.5%, 9.5%                       7.7%, 6.6%

                                      Interview, eligibility review,   Interview, eligibility review,   Interview, eligibility review,   Interview, eligibility review,   Interview, eligibility review,
Services
                                        job counseling (weekly)                 workshop                  job counseling, workshop               job counseling             job counseling, workshop

Effects on UI

 UI Duration (weeks)                        -3.90 [-31%]***                     -.62 [-4%]                      -.76 [-5%]**                     -.47 [-3%]**                      -.47 [-3%]*

  UI Benefits Collected ($)                 -318 [-31%] ***                      -82 [-4%]                       -73 [-5%]**                     -150 [-3%]**                      -68 [-3%]*

  Exhausted Benefits (rate)                         --                               --                               --                               --                               --

Effects on Earnings

 Quarters 1-4 †                                     --                               --                          152 [+3%]                        235 [+3%]                         -23 [-0%]

 Quarters 5-8 ††                                    --                               --                               --                          279 [+2%]                             --

 Quarters 9-12 †††                                  --                               --                               --                           40 [+1%]                             --

Note: Reported is the estimated treatment effect; in brackets, is the estimated effect as a percentage of the control group mean, where available; ***, **, *= statistically significant at the 1, 5, 10
percent level.

Control group means for UI duration, in program order: 12.4, 16.4, 15.5, 17.9, and 14.5 weeks. Control group means for UI benefits, in program order: $1,026, $2,158, $1,510, $4,559, and
$2,030.

† = Not available for the Nevada and Wisconsin programs. Available only for quarters 1 and 2 for the Charleston program. Control group means – $5,014 (Charleston, quarters 1 and 2 only),
$8,836 (New Jersey), and $9,919 (Washington).

†† = Available only for New Jersey program. Control group mean = $11,252.
††† = Available only for New Jersey program (quarters 9 and 10 only). Control group mean = $11,252 (quarters 9 and 10 only).
                          Table 3C: Experimental Evidence on the Effectiveness of U.S. Reemployment Programs
                                     Washington, DC JSA                                                                         Maryland Work Search
                                                                 Florida JSA Demonstration           Kentucky WPRS
                                       Demonstration                                                                               Demonstration
Study                                 Decker et al. (2000)           Decker et al. (2000)           Black et al. (2003)         Klepinger et al. (2002)

Study Period                         Mar. 1995 – June 1996         Mar. 1995 – June 1996          Oct. 1994 – June 1996            Jan. – Dec. 1994
                                   UI recipients facing long-     UI recipients facing long-    UI recipients facing long-
Participants                                                                                                                       All UI recipients
                                     term unemployment              term unemployment             term unemployment
Urate (state, national)                   8.4%, 5.6%                    5.5%, 5.6%                     5.5%, 5.5%                    5.2%, 6.1%

                                     Orientation, eligibility    Orientation, eligibility         Orientation, referral to
Services                                                                                                                         Job-search workshop
                                  review, job-search workshop review, job-search workshop                services

Effects on UI

 UI Duration (weeks)                     -1.13 [-6%]***                 -.41 [-3%]***                    -2.23***                    -.59 [-5%]**

 UI Benefits Collected ($)               -182 [-4%]***                   -17 [-1%]*                       -143*                       -75 [-4%]**

 Exhausted Benefits (rate)               -.048 [-8%]***                 -.018* [-4%]                      -0.024                      -.011 [-4%]

Effects on Earnings

 Quarters 1-4†                           635 [+10%]**                      -6 [-0%]                  1,055 [+14%]**                   -163 [-2%]

 Quarters 5-8††                          961 [+12%]**                    -313 [-3%]                     176 [+3%]                          --

 Quarters 9-12†††                        409 [+10%]**                    -275 [-2%]                          --                            --

Note: Reported is the estimated treatment effect; in brackets, is the estimated effect as a percentage of the control group mean, where available; ***, **,
*= statistically significant at the 1, 5, 10 percent level.

Control group means for UI duration, in program order: 20.1, 15.8, not available, and 11.9 weeks. Control group means for UI benefits, in program
order: $4,236, $2,728, not available, and $2,085.
† = Control group means, in program order: $6,318, $9,127, $7,500, and $8,407.
††= Not available for the Maryland program. Available only for quarters 5 and 6 for the Kentucky program. Control group means: $8,148
(Washington, DC); $11,941 (Florida); and $5,100 (Kentucky, quarters 5 and 6 only).
†††= Not available for the Kentucky and Maryland programs. Available only for quarters 10 and 11 for the Washington, DC program. Control group
means – $4,255 (Washington, DC, quarters 10 and 11 only); and $11,851 (Florida).
         Appendix Figure 1: Treatment-Control Differences in Employment and Earnings,
              REA Program Data vs. Sample Matched to Administrative Tax Data
                        A. Employment                                                                                                                                      B. Earnings
   .1




                                                                                                                                     3000
                                                                                                                                     2000
   .05




                                                                                                                                     1000
                                                                                                                                     0
   0




                                                                                                                                     -1000
         2008             2009                2010                                                      2011                                  2008                   2009                2010           2011

                    Experimental Data   Matched W-2 Values                                                                                                  Experimental Data      Matched W-2 Values

           Notes: Black dots represent treatment-control differences based on the Nevada REA program data, and white
           squares represent treatment-control differences based on the administrative tax data. For the program data, annual
           values are based on aggregating quarterly values from the program data to the annual level. The 95 percent
           confidence intervals are shown in vertical bands. Standard errors are clustered by individual.



Appendix Figure 2: Treatment-Control Differences in Earnings, Conditional on Employment
                                                                                  3000




                                                                                                                                                                   35000
                                                                                  2000
                                               Difference (Treatment - Control)




                                                                                                                                                                   30000
                                                                                  1000




                                                                                                                                                                           Mean
                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                   25000
                                                                                  -1000




                                                                                                                                                                   20000
                                                                                  -2000




                                                                                          2001   2003     2005      2007    2009             2011    2013   2015
                                                                                                        Treatment          Control            Difference

           Notes: Black dots represent treatment-control differences in outcomes, with 95 percent confidence intervals shown
           in vertical bands. Standard errors are clustered by individual. Red and blue dotted lines present outcome means
           for the treatment and control group, respectively.
Appendix Table 1: Regression Results, Treatment Likelihood in the Matched Sample
                                                       Treatment Indicator
                                                    Beta      SE       p-value

                 Age                              -0.0004       0.0001        0.0034
                 Female                           -0.0038       0.0041        0.3548
                 Wage = 0                         -0.0172       0.0130        0.1852
                 $0 < Wage <= $5k                 -0.0177       0.0103        0.0850
                 $5k < Wage <= $10k               -0.0170       0.0093        0.0677
                 $10k < Wage <= $15k              -0.0117       0.0090        0.1902
                 $15k < Wage <= $20k              -0.0063       0.0088        0.4721
                 $20k < Wage <= $25k              -0.0051       0.0087        0.5592
                 $25k < Wage <= $30k              -0.0028       0.0086        0.7463
                 $30k < Wage <= $35k              0.0082        0.0090        0.3649
                 $35k < Wage <= $40k              -0.0106       0.0092        0.2476
                 $40k < Wage <= $45k              0.0064        0.0105        0.5429
                 $45k < Wage <= $50k               -0.005        0.011         0.683
                 $50k < Wage <= $55k               -0.004        0.012         0.723
                 $55k < Wage <= $60k               -0.014        0.013         0.302
                 $60k < Wage                       0.000         0.000
                 UI / $1,000                      0.0014        0.0007        0.0546
                 Disability / $1,000              0.0011        0.0024        0.6658
                 NEC / $1,000                     0.0002        0.0003        0.4781
                 Tax Filer                        0.0239        0.0075        0.0014
                 1(EITC>0)                        -0.0098       0.0053        0.0657

                 R²                                            0.00123
                 Observations                                   31,828

                 Notes: Reported are estimated parameters, and their standard errors
                 and p-values. Dependent variable is the treatment indicator. Control
                 variables are from administrative tax data in 2008. All dollar values
                 are CPI adjusted to 2015 dollars.
Appendix Table 2A: Treatment-Control Differences in Employment and Earnings
              Tax Year   Treatment   Control   Difference    SE     p-Value

                                      W-2 Employment

              2001         0.773      0.758      0.015      0.007    0.026
              2002         0.796      0.774      0.022      0.006    0.001
              2003         0.817      0.800      0.017      0.006    0.005
              2004         0.847      0.834      0.013      0.006    0.026
              2005         0.890      0.876      0.014      0.005    0.004
              2006         0.921      0.914      0.007      0.004    0.088
              2007         0.948      0.945      0.003      0.004    0.314
              2008         0.974      0.971      0.003      0.003    0.269
              2009         0.934      0.925      0.009      0.004    0.025
              2010         0.736      0.683      0.053      0.007    0.000
              2011         0.782      0.734      0.048      0.007    0.000
              2012         0.785      0.742      0.043      0.007    0.000
              2013         0.767      0.730      0.037      0.007    0.000
              2014         0.756      0.724      0.032      0.007    0.000
              2015         0.748      0.711      0.037      0.007    0.000

                                        W-2 Earnings

              2001        24,516     24,407       109       470      0.815
              2002        24,669     24,560       109       526      0.836
              2003        26,147     25,920       227       469      0.628
              2004        28,715     28,015       700       512      0.172
              2005        30,853     30,356       497       523      0.342
              2006        33,198     32,761       437       540      0.418
              2007        34,268     33,934       334       491      0.496
              2008        34,037     33,323       714       499      0.152
              2009        24,014     23,218       796       355      0.025
              2010        16,396     14,320      2,076      333      0.000
              2011        20,433     18,306      2,127      402      0.000
              2012        22,950     20,304      2,646      644      0.000
              2013        23,771     21,391      2,380      464      0.000
              2014        24,774     22,405      2,369      481      0.000
              2015        26,675     23,875      2,800      545      0.000
Appendix Table 2B: Treatment-Control Differences in Broad and Total Income
             Tax Year   Treatment    Control    Difference     SE     p-Value

                                    Broad Individual Income

             2001        26,398       26,315       83         495      0.868
             2002        26,990       26,841       149        553      0.787
             2003        28,418       28,251       167        497      0.737
             2004        30,909       30,508       401        545      0.463
             2005        33,044       32,858       186        553      0.736
             2006        35,602       35,280       322        575      0.575
             2007        36,122       35,899       223        521      0.668
             2008        36,668       36,081       587        510      0.250
             2009        31,455       30,994       461        358      0.198
             2010        26,755       25,822       933        333      0.005
             2011        26,568       24,672      1,896       409      0.000
             2012        26,986       24,782      2,204       650      0.001
             2013        27,983       25,672      2,311       480      0.000
             2014        28,792       26,618      2,174       509      0.000
             2015        30,954       28,375      2,579       572      0.000

                                     Total Family Income

             2001        45,250       44,426       824         718     0.251
             2002        44,906       44,436       470         718     0.513
             2003        45,824       45,074       750         715     0.294
             2004        47,742       46,199      1,543        822     0.061
             2005        48,697       47,726       971         760     0.202
             2006        50,220       49,231       989         749     0.187
             2007        50,740       49,902       838         779     0.282
             2008        49,158       48,206       952         870     0.274
             2009        41,686       40,951       735         883     0.405
             2010        39,466       37,438      2,028        864     0.019
             2011        38,937       36,459      2,478        631     0.000
             2012        39,330       37,139      2,191       1,087    0.044
             2013        41,722       38,504      3,218       1,067    0.003
             2014        43,681       39,590      4,091        652     0.000
             2015        46,191       41,825      4,366        682     0.000
Appendix Table 2C: Treatment-Control Differences in UI Benefits

       Tax Year   Treatment   Control   Difference   SE    p-Value

                              UI Benefit Amount

       2001          384        386         -2       24     0.926
       2002          678        623         55       37     0.134
       2003          604        600          4       35     0.907
       2004          404        435        -31       25     0.207
       2005          378        373          5       24     0.826
       2006          422        391         31       25     0.225
       2007           98         65         33       13     0.012
       2008         1,229      1,184        45       45     0.315
       2009         6,024      6,102       -78       86     0.367
       2010         8,390      9,060      -670       127    0.000
       2011         3,587      3,657       -70        87    0.421
       2012         1,479      1,417        62        56    0.268
       2013         1,030       966         64        46    0.163
       2014          531        509         22        28    0.427
       2015          496        455         41        27    0.130
Appendix Table 2D: Treatment-Control Differences in Spousal W-2 Employment and Earnings

                    Tax Year   Treatment     Control   Difference    SE     p-Value

                                           Spousal W-2 Employment

                    2001         0.249        0.237      0.012      0.007    0.063
                    2002         0.250        0.239      0.011      0.007    0.087
                    2003         0.257        0.248      0.009      0.007    0.194
                    2004         0.264        0.253      0.011      0.007    0.115
                    2005         0.275        0.260      0.015      0.007    0.031
                    2006         0.283        0.268      0.015      0.007    0.039
                    2007         0.296        0.280      0.016      0.007    0.024
                    2008         0.299        0.279      0.020      0.007    0.005
                    2009         0.290        0.270      0.020      0.007    0.005
                    2010         0.283        0.263      0.020      0.007    0.006
                    2011         0.286        0.261      0.025      0.007    0.000
                    2012         0.289        0.262      0.027      0.007    0.000
                    2013         0.290        0.259      0.031      0.007    0.000
                    2014         0.285        0.254      0.031      0.007    0.000
                    2015         0.285        0.251      0.034      0.007    0.000

                                            Spousal W-2 Earnings

                    2001        9,388        9,067        321       336      0.340
                    2002        9,527        9,127        400       337      0.235
                    2003        9,874        9,468        406       342      0.235
                    2004        10,343       9,832        511       350      0.144
                    2005        10,752       10,270       482       357      0.177
                    2006        11,174       10,706       468       363      0.198
                    2007        11,883       11,176       707       373      0.058
                    2008        11,579       11,038       541       364      0.138
                    2009        10,786       10,309       477       351      0.174
                    2010        10,546        9,866       680       347      0.050
                    2011        10,586        9,893       693       344      0.044
                    2012        10,585        9,939       646       346      0.062
                    2013        11,004        9,988      1,016      356      0.004
                    2014        11,231       10,061      1,170      363      0.001
                    2015        11,681       10,476      1,205      376      0.001
Appendix Table 2E: Treatment-Control Differences in Tax Filing and Homeownership
                Tax Year   Treatment   Control   Difference    SE     p-Value

                                         File Tax Return

                2001         0.864      0.858      0.006      0.005    0.261
                2002         0.874      0.861      0.013      0.005    0.012
                2003         0.877      0.863      0.014      0.005    0.006
                2004         0.885      0.867      0.018      0.005    0.001
                2005         0.899      0.880      0.019      0.005    0.000
                2006         0.909      0.895      0.014      0.005    0.002
                2007         0.937      0.924      0.013      0.004    0.000
                2008         0.940      0.927      0.013      0.004    0.001
                2009         0.931      0.913      0.018      0.004    0.000
                2010         0.901      0.880      0.021      0.005    0.000
                2011         0.878      0.859      0.019      0.005    0.000
                2012         0.851      0.829      0.022      0.006    0.000
                2013         0.846      0.810      0.036      0.006    0.000
                2014         0.822      0.790      0.032      0.006    0.000
                2015         0.806      0.766      0.040      0.006    0.000

                                        Home Ownership

                2001         0.268      0.259      0.009      0.007    0.204
                2002         0.282      0.277      0.005      0.007    0.447
                2003         0.302      0.290      0.012      0.007    0.101
                2004         0.312      0.302      0.010      0.007    0.168
                2005         0.326      0.318      0.008      0.007    0.289
                2006         0.337      0.332      0.005      0.007    0.505
                2007         0.343      0.339      0.004      0.008    0.612
                2008         0.339      0.335      0.004      0.007    0.603
                2009         0.335      0.320      0.015      0.007    0.042
                2010         0.314      0.295      0.019      0.007    0.009
                2011         0.299      0.275      0.024      0.007    0.001
                2012         0.290      0.263      0.027      0.007    0.000
                2013         0.298      0.265      0.033      0.007    0.000
                2014         0.297      0.270      0.027      0.007    0.000
                2015         0.308      0.280      0.028      0.007    0.000
