NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A SWING-STATE THEOREM, WITH EVIDENCE
Xiangjun Ma
John McLaren
Working Paper 24425
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24425

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018, Revised April 2018

We are grateful to seminar participants at Yale, Syracuse, Southern Methodist University, George
Mason, and the University of Maryland, as well as conference participants at the International
Economics Workshop, University of International Business and Economics, Beijing; Workshop
on International Trade 2016, Shanghai University of International Business and Economics; the
2nd CCER (China Center for Economic Research, Peking University) Summer Institute, 2016;
the 2012 CAGE/CEP Workshop on Trade Policy in a Globalized World, Venice; and the 2017
Mid-Atlantic Trade Workshop. Special thanks go to Peter Schott and our discussant, Christina
Tello-Trillo. We acknowledge support from NSF Grant 0418388, the Bankard Fund for Political
Economy at the University of Virginia, National Natural Science Foundation of China
(71503045) and the Beijing Social Science Fund (15JGC158). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Xiangjun Ma and John McLaren. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Swing-State Theorem, with Evidence
Xiangjun Ma and John McLaren NBER
Working Paper No. 24425
March 2018, Revised April 2018
JEL No. D72,F13
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of local partisanship in a model of electoral competition. Voters care about
policy, but they also care about the identity of the party in power. These party preferences vary
from person to person, but they are also correlated within each state. As a result, most states are
biassed toward one party or the other (in popular parlance, most states are either ‘red’ or ‘blue’).
We show that, under a large portion of the parameter space, electoral competition leads to
maximization of welfare with an extra weight on citizens of the ‘swing state:’ the one that is not
biassed toward either party. The theory applies to all areas of policy, but since import tariffs are
well-measured they allow a clean test. We show empirically that the US tariff structure is
systematically biassed toward industries located in swing states, after controlling for other
factors. Our best estimate is that the US political process treats a voter living in a non-swing state
as being worth 77% as much as a voter in a swing state. This represents a policy bias orders of
magnitude greater than the bias found in studies of protection for sale.

Xiangjun Ma
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
xm2e@virginia.edu
John McLaren
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
jmclaren@virginia.edu

1

Introduction

Among the industries in the United States disadvantaged by the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) between the US, Mexico and Canada, the Florida
tomato industry has a prominent place. Following implementation of the agreement
in the mid-1990’s, cheap winter tomatoes flooded in from Mexico that compared quite
favorably with Florida winter tomatoes in quality. The industry petitioned to the
Clinton administration for relief; the president made the tomato issue a high priority
and dispatched one of his top lieutenants to negotiate a special side agreement with
Mexico. The agreement was reached in October 1996 and required Mexican tomatoes
sold in the US to be subject to a price floor (explained to the public as a protection to
consumers against ‘price instability’) (Lukas, 1998).
A natural question is why the US government should have placed such a high
priority on one small industry in one state. It may help to understand this if we
recall that a presidential election was scheduled for November 1996, and Florida had
been appearing to be one of the most fiercely contested states. As one political reporter
summarized the point, the question was “how much the tomato issue could a↵ect swing
votes in Florida, which has gone Republican in recent years but which now seems in
play, with Mr. Clinton slightly ahead of Mr. Dole in the polls.” (Sanger, 1996). The
political logic is summarized more bluntly elsewhere in the same report: “‘The math
was pretty simple,’ another official said. ‘Florida has 25 electoral votes, and Mexico
doesn’t.”’
This is a case in which trade policy was invoked to protect an industry apparently
because it was concentrated in a state that was expected to have a very small margin
of victory for whichever party would win it in the upcoming presidential election, so

2

that a small change in policy might be the deciding factor in which party would win
it. The logic of protection in this case has nothing to do with appealing to a median
voter or responding to lobbyists or influence peddling. An electoral system such as the
American system seems to be set up in such a way as to create strong incentives for
this type of calculation, and indeed other examples can be found, such as steel tari↵s
appealing to the states of West Virginia and Pennsylvania, in which the calculus is
similar.
To analyze these e↵ects formally, this paper studies the e↵ects of local partisanship
in a model of electoral competition for congressional seats or electoral-college votes, as
in a US-style presidential election. That is, voters care about policy, but they also care
about the identity of the party in power. These party preferences vary from person
to person, but they are also correlated within each state. As a result, most states are
biassed toward one party or the other (in popular parlance, most states are either ‘red’
or ‘blue’). Extensive evidence confirms that US states vary widely and persistently
in their partisan leanings, in ways that seem to be driven by factors other than pure
economic interest. Glaeser and Ward (2006), for example, report that in data from
the Pew Research Center in the 2004 Presidential election the correlation between the
Republican George W. Bush winning a state and the fraction of the state who agree
that “AIDS might be God’s punishment for immoral sexual behavior” is 70%, and
this is correlated with a wide range of other cultural views having nothing to do with
economic policy but which are strongly correlated with partisan voting behavior.1
In the simple version of our model we show that, under a large portion of the
1

Ansolabehere et al (2006), however, argue that the cultural element in state voting patterns is often
overstated. In addition, they document that the red-blue divide across states has been quite stable for
several decades.

3

parameter space, electoral competition leads to maximization of the welfare of citizens
of the ‘swing state:’ the one that is not biassed toward either party.2 We can call
this the case of an ‘extreme’ swing-state bias; in this equilibrium, politicians disregard
the e↵ect of policy on anyone who does not live in a swing state. In a version with
some added uncertainty, there is a bias toward the swing state in policy making, but it
becomes extreme in the sense that policy ignores non-swing-state welfare only in the
limit as uncertainty becomes small. Thus, the model with uncertainty can rationalize
a ‘partial’ swing-state bias.
A central goal of this paper is an empirical test for the swing-state bias, together
with the more formidable task of measuring the size of the bias. The theory applies
to any area of policy-making, and would predict a swing-state bias in tax and subsidy
policy, infrastructure spending, the location of military bases, and so on.3 We focus
on import tari↵s as a first case study because they are well-measured in a consistent
way across industries and so allow for a clean test. We use a parametrized model to
estimate the bias empirically, and find that US tari↵s are set as if voters living outside
of swing states count 77% as much as voters in swing states. One can interpret this as a
measure of the degree of distortion created by the majoritarian electoral system,4 and
it implies a degree of bias that is orders of magnitude greater than the bias implied
by empirical estimates of protection-for-sale models. We are not aware of previous
attempts to quantify the normative bias created by swing-state e↵ects. Tentatively,
2

In the basic model we assume for simplicity that there is only one swing state.
Another potential example is environmental policy. The US government recently announced a plan
to expand o↵shore oil drilling dramatically. The move was unpopular in coastal states, and requests by
governors of those states for an exemption were rebu↵ed – except for Florida, which happens to be the
quintessential swing state (Hiroko Tabuchi, “Trump Administration Drops Florida From O↵shore Drilling
Plan,” New York Times, January 8, 2018).
4
See McLaren (2016, Section 3.1), Persson and Tabellini (2002, Ch. 8), and Grossman and Helpman
(2005) for analysis of the di↵erences between majoritarian and proportional-representation systems for policy
outcomes.
3

4

the results suggest that such e↵ects are far more important for understanding trade
policy than lobbying.
The e↵ects of electoral competition on trade policy can be analyzed from several
di↵erent angles (see McLaren (2016), sections 3.1 and 3.2, for a survey). Early approaches were based on the median-voter theorem, which was adapted to trade policy
by Mayer (1984) in a two-good Heckscher-Ohlin model. It was tested empirically by
Dutt and Mitra (2002) and by Dhingra (2014), both of which show international evidence consistent with the broad comparative-statics predictions. However, the model
is essentially vacuous outside of a two-good model since there is generically no equilibrium if the policy space has more than one dimension (Plott, 1967).5 Indeed, defining
a median voter is typically impossible when multiple goods compete for protection and
voters have di↵erent preferences regarding them, so this strain of empirical work has
focussed on predicting the overall level of protection, rather than its structure. No
study has attempted to argue that aggressive protection of the US sugar industry from
imports has resulted because the median US voter is a sugar planter.
A more promising approach is explored in Lindbeck and Weibull (1993), which incorporates partisanship as well as policy preferences into voters’ behavior and shows
that in an equilibrium in which politicians can commit to policy the least partisan voters, ‘swing’ voters, tend to get the most weight. This framework, from which we draw
heavily, was further developed by Dixit and Londregan (1996), with a more general
model of electoral competition that incorporates income inequality and di↵erences in
the ability of a party to channel income to a given group (so that each party has a
natural constituency), in addition to partisanship. Swing-voter e↵ects emerge as one of
5

Note that the last section of Mayer (1984) attempts to generalize the model to many goods, but does so
by imposing the fiction that each election is a referendum on a single good’s tari↵.

5

a number of influences on policy. The authors show evidence that US garment workers
tend to live in swing states, which could be the reason for their favorable treatment in
trade policy.
These approaches all assume a unitary national election, but national elections with
a state-by-state majoritarian structure are di↵erent in important ways. Brams and
Davis (1974) study the allocation of campaign resources across states in an electoralcollege game, arguing that large states receive disproportionately large allocations in
equilibrium; and Colantoni, Levesque, and Ordeshook (1975), who argue that this empirical finding disappears when ‘competitiveness’ of the state is included (essentially
the closeness of the state to ‘swing state’ status), and that in addition more competitive states receive more campaign resources. Although both papers are based on a
theoretical model, neither of these solves for Nash equilibrium campaign strategies.
Strömberg (2008) fully characterizes Nash equilibrium in a model of campaign competition with probabilistic voting and partisan bias that varies by state. To make the
model tractable, he uses a law of large numbers that applies when the number of states
is sufficiently large. In equilibrium, campaign resources allocated by each party in state
s are proportional to Qs , which is the derivative of the probability that party A wins
the election with respect to the average state-s voter’s preference for party A. This is
a value that Strömberg (2008) estimates from election data, and can be interpreted as
the likelihood that state s (i) is a swing state, and (ii) is pivotal (meaning that a change
in the outcome for state s will change the outcome of the national election). Strömberg
(2008) shows that Qs is highly correlated with observed campaign resources.
The Strömberg (2008) model is close to the issues that are our focus, but our interest
is on the influence of swing-state e↵ects on policy, rather than campaign strategy, and

6

on quantifying the implied welfare bias against citizens living outside of swing states.
Persson and Tabellini (2002, Ch. 8) study a stylized model of electoral competition with
two states with opposite partisan bias plus a swing state, and show that the swing state
enjoys a bias in the design of fiscal policy. Conybeare (1984) looks for swing e↵ects on
tari↵s in Australia and McGillivray (1997) in Canada and the US, with mixed results.
Wright (1974) argues that swing states during the Great Depression tended to receive
more New-Deal spending, while Wallis (1998) argues that the finding may be due to a
special Nevada e↵ect (since Nevada was a swing state that received disproportionate
spending, but that may be due to the fact that it also had a powerful Senator).6
Most importantly, Muûls and Petropoulou (2013) study a model of trade policy
and swing-state e↵ects that is complementary to ours in several respects. They have
a simple policy space (‘protection’ or ‘free trade’) and thus cannot discuss optimal
policy as we do. They have a rich conception of how electoral competition works, in
which politicians cannot commit to policy, but incumbent office holders choose policy
to signal their underlying preferences to voters; by contrast, we have a blunt model of
commitment to policy as in the standard median-voter model. The crisp swing-state
theorem that emerges in our model is not present in theirs; their main result is that the
more protectionist voters there are in the states with the lowest partisan bias, the more
likely a government is to provide trade protection even if the government’s preferences
are for free trade. In short, our model is much simpler and provides a crisper theorem,
while their model is richer and more realistic in its portrayal of political dynamics.
More importantly, our empirical approach allows us to estimate the strength of the
6

Slightly farther from the topic of the present paper, Hauk (2011) finds that industries concentrated in
smaller states tend to receive higher tari↵s, and Fredriksson et al. (2011) find that industries in majoritycontrolled Congressional districts tend to have higher tari↵s. Both studies derive their hypotheses from
legislative bargaining under the influence of lobbying rather than electoral competition, though.

7

swing-state bias as a structural parameter.
We draw on all of this work, and we bring the theory to data by adapting a version
of the general-equilibrium set-up of Grossman and Helpman (1994), which has been
used for empirical work by Goldberg and Maggi (1999), Gawande and Bandyopadhyay
(2000) and many others.
The next section presents the formal model in detail, and the following sections
analyze its equilibrium. The benchmark swing-state theorem is derived in Section 5,
and its robustness to variations in the model (including uncertainty and the partial
swing-state bias) is discussed in Section 7. Empirical analysis is o↵ered in Section 8.

2

The Model

Consider the following small-open-economy model. There are a continuum of citizens,
each of whom has a type indexed by s, where s 2 [0, 1]. These citizens will all be
a↵ected by the government’s choice of policy. This is represented by a vector t 2 Rn
for some n; for example, t could be a net tari↵ vector, and n the number of tradable
goods. The citizen’s type summarizes all of the information about how policy will a↵ect
that citizen economically; for example, it may summarize the factor ownership or the
sector-specific human capital of the citizen, and thus what the e↵ect of policy choices
will be on that citizen’s real income. For now, we will not specify these economic
details, and simply write the citizen’s indirect utility by U (s, t). Assume that U is
bounded and is di↵erentiable with respect to t.
There are M states in which people may live. Each one elects a representative to
the congress. The states di↵er in their economic characteristics, as summarized by the
state-specific density hi (s) for the economic types of the citizens living in state i. In

8

each state, the candidate with the most votes wins, with ties decided by a coin flip.
There are two national parties, A and B, and each fields two candidates in each
state. After the election, the party with the largest number of seats controls the
legislature, and thus has the right to introduce a bill regarding policy – specifically, a
proposed value for t. (If the seats are evenly divided, control is determined by a coin
flip.) If a majority of members vote in favor of the bill, it becomes law; otherwise, the
default policy t0 remains in e↵ect.
As in Lindbeck and Weibull (1993), elections are characterized both by credible
commitment by candidates and by idiosyncratic party preferences on the part of voters.
There are two candidates for office in each state, each representing one of the two
parties. Each party commits publicly before the election to its policy, which entails
committing to a value for t that the party will propose and pass if it captures control
of congress. The two parties move simultaneously in choosing policy. Each voter in
equilibrium then understands what the realized policy will be if either party wins, and
on the basis of that can calculate the utility that the voter would receive if either
party was to win control of congress. The voter then votes for the local candidate
of the party that o↵ers that voter the highest expected utility. This expected utility
is determined both by the voter’s expected real income and by the voter’s inherent
preference µ 2 ( 1, 1) for party A. For any voter j in state i, the value of µ is equal
to µi + v j . The value µi is a fixed e↵ect common to all citizens of state i, while the
value v j is an idiosyncratic e↵ect with mean zero whose distribution function F and
density f are common to all citizens in all states. Thus, a state i with µi > 0 has
a partisan bias in favor of party A;7 a state with µi < 0 is biassed in favor of party
7

Alternatively, the partisan bias could be assumed to be a preference for one party’s local candidate over
the other party’s, without changing much of substance in the model.

9

B; and a state with µi = 0 is neutral. These µi values are the form taken by local
partisanship in the model, and can be interpreted as capturing the cultural di↵erences
quantified by Glaeser and Ward (2006).
Without loss of generality, we can number the states in order of decreasing µi .
Denote by m
e A the number of states biassed toward party A, and by m
e B the number
of states biassed toward party B. We will assume that exactly one state, numbered
m
e A + 1, has µi = 0, and we will call this the ‘swing’ state. To save on notation, let i⇤

denote m
e A + 1 from now on.

The uniform case will be of special interest in what follows:
8
0 if v < a
<
1/(2a) if v 2 [ a, a]; and
funif (v) =
:
0 if v > a

for some a > 0.

We assume that each voter votes sincerely. What this means in this case is that if
party A o↵ers a policy tA and party B o↵ers tB , then voter j in state i will vote for A
if
U (s, tA ) + µ > U (s, tB )
and will vote for B otherwise. For each citizen type, s, the probability that a randomly
selected citizen in state i will vote for party A is equal to:
✓(tA , tB , i, s) ⌘ 1

F (U (s, tB )

U (s, tA )

µi ).

(1)

Of course, this also gives the fraction of s-type voters in i that will vote for party
A, and party A’s total votes in the state are given by:
✓(tA , tB , i) ⌘ 1

Z

F (U (s, tB )

10

U (s, tA )

µi )hi (s)ds.

(2)

For each state i, we define economic welfare as a result of any policy t:
W (t, i) =

Z

U (s, t)hi (s)ds.

Note that this excludes partisan preference, although that is part of preferences. We
will denote as ‘full welfare’ W (t, i)+ µi in the event that party A wins, and W (t, i)
otherwise.
The following observation on the nature of voting in the uniform case will be useful
later.
Lemma 1. In the uniform case, if 0 < ✓(tA , tB , i, s) < 1 for all s, then party A’s
candidate wins in state i if and only if tA o↵ers state i higher full welfare than tB does.

This follows immediately by performing the integral in (2), using the uniform density. Since with the uniform density

F (x) =

x+a
8x 2 [ a, a],
2a

equation (2) reduces to

1
✓(t , t , i) =
2
A

B

R

(U (s, tB )

U (s, tA ))hi (s)ds
2a

µi

,

R
which is a vote share less than one half if and only if (U (s, tB ) U (s, tA ))hi (s)ds µi =

W (tB , i) W (tA , i) µi > 0. This simple result is due to the fact that with the uniform
distribution for partisan preferences, the probability that a given voter switches her

vote from A to B in response to a change in B’s policy is proportional to the change
in her utility that would result from the policy change.

11

3

Political payo↵s

Each party’s payo↵ is given by the function G(m), where m is the number of seats the
party wins. The function G is strictly increasing, so that parties care not only about
victory, but about the margin of victory. However, we do allow for the possibility that
the parties care primarily about winning power. In particular, we specify the function
as follows:
G(m) = g(m) + (m)
where g(m) is strictly increasing and (weakly) concave with g(0) = 0, and:
8
0 if m < M/2;
<
1/2 if m = M/2; and
(m) =
:
1 if m > M/2
is a dummy variable for control of the congress. Thus,

(3)

reflects concern about control,

while g reflects concern about the margin of victory. It is possible that each party
cares primarily about control of the legislature with the margin of victory only a minor
concern, in which case g(M )

g(0) will be small.

In what follows, the seats held by the two parties resulting from the election are
denoted by mA and mB respectively.
Note that even in a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium, the outcome can be random
because of tied elections in some states. This complicates evaluation of the parties’
payo↵s somewhat. The following lemma is helpful in doing this, and in analyzing Nash
equilibrium.
Lemma 2. The utility-possibilities frontier for the two parties is bounded above by a
frontier made by randomizing over only adjacent values of mA . Precisely:
For any choice of probability distribution over tA and tB (including degenerate
ones), consider the payo↵ point (E[G(mA )|tA , tB ], E[G(mB )|tA , tB ]), where the expec-

12

tation is calculated with respect to the probability distribution over mA and mB induced
by the distribution over the tA and tB together with any tie-breaking. This payo↵ point
must lie on or below the frontier:
{(↵G(x)+(1 ↵)G(x+1), ↵G(M x)+(1 ↵)G(M x 1))|↵ 2 [0, 1], x = 0, 1, ..., M 1}.
(4)
This frontier is concave (strictly so if g is strictly concave).
This is illustrated in Figure 1, which illustrates a case in which M = 6. Each dot in
the figure shows the payo↵ for the two parties for a given division of the seats between
them. Point a, for example, represents the outcome when Party A has all 6 seats, point
b the outcome when Party A has 4 seats and Party B has 2, point c the outcome when
each party has 3 seats, and point d when Party B has all 6 seats. The straight lines
connecting adjacent points show payo↵ combinations made from randomizing between
them. In the event that each party cares primarily about winning a majority of seats
and only to a small degree about the margin of victory the dots will be clustered close
to (0, 1) and (1, 0), with point c isolated very close to ( 12 , 12 ).8

4

Pure-strategy Nash equilibria

A Nash equilibrium in pure strategies is a pair of policies tA and tB such that given tA ,
tB maximizes E[G(mB )|tA , tB ], and given tB , tA maximizes E[G(mA )|tA , tB ]. We will
see here that such equilibria feature some strong properties. Note that because both
parties’ payo↵s are discontinuous in the policy choices, we cannot assume that either
party will choose its policy to satisfy a first-order condition (and in fact, as we will see,
the payo↵ function is typically discontinuous at the equilibrium point). This means
8

The role of the concavity in the lemma is subtle. It ensures that the frontier derived is the true utilitypossibilities frontier, since neither party can achieve a higher payo↵ by randomizing.

13

that the techniques used to analyze equilibrium in Lindbeck and Weibull (1993) and
Dixit and Londregan (1996) cannot be applied, so we need an alternate route, which
we describe as follows.
The first point to note is that in any equilibrium in pure strategies, either party
has the option of mimicking the other (by correctly anticipating what the other will
do; of course, the two parties move simultaneously). For example, party A can always
choose to set tA equal to tB . In that case, A will win all of the A-biassed states, B
will win the B-biassed states, and the swing state will be be tied. Therefore, by this
strategy party A can assure itself a payo↵ of:
e A ⌘ 1 [G(m
e A ) + G(m
e A + 1)],
G
2

and thus must achieve at least as high a payo↵ in any pure-strategy equilibrium. By a
parallel argument, party B must achieve a payo↵ of at least
1
e B ⌘ 1 [G(m
e B ) + G(m
e B + 1)] = [G(M
G
2
2

in any pure-strategy equilibrium.

m
eA

1) + G(M

m
e A )]

e B the two parties’ ‘natural payo↵s.’ It can be seen
e A and G
We can call the values G

that they are not merely lower bounds for the pure-strategy payo↵s, but upper bounds
as well.

Proposition 3. In any pure-strategy Nash equilibrium, the two parties achieve exactly
their ‘natural’ payo↵s.
e A and party B’s
Proof. We have already seen that party A’s payo↵ must be at least G
e B . Note that this payo↵ pair lies on the payo↵ frontier (4)
payo↵ must be at least G

e B , then
derived in Lemma 2. That means that if party B receives a payo↵ of at least G

14

e A . Similarly, if party A receives a payo↵ of
party A must receive a payo↵ of at most G
e A , then party B must receive a payo↵ of at most G
e B . Thus, the two parties’
at least G

payo↵s are exactly their ‘natural’ payo↵s.

5

The Swing-State Theorem.

We can now derive the main result concerning the role of the swing state in the policy
outcome of electoral competition. The result emerges in a particularly simple way in
the special case of the uniform distribution, so we start with that.
Proposition 4. If f is uniform, then in any pure-strategy Nash equilibrium, tA and
tB must be local maxima for swing-state welfare.
Put slightly di↵erently, in any pure-strategy equilibrium, both tA and tB must
locally maximize W (t, i⇤ ) with respect to t. The proof is very simple. Suppose that
there is a pure-strategy equilibrium in which party A commits to a policy vector tA
that is not a local welfare maximizer for the swing state, and party B commits to some
policy tB . We have already observed that in this, as in any pure-strategy equilibrium,
each party receives its natural payo↵. Now observe that party A has the option of
choosing policy vector tA , mimicking party A’s strategy. If it does that, it will again
receive its natural payo↵, winning all of its home states and winning the swing state
with 50% probability. But since tA is not a local welfare maximizer for the swing state,
party B can also deviate from tA slightly in a direction that improves the swing state’s
welfare, winning the swing state with certainty, without changing the outcome of the
election in any other state. (Note that when tA is close to tB 0 < ✓(tA , tB , i⇤ , s) < 18s,
so Lemma 1 will apply.) Therefore, with this deviation, party B has strictly increased
its payo↵. We conclude that the original policies (tA , tB ) were not an equilibrium.

15

That is sufficient to prove the result.
Naturally, this yields a stronger result in the event that state i⇤ welfare has only
one local maximum, such as when it is quasiconcave in t.
Corollary 5. If f is uniform and W (i⇤ , t) has only one local maximum with respect to
t, then any pure-strategy equilibrium maximizes swing-state welfare; or in other words,
tA = tB = argmax{t} W (i⇤ , t).
The result and its proof are slightly more complicated if we relax the assumption
of a uniform distribution:
Proposition 6. In any pure-strategy Nash equilibrium, both parties choose policies
that satisfy the first-order condition for maximizing swing-state welfare. Precisely, in
any pure-strategy Nash equilibrium:
Wt (tA , i⇤ ) = 0,
where the subscript indicates a partial derivative.
tB are a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium with Wt (e
tB , m⇤ ) 6=
Proof. Suppose that e
tA and e
e A = E[G(mA )|e
0. We know that E[G(mA )|e
tA , e
tB ] = G
tB , e
tB ].

Now, party A’s share of the swing-state vote for any policy vector t that it might

choose, ✓(t, e
tB , i⇤ ), is given by:

✓(t, e
tB , i⇤ ) ⌘ 1

which has derivative:

✓t (t, e
tB , i⇤ ) =

Z

Z

F (U (s, e
tB )

f (U (s, e
tB )

⇤

U (s, t))Ut (s, t)hi (s)ds.

If t is set equal to e
tB , the swing-state vote is split:

✓(e
tB , e
tB , i⇤ ) = 1/2

16

⇤

U (s, t))hi (s)ds,

and the derivative of the vote share is proportional to the derivative of swing-state
welfare:
✓t (e
tB , e
tB , i⇤ ) =

Z

⇤
f (0)Ut (s, e
tB )hi (s)ds = f (0)Wt (e
tB , m⇤ ) 6= 0.

But this non-zero derivative implies that we can find a sequence of policies tk , k =
1, 2, ..., converging to e
tB , with

✓(e
tB , tk , i⇤ ) > 1/2

for all k. But then for high enough k, party A will win all of the m
e A states that lean

toward A, and also win the swing state for sure. Therefore, the party’s payo↵ will be
e A , and the proposed policy pair (e
strictly higher than G
tA , e
tB ) cannot be an equilibrium.

tB , i⇤ ) = 0. Parallel
This contradiction establishes that equilibrium requires that Wt (e
logic shows that we must also have Wt (e
tA , i⇤ ) = 0.

The idea of the proof is straightforward. If party B is expected to choose a policy

that violates the first-order condition for swing-state welfare, then party A can always
mimic B’s choice, then sweeten the policy slightly for swing-state voters and thus win
the swing state, strictly improving its payo↵. The proposition o↵ers a natural corollary,
as follows. First, if a function on Rn attains a maximum at some value t⇤ and at no
other point on Rn is the first-order condition for maximization of the function satisfied,
then we will say that the function is regular. The following is immediate:
Corollary 7. If W (t, i⇤ ) is regular with respect to t, then the only possible pure-strategy
Nash equilibrium has tA = tB = t⇤ , where t⇤ maximizes W (t, i⇤ ).
Comment. The best-known analogue to this result in the literature is the equilibrium condition in Strömberg (2008). This result di↵ers from that one in a number

17

of ways. First, unlike Strömberg, we assume that both parties care not only about
winning but about the margin of victory. Even if the parties’ interest in the margin is
very small, this has a large e↵ect on the equilibrium, because parties in our model cater
to the swing state even if they know it will not be pivotal. Indeed, if m̃A > m̃B + 1, in
a pure-strategy equilibrium party A will win the election for sure, so the swing state
will not be pivotal; but both parties cater to swing-state voters because A wants to
win by a large margin and B wants to lose by a small margin. Further, nothing in our
result depends on the existence of a large number of states; the proposition works with
any value for M .

6 Conditions for Existence of the Swing-State
Equilibrium
Corollary 7 tells us that when the objective function is regular we need to concern
ourselves with only one possible candidate for a pure-strategy equilibrium, namely, the
maximization of the swing-state welfare by both parties. Thus, under those conditions,
existence of a pure-strategy equilibrium is easy to check: From a situation in which
both parties are maximizing swing-state welfare, ask whether or not, say, party A can
deviate to pick up enough B-leaning states to compensate for the certain loss of the
swing state as well as the loss of any A-leaning states that it may thereby incur. If
such a profitable deviation is possible, then only mixed-strategy equilibria occur.
One property is immediate: If local partisan preferences are strong enough, then
the pure-strategy equilibrium exists.
⇤

Proposition 8. Suppose that µi = ↵k i for i = 1, ..., n, with k i = 0 and k i fixed. Then
if ↵ is sufficiently large, the swing-state optimum will be an equilibrium.

18

Simply, if partisan preferences are strong enough to dominate each voter’s preferences aside from those of the swing state, then there is no possible profitable deviation
from the swing optimum. However, a simple example can show that the swing-state
optimum becomes an equilibrium far before that extreme point has been reached.
Figure 2 shows a simple three-state example. Maintain the assumption that the
idiosyncratic partisan shocks ⌫ are uniformly distributed so that Lemma 1 applies. The
figure plots state-1 economic welfare on the horizontal axis and state-2 economic welfare
on the vertical axis, and shows the economic welfare-possibilities surface between states
1 and 2, or in other words, the maximum value of W (t, 2) with respect to choice of
t subject to the constraint that W (t, 1)

w̄ for each feasible value of w̄. The axes

have been centered on the utility pair obtained by states 1 and 2 when t is chosen to
maximize state-3 economic welfare. Suppose that µ1 =

µ2 =

> 0, and µ3 = 0,

so that state 3 is the swing state. The origin of the two axes is then the swing-state
optimum.
From the figure we can see readily whether or not a swing-state equilibrium exists.
If either party can deviate from the swing-state optimum, which in this figure is the
origin, and obtain the votes of the other party’s home state without losing its own home
state, then the swing-state optimum is not an equilibrium and there is no equilibrium
in pure strategies. In the case of Figure 2, we see that Party A would be able to choose
a policy vector that would generate utilities at point C, which state-2 voters would
prefer to the swing-state optimum by more than . Consequently, all state-2 voters
would vote for party A. However, since the loss in utility for a state-2 voter is less than
, state-1 voters also will vote for party A. By deviating to point C, Party A loses the
swing state but now wins the two non-swing states with certainty. Consequently it is

19

better o↵, and the swing-state optimum is not an equilibrium.
By contrast, Figure 3 illustrates a case in which the pure-strategy equilibrium does
exist. Starting from the swing-state optimum, it is not possible for party A to deviate
in such a way as to steal state 2 from party B (which would require a movement upward
by a distance of at least ) that does not also cause it to lose state 1 (since it must
move leftward by a distance greater than ). Grabbing state 2 would require choosing
a point no lower in the figure than point D, but that is already too far to the left to
retain state 1. Similarly, it is not possible for party B to steal state 1 profitably. Thus,
the swing-state optimum is an equilibrium.
This logic can be summarized as follows: In Figure 2, if the welfare-possibilities
frontier for states 1 and 2 crosses either (i) the horizontal line ab or the vertical axis
above it; or (ii) the vertical line cd or the horizontal axis to the right of it, then there
is no equilibrium in pure strategies. Otherwise, the swing-state optimum is the unique
equilibrium in pure strategies.
Note the factors that contribute to the existence of the swing-state equilibrium.
(i) The larger is , the more likely it is that the swing-state equilibrium will exist.
Any increase in

will slide ab up and cd to the right, eventually ensuring that they

do not intersect the state 1 and 2 welfare frontier. In the extreme case, of course, if
is large enough, the square regions of length

in figures 2 and 3 will eclipse the

welfare-possibiities frontier and no state will ever vote against its partisan preference.
(ii) Sufficient economic similarity of states promotes the swing-state equilibrium.
Note that if we allow the states to become very similar in economic terms, so that the
three W (t, i) functions (for i = 1, 2, and 3) converge to each other, then the curve in
Figure 2 shrinks to a point. For a given value of , this guarantees that the swing-

20

state optimum will be an equilibrium, because there will be no point like C on the
party-A-party-B Pareto curve above the second-quadrant
fourth-quadrant

box (or to the right of the

box). This point can be summarized in the following Proposition.

Proposition 9. Assume that all states have the same number of citizens. For a set of
densities hi (s, 0) of economic types across states i = 1, . . . M , consider:
hi (s; ) = (1

)hi (s; 0) +

X hj (s; 0)
j6=i

for

0. Then there exists a value ¯ such that if

M

1

(5)

> ¯ , the swing-state equilibrium

exists.
In this formulation, the densities hi (s, ) are the densities that result if, starting
with the densities hi (s, 0), we pluck a fraction

of citizens from each state and spread

a representative sample of them in equal numbers to all other states. In the limit as
approaches unity, the states all become economically identical, and the di↵erence
between the welfare experienced by state i if its own welfare-maximizing policy is
applied compared to any other state’s welfare-maximizing policy will be well below .
This may be of use in understanding historical trends, as it is fairly well documented
that regions in the United States have been becoming more similar economically over
time (Peltzman (1985), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992)), while at the same time geographic di↵erences in partisan preferences have remained stable (Ansolabehere et al,
2006). Perhaps this may help explain the transformation of the US political regime
from one in which the Democratic party appealed to the South with open-trade policies
and the Republican party appealed to the North with protectionism, to the modern
regime in which the policies pursued by the two major parties are much more similar,
and both parties compete very intensely in national elections for voters in the swing

21

states.

7

Some generalizations.

The main model above is obviously quite special in a number of ways. Here we show
that the same sort of logic survives some natural relaxations in the assumptions.

7.1

Replicating the economy.

Raising the number of states without changing the distribution of attributes of states
does not make the swing-state equilibrium more or less likely. The swing-state equilibrium does not have anything to do with the number of states per se. This can be
seen by a replication experiment. If party A can defect from the swing-state optimum
profitably, for example, simply doubling the number of states by replicating each one
clearly will not change that fact. Similarly, if it cannot profitably deviate, replicating
will not change that fact either.

7.2

More than one swing state.

If we allow for multiple swing states, the basic logic is maintained, but we need to
allow for the likelihood that the di↵erent swing states will have di↵erent economic
interests. As a result, the general point is that it must not be possible to deviate from
the equilibrium policy in a way that will attract the voters of one swing state without
losing the voters of another swing state.
Proposition 10. If there are multiple swing states, then in any pure-strategy Nash
equilibrium:
Wt (tp , i) = p Wt (tp , j)
for p = A, B, for some numbers p and for any swing states i and j.

22

(6)

7.3 No exact swing state, and probabilistic elections: A
partial swing-state bias.
If µ̄i 6= 0 for each state i but there is one state for which µ̄i is close to zero, the basic
logic of the model applies provided we add a small amount of noise to the model. Let us
modify the model in the following way. Suppose that for each state µ̄i = µ̂i + ⌘ i , where
i
µ̂i is a constant known to all, µ̂ ⌘ {µ̂i }M
i=1 , while ⌘ is a random shock whose value is

known to neither party until after the votes have been counted, but the distribution of
⌘ i is common knowledge. Further, suppose that the ⌘ i are i.i.d, and the distribution
of ⌘ i is given by the density ⇢(⌘ i ; ), where ⇢(⌘; ) ! 0 as
⇢(0; ) ! 1 as

! 1 for ⌘ 6= 0 and

imply a distribution for ⌘ i with the mass

! 1. Larger values of

more concentrated around zero and a variance that shrinks to zero in the limit as
becomes large.
This puts the model into the tradition of probabilistic voting models such as Persson
and Tabellini (2002) or Strömberg (2008), for example. With this framework, any tari↵
pair (tA , tB ) will result in a probability ⇡ j (tA , tB ; µ̂j , ) that party A will win state j.
If we focus on the case in which g(m) from (3) is linear, then the payo↵ for party
A will be GA (tA , tB ; µ̂, ) ⌘ E[G(m)|(tA , tB ; µ̂, )] = g(m̄A (tA , tB ; µ̂, )) + prob(mA >
M/2|(tA , tB ; µ̂, )), where m̄A (tA , tB ; µ̂, )) is the expected number of seats captured
by party A and the probabilities are computed from the underlying ⇡ j probabilities.
Party B’s payo↵ function, GB (tA , tB ; µ̂, ), is constructed analogously (and is equal to
g(M ) + 1

GA (tA , tB ; µ̂, )). (We assume that M is odd here just to eliminate the

nuisance of ties, without changing anything of substance.)
It is straightforward to show the following proposition.
Proposition 11. With g(·) linear and M an odd number, fix µ̂i 6= 0 for i 6= i⇤ and

23

⇤

⇤

consider a sequence of values µ̂ik such that µ̂ik ! 0 as k ! 1. Suppose in addition that
k

! 1 as k ! 1, that GA (·, ·; µ̂k ,

and GB (·, ·; µ̂k ,

k)

k)

is strictly quasi-concave in its first argument,

in its second argument, for all k; that t must be chosen from a

compact space T ⇢ <n , that W (·, ·) is regular with respect to t as defined in Section 5
and continuously di↵erentiable; and that Wt (t, i) is uniformly bounded for all i. Then
B
if for each k there is a Nash equilibrium in pure strategies (tA
k , tk ) for the model with

µ̂i = µ̂ik and

=

k,

⇤
B
⇤
⇤
then we must have tA
k ! t and tk ! t as k ! 1, where t is

the optimal value of the policy vector for state i⇤ .
This means that if there is a state that is approximately swing, and politicians
can form a good estimate of election outcomes given policy choices but the estimate
is subject to error, then there will be a swing-state bias in tari↵ choices but it may be
less extreme than in the benchmark model. Tari↵s will maximize a weighted welfare
function that may put some weight on non-swing-state welfare, but for large k it will
be smaller than the weight on swing-state welfare. This contrast with the benchmark
model will be explored in the empirical analysis.

7.4

The filibuster.

If the model is interpreted as a representation of the US Senate, an issue that arises is
the filibuster. This is a maneuver by which a minority can prevent a bill from being
passed by preventing an end to debate and a move to the final vote, because the vote
to end debate needs 60 votes out of 100 to pass. As a result, if a determined minority
of 40% of the members wish to prevent a bill from passing, it can do so.
This raises the possibility that the threshold for control of the Senate is 60 seats,
rather than the 50 that we have been assuming. In practice, the e↵ect of the fili-

24

buster has not been as stark as this, for a number of reasons. For most of its history,
the filibuster has been fairly rarely used, invoked only to block a bill toward which
the minority had a very deep objection. In addition, many bills have been passed
by a majority with less than a 60-seat majority, by cobbling together a coalition of
opposition-party members in agreement with the bill in question or at least willing to
do some log-rolling. Further, even having a 60-seat majority does not guarantee that
one’s party does not have some members willing to buck the party leadership and join
a filibuster at times.
However, to see how the model functions when a filibuster is allowed for, let us
make the simplest, starkest assumption, and specify that M = 100 and that no party
controls the Senate unless it has at least 60 votes. In other words, any split that is
more even than 60-40 is treated as a tie. That changes the payo↵ function (3) to:
8
<

0 if m  40;
1/2 if 40 < m < 60; and
(m) =
:
1 if m 60.

(7)

In this case, the payo↵ frontier for the two parties can fail to be concave,9 in which
case the method of proof used for the non-filibuster case cannot apply. However, there
are sufficient conditions that guarantee concavity. First, a linear g function:
Proposition 12. If g is linear, then the payo↵ frontier for the two parties resulting
from the payo↵ function (7) is concave.
The proof is simple: It is easy to verify that if g is linear, transferring one Senate
seat from Party A to Party B will raise B’s payo↵ and lower A’s payo↵ by the same
amount. Therefore, the payo↵ frontier will have a slope of
9

1 between any two points,

Each of the portions, namely with mA  40, 40 < mA < 60, and mA
assembled frontier with the three stitched together need not be.

25

60 will be concave, but the

and thus be weakly concave.
An additional sufficient condition arises from noting that the slope of the frontier
between the points (mA , mB ) = (59, 41) and (mA , mB ) = (60, 40) can be written:

G(59)
G(41)

G(60)
G(40)

=

=
This slope is a weighted average of

⇣

4g(60) 12
4g(41) + 12
⇣
⌘
4g(41) 4g(60)
4g(41) +

4g(60)
4g(41)

⌘

4g(41) +

1
2

1
2

.

and unity. If the weight on the former

term is large enough (in other words, if 4g(41) is large enough relative to 12 ), then this
⌘
⇣
⌘
⇣
4g(59)
and
slope will be between 4g(61)
4g(40)
4g(42) . In this case, the payo↵ frontier becomes

steeper every time a seat is transferred from Party A to Party B, and the payo↵ frontier
is once again concave. This provides the following sufficient condition:
Proposition 13. Let g(m) = Kg ⇤ (m) for g ⇤ increasing and concave and K > 0. Then
there exists a value K̄ such that if K > K̄, the payo↵ frontier is concave.
In other words, if the margin of victory is sufficiently important in the motivations
of the two parties the payo↵ function is concave.
If either of these sufficient conditions is satisfied, then the concavity of the payo↵
function means that all of the analysis and in particular all versions of the swing-state
theorem that hold in the basic model continue to hold in the case of the filibuster.
Summary. The simple model of electoral competition we have presented has a stark
prediction in the case of perfect information: In a pure-strategy equilibrium, policy will
exhibit an extreme swing-state bias; it will maximize the welfare of the swing state (or
the joint welfare of the swing states) without any regard to the well being of voters
living in other states. This pure strategy equilibrium exists in a broad swath of the

26

parameter space. When some noise is added to the model, the e↵ect is softened, and a
partial swing-state bias is possible, which becomes extreme in the limit as the amount
of uncertainty becomes small.

8

Bringing the model to the data.

We wish to look at trade policy to test for swing-state e↵ects as predicted by the
model, but we need to make some additional assumptions about the nature of the
economy in order to be able to do so. One approach is to simplify the economy along
the lines employed by Grossman and Helpman (1994), which allows us to analyze the
equilibrium using partial-equilibrium techniques. This has disadvantages, in that for
example the e↵ect of trade policy on wages and employment is omitted by construction,
a consideration which is central to trade policy politics in practice. But it is simple
and transparent and allows us to focus in a clean way on the di↵erences in industrial
composition across states, and so as a first pass this is the approach that we take.
Assume that all consumers have the same utility function, c0 +⌃i=1,...n U i (ci ), where
ci is consumption of good i, U i is increasing and concave, and c0 is consumption of the
numeraire good 0. Each good is produced with labor and an industry-specific fixed
factor that is in fixed and exogenous quantity in each state, with the exception that
good 0 is produced using labor alone with a constant unit marginal product of labor.
Each state’s labor supply is fixed – labor cannot move from state to state.

Let the sum of indirect utility in state s be given by v(p, Is ), where p is the vector
of domestic prices across all goods and Is is state-wide income. The world price vector
is p⇤ , which we take as given, and the vector of tari↵s is p
10

p⇤ .10 Suppose that the

For a given import-competing industry i, if pi > pi⇤ there is a positive import tari↵, while if pi < pi⇤

27

government maximizes weighted welfare, where the weight on state-s welfare is As ,
with As = 1 if s is a swing state and As =

if s is not a swing state. The objective

function is:
⌃s As [v (p, Rs (p) + ↵s T R(p, p⇤ ))] ,

(8)

where Rs (p) is the state-s revenue function, T R(p, p⇤ ) is national tari↵ revenue, ↵s is
the state-s share of tari↵ revenue, and the summation is over all states.

8.1

Derivation a regression equation.

We now show how this set-up yields an estimating equation. Taking the derivative of
(8) with respect to pi and setting equal to zero yields:
h
⌃s As Q̃is

i
C̃si + ↵s T Ri (p, p⇤ ) = 0,

(9)

where Q̃is and C̃si are the quantities of consumption and production of good i in state
s respectively, and T Ri (p, p⇤ ) is the derivative of tari↵ revenue with respect to pi .
(Throughout, tildes will refer to physical quantities, and the corresponding variables
without tildes will represent values.)

Since tari↵ revenue is given by
T R(p, p⇤ ) = (p

p⇤ )M̃ ,

(10)

where M̃ is the vector of net imports in quantity units, the derivative of tari↵ revenue
there is a negative import tari↵, or an import subsidy. For a given export industry, those two cases represent
an export subsidy and an export tax respectively.

28

is given by
dM̃ i
,
dpi
(pi p⇤i ) pi dM̃ i
= M̃ i + M̃ i
,
pi
M̃ i dpi
✓
✓
◆ ◆
⌧i
⌘i ,
= M̃ i 1 +
1 + ⌧i

T Ri (p, p⇤ ) = M̃ i + (pi

p⇤i )

where ⌧ i is the ad valorem equivalent tari↵ on good i, so ⌧ i =

pi p⇤i
p⇤i

and ⌘ i is the

elasticity of import demand for good i with respect to the price of good i.11

Consequently, we can write the first-order condition:
⌃s As



Q̃is

C̃si

+ ↵s M̃

i

✓

1+

✓

⌧i
1 + ⌧i

◆

⌘

i

◆

= 0.

(11)

Now, multiplying through by pi , we can express the condition in terms of values of
production and consumption of good i in state s, Qis and Csi , respectively, as well as
the value of national imports, M i :

⌃s As



Qis

Csi

+ ↵s M

i

✓

1+

✓

⌧i
1 + ⌧i

◆

⌘

i

◆

= 0.

(12)

Finally, since in this model everyone consumes the same quantity of each nonnumeraire good (assuming away corner solutions), we can write

Csi = ⇢s Qi + M i ,

(13)

where ⇢s is the state-s share of the country’s population and Qi is national production
of good i.
11

For an import-competing industry, M̃ i > 0 and ⌘ i < 0. For an export industry, M̃ i < 0 and ⌘ i > 0.

29

Finally, we reach an estimating equation as follows:


◆ ◆
⌧i
⌃s2S
⌘i
⇢s Q + M + ↵s M 1 +
1 + ⌧i

✓
✓
◆ ◆
⌧i
i
i
i
i
=
⌃s2S
Qs ⇢s Q + M + ↵s M 1 +
⌘i ,
/
1 + ⌧i
Qis

i

i

i

✓

✓

(14)

where S is the set of states that are classified as swing states.
This is a regression equation, without intercept, where each observation is an industry i. The only parameter to be estimated is . The rest is data. A value of
consistent with the extreme swing-state bias of the benchmark model, while 0 <

= 0 is
<1

indicates a partial swing-state bias consistent with the probabilistic model. A value
= 1 would indicate no bias at all, and

> 1 would indicate a bias against the swing

states.
To understand this equation better, we can rewrite it by defining the marginal
benefit to the swing states of an increase in the tari↵ on i, M BiSS , as:
M BiSS ⌘

✓

QiSS
Qi

⇢SS

◆

+

✓

Mi
Qi

◆

(↵SS

⇢SS ) +

✓

Mi
Qi

◆✓

⌧i
1 + ⌧i

◆

⌘ i ↵SS ,

where QiSS = ⌃s2S Qis is swing-state industry-i production and ↵SS ⌘ ⌃s2S ↵s and
⇢SS ⌘ ⌃s2S ⇢s are the aggregate swing-state share of government spending and population respectively. Here we have divided through by the value of industry i output
to scale the expression. The first term can be called the ‘direct redistribution term;’
if the swing-state share of industry-i output (

QiSS
)
Qi

exceeds the swing-state share of

population (⇢SS ), then an increase in the tari↵ on i redistributes real income to swingstate residents by raising swing-state producer surplus more than it lowers swing-state
consumer surplus. The next two terms have to do with tari↵ revenue, and so are proportional to import penetration,

Mi
.
Qi

The first of these terms can be called the ‘fiscal

redistribution term,’ and represents the possibility that the swing-state share of gov-

30

ernment spending (↵SS ) exceeds the swing-state share of population (⇢SS ), so that an
increase in the tari↵ on i will provide an indirect redistribution to swing states through
expenditure. This may not be important in practice, but it has been important at
times in the past, as for example in the early US economy, when low-population western states supported tari↵s because they received vastly disproportionate shares of the
revenues for infrastructure development (Irwin (2008)). The last term is the portion
of the marginal distortion cost of the tari↵ that is borne by swing-state residents. The
aggregate marginal distortion is proportional both to the size of the tari↵ and to the
elasticity of import demand, and swing-state residents’ share of this is equal to their
share of tari↵ revenue, or ↵SS .
We can define M BiN SS analogously as the marginal benefit to non-swing state
residents, by taking the sums over s 2
/ S, and this gives the first-order condition as:

M BiSS =

· M BiN SS .

(15)

The M BiSS and M BiN SS terms can be computed from data. If we find that on the
whole the marginal benefit for swing states is much smaller than for non-swing states,
implying that tari↵s are closer to the swing-state optimum than the non-swing-state
optimum, then that implies a small value of

and a correspondingly large bias towards

swing states.

8.2

A special case.

Of course, the benchmark model with no uncertainty predicts that M BiSS ⌘ 0. In this
case, the tari↵s will satisfy:
✓

⌧i
1+

⌧i

◆

=

⇣

QiSS
Qi

⌘ ⇣ i⌘
(↵SS
⇢SS + M
Qi
⇣ ⌘
Mi
|⌘ i |↵SS
Qi

31

⇢SS )

.

(16)

Industries with disproportionate production in swing states (so that

QiSS
Qi

> ⇢SS )

will tend to receive positive protection, and tari↵s all around will tend to be higher,
the stronger is fiscal redistribution toward swing states (that is, ↵SS

⇢SS ). These

e↵ects will be tempered by high import elasticities (|⌘ i |), but will be accentuated if
the swing-state population (⇢SS ) is small, because in that case swing-state residents
do not much care about the distortion cost of tari↵s.
To anticipate the empirical method, we will see how far we can go in explaining
the pattern of tari↵s with (16), which holds if

= 0. We will argue that this special

case does not fit the data well. The main e↵ort will then be to use (14) as a regression
equation to estimate .

9

Data.

Here we describe the construction and data sources of the variables used to estimate
the model. Our empirical strategy will be described in the following section.

9.1

Swing-state indicators.

States can be classified as swing-states or non-swing states in a variety of ways. Our
main approach is to classify a state as swing if the outcome in its relevant election is
sufficiently close, but this criterion can produce a range of di↵erent classifications, for
two reasons. First, note that a swing state can be defined in principle for any election,
and so there are di↵erent swing-state designations for each election for the Senate,
House of Representatives, and the Presidency. Since we do not have employment figures
by House district, we limit our attention to Senate and Presidential swingness. Second,
we need to choose a cuto↵ for swing status. Since the ideal would be the narrowest
criterion possible that allows enough variation in the variable to allow estimation, in

32

our preferred specification we define a state as a swing state in a given election if the
vote di↵erence between the two major parties is less than 5 percentage points. We
also check robustness with a 10 percentage point criterion. In addition, we try an
alternative criterion, which we can call the ‘switching’ criterion, in which the winning
party in a state election changed at least once over a given period.
What is most important for politicians’ incentives is the anticipated closeness of
a state in an upcoming election. In our simplest baseline model, that is known with
certainty since the µ̄i parameters are known with certainty. Of course, this is an
approximation at best; politicians poll and use informal information-gathering and
experience to judge what the swing states are going to be in any given election, and at
times this assessment will be in error. One can think of the election results as revealing
the ex ante expected swing status of each state up to this forecast error, and hence
a noisy judgment of the swing states that really matters to us. One way of reducing
some of the noisiness is to define swing states based on the average absolute value of
the vote margin over a decade. This is what we have done, resulting in a group of
swing states on average over the 1980’s and also over the 1990’s, using both the 5 and
10 percent thresholds.
Voting data come from the website of the Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives.12 Table 1, Panel A lists the swing states after each presidential election
as well as the “averaged” swing states over the 1990s. Table 1, Panel B lists the swing
states after each senate election every 2 years as well as the “averaged” swing states
over the 1990s. In each case the last column shows the list of swing states based on the
‘switching’ criterion over the 1990’s where available. Note that the list of swing states
12

See http://history.house.gov/Institution/Election-Statistics/Election-Statistics/

33

varies considerably by criterion. For example, Arizona is a swing state in the 1990’s
much more often in presidential elections than in senate elections. Relaxing the criterion from 5% to 10% in any given election tends roughly to double the number of swing
states. Note from Panel A that, averaging over the 1990’s, there are no swing states
using the 5% criterion, and in Panel A the swing-state ‘switching’ criterion is omitted
because there are very few presidential switching states between 1992 and 1996. For
these reasons, our empirical work will use mainly the 5% and 10% presidential, 10%
senate, and senate switching criteria, focussing on the former as a benchmark.
Looking over Table 1, most of the classifications are as one would expect, but there
are also surprises. Some of these are due to the distinction between presidential and
senatorial elections. Following the events of November 2000, we tend to think of Florida
as the quintessential swing state, and it does appear in the list several times, but in the
Senate elections it is more often not a swing state. For example, in 1992 Democratic
Senator Bob Graham won re-election with 65% of the vote. On the other hand, some
readers will be surprised to see Texas in Panel A as a presidential swing state, given
its status as a quintessential Red State. This is likely due to special circumstances
during 1992 and 1996, when Texas businessman Ross Perot ran an unusually successful
independent campaign, winning 22% and 7% of the Texas vote in those two years
respectively, and holding the Republican victory margin in the Texas presidential ballot
to under 5%. By contrast, in 2000, Republican (and Texan) George W. Bush won Texas
by a 21% margin. But Texas is not in the swing-state lists at all for the Senate races.
Another example is California, which as the quintessential Blue State does not show up
in Panel A, but does show up in Panel B because it had some close Senate races. We
allow in our empirical work for both types of swingness to matter, remembering that

34

what matters is not which states are perceived as swing now, but which were perceived
as swing in the mid-1990’s when US tari↵s were re-written.

9.2

Trade barriers.

We use both U.S. Most-Favored Nation (MFN) tari↵s and U.S. tari↵s on goods imported from Mexico as trade barriers for the estimation.
Many empirical studies of trade policy have used non-tari↵ barriers (NTB’s) instead of tari↵s, on the ground that MFN tari↵s are established through international
negotiation and thus cannot reflect domestic political pressures in the way indicated
by simple political-economy models. In particular, both the pioneering papers of Goldberg and Maggi (1999) and Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000) used the 1983 NTB
coverage ratio of an industry – the fraction of products within the industry that were
subject to any NTB in 1983 – as the measure of trade policy. That is not helpful for
our purposes. We wish to exploit the first-order condition (14), which (as summarized
in (15)) is derived from the marginal benefit of a tari↵ increase to either swing-state or
non-swing-state residents. But there is no way to interpret this equation in terms of
the marginal benefit of increasing an industry’s NTB coverage ratio.13 (See Gawande
and Krishna (2003) for discussion of the appropriateness of NTB coverage ratios more
broadly.)
Further, current interpretation of the multilateral process suggests that negotiations
have the e↵ect of neutralizing terms-of-trade externalities across countries, allowing
each national government to choose a politically optimal tari↵ structure subject to the
constraint given by the trading partners’ overall terms of trade (see Bagwell and Staiger
13
Note, for example, that an important part of the first-order condition is the e↵ect of a tari↵ change on
tari↵ revenue, but most NTB’s do not generate revenue. The revenue e↵ects are empirically important, as
noted later in Footnote 20.

35

(1999)). This allows much scope for domestic politics to a↵ect the structure of tari↵s,
even if the overall level of tari↵s is constrained by negotiation. Indeed, Fredriksson et
al (2011) show that the inter-industry pattern of US MFN tari↵s is highly correlated
with domestic political pressures in a way consistent with models of unilateral tari↵
setting.
For these reasons, we use the MFN tari↵s. Now, care must be used in the use
of tari↵s because they are set by Congress, and tari↵ bills are passed infrequently.
Consequently, MFN tari↵s show a great deal of inertia. In any given year, MFN tari↵s
most likely reflect political calculations made when the bill was passed, which many
have been many years ago.14 Our focus is the MFN tari↵s as of 1996, because that
is the first election year after the Uruguay Round reset US trade policy.15 We wish
to examine the e↵ect of political conditions at the time at which tari↵s are set, and
so we use data on political and economic conditions over the 1990’s together with the
1996 tari↵s. The relevance of Presidential elections is clear, since the executive branch
sets the agenda by negotiating the agreement through the US Trade Representative,
appointed by the President, but we allow for Congressional pressure by looking at
swingness in both Senate elections and the Presidential election.
In addition to MFN tari↵s, we use US tari↵s on imports from Mexico in the years
leading up to NAFTA, which were, at the margin, subject to unilateral discretion by
the US government. Before the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
came into force in 1994, the U.S. imposed tari↵s on imports from Mexico that were on
14

A striking example of this tari↵ inertia is Fredriksson, Matschke, and Minier (2011), who measure the
bias in tari↵ setting in favor of the majority party in Congress. The results for 1993 show a positive bias,
but the results for 1997 show a negative bias, as if tari↵s punish the constituents of the party in power. The
explanation is that the tari↵s have barely changed at all between the two years, but in the intervening years
party control of the House had switched.
15
Tari↵s were reset by the Uruguay Round Agreements Act, Public Law 103-465, 108 Stat. 4809, signed
into law by President Clinton on December 8, 1994.

36

average below MFN tari↵s because many goods were duty free due to the Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP). 16 Because eligibility for duty-free access under the GSP
is subject to importing-country discretion, there is potentially more scope for political
influence over tari↵s on Mexican imports than on MFN tari↵s. Both the MFN tari↵s
and the Mexico-specific tari↵s are collected by John Romalis and described in Feenstra,
Romalis, and Schott (2002).
Table 2 shows the means and standard deviations of the Mexico-specific tari↵s from
1989 to 1999 based on the Harmonized System 8-digit code. They started decreasing
before NAFTA, with a small drop from 1990 to 1991 and a large drop from 1993 to
1994. To allow for the possibility that 1993 tari↵s were a↵ected by expectations of the
NAFTA agreement which was then being completed, we employ both tari↵s in 1993
and averaged tari↵s from 1991 to 1993 as the pre-NAFTA Mexico-specific tari↵s.

9.3

Other variables

We use aggregate income in industry i in state s to proxy for the value of output of
industry i in state s, Qis . This is the aggregate of the TOTINC variable, total personal
income, of the US Census, for all workers employed in i and residing in s. This variable
is taken from the IPUMS public-use micro-samples from the U.S. Census (Ruggles et.
al., 2010). Because of this, we are limited to the Census’ industry categories. Therefore,
we aggregate MFN tari↵s and pre-NAFTA Mexico-specific tari↵s up to the Census
categories by computing the import-weighted average of all tari↵s in each industry.
Import data are downloaded from the Center for International Trade Data at U.C.
Davis.17
16

See Hakobyan (2015) for an analysis of the GSP, and Hakobyan and McLaren (2016) for a discussion of
the GSP in the case of Mexico and how tari↵s changed with the NAFTA.
17
See http://cid.econ.ucdavis.edu/.

37

The Census has a number of advantages over a potential alternative, the County
Business Patterns (CBP), for our purposes. For example, if a worker commutes to
work across a state line, his/her earnings will be reported in the county where the
workplace is located for the CBP, but will be listed in the state where the worker lives
for the Census. But as a voter, where the worker lives is what matters. These e↵ects
may be very important quantitatively; many of the Labor-Market Areas constructed
in Tolbert and Sizer (1996), for example, cross state lines, implying large numbers of
workers who commute to jobs in a state other than their state of residence. In addition,
the CBP data report only payroll income; an owner-operated firm will have profits that
are not part of the payroll, but should be part of the income variable reported in the
Census. An additional problem is the large number of industry-state observations for
which the CBP suppresses number of workers and all payroll information because of
confidentiality constraints.
The state share of national population is calculated by dividing state s’s population
by total population, which can be found on the website of Federal Reserve Bank of
Saint Louis, sourced to the Population Estimates Branch of the U.S. Bureau of the
Census.18 The state share of tari↵ revenue is approximated by the central government
spending share of state s. The government spending information is also from the U.S.
Census.
Lastly, elasticities of import demand for good i are from Kee, Nicita, and Olarreaga
(2009).
18

See http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2.

38

10

Empirical Analysis.

Our empirical strategy is as follows. If the simplest version of the story as laid out in
the model of Sections 2 to 6 is correct, then (16) will predict tari↵s, and we can explain
tari↵s with the disproportionate production e↵ect and the fiscal bias e↵ect, scaled by
imports and import elasticities. We first examine how well these terms predict tari↵s,
and how well the optimal tari↵ as predicted by (16) fits the observed pattern of tari↵s
across industries. We will argue that these two components do have explanatory power,
providing evidence of a swing-state e↵ect, but that the optimal tari↵s as given by (16)
predict observed tari↵s poorly, in a way that suggests that the bias toward swing
states is not as extreme as predicted in the simplest model. We accordingly use (14)
to estimate the value of the partial bias, , as in the probabilistic model.

10.1

The redistribution and distortion terms separately.

First, consider the benchmark model with no uncertainty and

= 0, so that (16) ap-

plies. Apart from the ↵SS factor in the denominator which is common to all industries,
the equilibrium tari↵ in industry i is an increasing function of the disproportionate production of industry-i output in swing states:
✓

QiSS
Qi

⇢SS

◆

(17)

and the fiscal bias term:
✓

Mi
Qi

◆

(↵SS

⇢SS ) ,

(18)

but a decreasing function of the distortion term:
✓

Mi
Qi

◆

39

|⌘ i |.

(19)

As a first exploration, we ask to what extent these terms are correlated with variation
in tari↵s across industries. The results are summarized in Table 3.
To illustrate how these are related to tari↵s in the data, consider the case of the 5%
Presidential swing criterion. The disproportionate production term varies widely. To
take the example of the presidential 5% swing criterion, the term varies from
“Photographic equipment and supplies” and

20% for

13% for “Drugs” to 35% for “Carpets

and Rugs” and 61% for “Tobacco manufactures”. The median value is 0.0% and the
standard deviation is 12%. The first column of Table 3 lists the simple correlation of the
tari↵s by industry with the disproportionate production term for di↵erent swing-state
criteria, first for the 5% and 10% presidential criteria (first eight rows), then for the
10% senate criterion (next four) and ‘switching’ criterion (last four). For each criterion,
the four rows show respectively results for the 1996 MFN tari↵s; 1990’s tari↵s averaged;
the 1993 pre-NAFTA tari↵s on Mexico; and the tari↵s on Mexico averaged over 1991-3.
Clearly, across the board, the disproportionate-production term is positively correlated
with the industry tari↵. The correlation ranges from 6.5% to 25%, with a median of
18%.
The second column of Table 3 shows the same calculation for the fiscal bias term
(18). The value of ↵SS

⇢SS is about 3.4%, implying that swing states tend to receive

somewhat more federal spending than their share of population, so the fiscal-bias term
is higher for industries with higher levels of import penetration. The values range from
essentially zero for “Newspaper publishing and printing” and “Coal mining” to 16% for
“Radio, TV, and communication equipment” and 20% for “Footwear, except rubber
and plastic.” The median value is 3% and the standard deviation is 4% (much smaller
than the standard deviation of disproportionate production). Here, the correlation

40

with tari↵s ranges from 22% to 26%, with a median of 25%.
The third column shows the correlation of tari↵s with the distortion term

⇣

Mi
Qi

⌘

|⌘ i |.

Other things equal, (16) implies that a higher value for the distortion term should be
associated with a lower tari↵. The correlations are all small but are a mix of positive
and negative, ranging from

4% to 1%.

These simple correlations do show a prima facie, if suggestive, case for a swing-state
bias. Industry tari↵s tend to be higher in industries whose output is disproportionately concentrated in swing states and industries with a greater potential to generate
redistributable revenue (which goes disproportionately to swing states), and lower in
industries with greater distortionary e↵ects.

10.2

The optimal tari↵ with an extreme swing-state bias.

We now put these terms together to form the optimal tari↵ under the assumption of
an extreme swing-state bias, as in the benchmark model. We compute the right-hand
side of (16) for each tari↵ and swing-state criterion as described above, and list these
correlations in the fourth column of Table 3. If the model fit exactly, the correlation
would be 100%. We see a mix of positive and negative correlations, with none above
11% and most of them quite small. Evidently the extreme-bias model is a very poor
predictor of overall tari↵s.
To see why this occurs, take the example of 1996 MFN tari↵s with the 5% presidential criterion for the 1990’s. If we call the values on the right-hand side of (16)
the ‘predicted’ tari↵19 under the case of extreme swing-state bias, then plotting the
predicted tari↵ against the actual tari↵ produces Figure 4. The ‘predicted’ tari↵s vary
19

The quotation marks are warranted because the right-hand side of (16) is largely made up of variables
whose values are themselves a↵ected by the tari↵, such as M i .

41

from

168% for “Printing, publishing, and allied industries, except newspapers” and

114% for “Newspaper publishing and printing” to 180% for “Coal mining” and 184%
for “Tires and inner tubes.” These figures clearly vary over an enormous range, although all but those four industries lie within

43% and 55%. This variation is driven

largely by the di↵erences in the disproportionate-production term. For Tires, this term
takes a value of 17%, meaning that swing states’ share of national tire production exceeds their share of national population by 17 percentage points, a figure driven partly
by swing-state Ohio with 17% of national tire production and only 4% of national
population. For Coal Mining the figure is 11%, driven partly by Kentucky (a swing
state in presidential elections in the 1990’s), with 18% of national coal production and
only 1% of the national population. For Printing, the disproportionate production is
4%, and for Newspapers

1%. Production in these industries is disproportionately

located in the blue states of New York, California, Illinois, and Massachusetts.
If the government’s sole aim was to raise swing-state welfare, it would use these
four industries as a very efficient lever to transfer wealth aggressively to those states
from the rest of the country, using a high positive tari↵ on the first two and a high
negative tari↵ on the latter two. The fact that it does not do so is a strong piece of
evidence against the hypothesis that

= 0. Indeed, the observed tari↵s on these four

industries do not exceed 3.5% (and of course there are no negative tari↵s at all in the
data).
If those four industries are removed from the data, the fit of equation (16) improves,
with a stronger positive correlation, as shown in Figure 5, but the basic point remains.
Actual tari↵s have a much narrower range than the predicted tari↵s, and appear to
respond positively to swing-state incentives but much more weakly than predicted by

42

(16). The hypothesis of an extreme bias is not consistent with the observed structure
of tari↵s. We move now to estimating how much of a bias actually is consistent with
the data.

10.3

Estimating a partial swing-state bias.

We wish to estimate the weight,

, that is placed by the political process on voters

in non-swing states. We do this in two ways, both using the first-order condition (15)
(or equivalently, (14)). First, we use (14) as a regression equation, and then we use
it to compute the implied value of

in each industry individually. Each of these two

methods can generate many di↵erent estimates based on which criterion for swing state
is used. Rather than pick our favorite estimate and present that to the reader, we will
show a range of estimates, which in some cases conflict with each other, and then
summarize the main story that emerges.
To use (14) as a regression equation, we treat each industry in each year as an observation. The regressand is the marginal benefit of an increase in the tari↵ on industry
i to the swing states, and the sole regressor is minus one times the marginal benefit of
the tari↵ increase to the non-swing states. The coefficient is then the estimated value
of . Note that it is important that there be no intercept, because that would violate
the first-order condition that comes from the theory. The implied error subsumes all
factors that di↵er across industries that are not in the model but that might a↵ect
tari↵ formation, such as di↵erences in enforceability of tari↵s, and measurement error.

43

10.4 MFN tari↵s and preferential tari↵s on Mexican imports.
The regression results are given in Tables 4 through 8. Each of these tables is based
on one swing-state criterion. Tables 4, 5, 7, and 8 are based on the 5% and 10% presidential, 10% senate and switching criteria respectively. In each table, the first four
columns show the estimates of

from (14) as a regression equation, using respectively

the 1996 MFN tari↵s; tari↵s averaged over the 1990’s; the pre-NAFTA tari↵s on Mexico; and the tari↵s on Mexico averaged over 1991-3. As a robustness exercise, Table 6
allows for the value of

to vary by year, and uses the year-by-year varying swing-state

indicators from Table 1. Coefficients significantly di↵erent from zero are marked by
asterisks, while those significantly di↵erent from 1 (indicating a swing-state bias) are
marked with a dagger.
All estimates lie strictly between 0 and 1, with both

= 0 and

= 1 rejected. The

estimates vary from 0.196 (for the 5% senate criterion for 1998 in Table 6) and 0.782
(for the 1993 pre-NAFTA tari↵s with the ‘switching’ criterion in Table 8). Since any
estimate below

= 1 implies a swing-state bias, clearly, the estimates imply a strong

bias. At the same time, since the estimates are all significantly di↵erent from zero,
the extreme bias of the benchmark model with no uncertainty is also rejected. The
estimated swing-state bias tends to be somewhat weaker for the pre-NAFTA tari↵s on
Mexico and for the less strict swing-state criteria (10% instead of 5%). No obvious
time trend is revealed by the year-by-year estimates in Table 6.
Now, a major concern is measurement error, particularly with regard to the elasticities of import demand, which are difficult to estimate. If all terms of (14) are measured
with an iid error, then the estimator for

will tend to be biassed toward zero. For

44

this reason, it is conceivable that we would find a spurious swing-state bias that is
really simply the result of classical errors-in-variables attenuation. If we had available
variables that are highly correlated with the right-hand-side of (14) but uncorrelated
with the measurement error, we could use them as instrumental variables, but such
variables are difficult to come by in this context. Another way of dealing with this
is to use what we will call a ‘reverse regression.’ We divide both sides of (14) by
and make the right-hand side, with the non-swing-state variables, into the regressand,
while the left-hand side with the swing-state variables takes the role of the regressor.
Under this approach, the regression coefficient is interpreted as

1,

and a swing-state

bias is indicated by a value of the coefficient in excess of 1. Since the classical errors-invariables bias will also bias this coefficient toward zero, if the reverse regression yields
estimates that exceed unity, we can take this as strong evidence in favor of a swingstate bias. The results of this reverse regression are reported in the last four columns
of Tables 4 through 8, which have the same format as the first four columns, and also
use daggers to indicate a significant di↵erence from unity. A value slightly below unity
is found for the 1996 MFN tari↵s with the 10% senate criterion in Table 7, and three
values fall below unity in the senate criterion in the last two columns of Table 6, but
all other point estimates are above 1.
The various estimates from the regression approach are summarized in Figure 6.
Each point in the scatter plot is a pair of estimates for

from the first two panels of

Tables 4 through 8, where the horizontal axis measures the ‘regular regression’ estimate
from the first four columns of the table and the vertical axis measures the ‘reversed
regression’ estimate from the last four columns (that is, the vertical component of
each point is the reciprocal of the corresponding regression coefficient in the reversed

45

regression). The 45 line is drawn as a dotted line, and the horizontal line is at the value
= 1. The fact that every point is above the 45 line is evidence that measurement
error is indeed a problem. Note that only four estimates are in excess of

= 1.

If one assumes that in each case the true value must lie between the basic estimate
and the reverse-regression estimate, then in each case but those four the true value is
indicated as within the unit interval, and in those four cases the midpoint between the
two estimates is well within the unit interval. The median of all of these estimates is
= 0.76.
Stepping away from the regression approach, the second approach to measuring
the bias is a straightforward industry-by-industry calculation. In any industry i where
M BiSS and M BiN SS are of opposite signs,
timization. These implied values of

M BiSS
M BiN SS

is the value of

implied by op-

of course vary from one industry to the next

– which would be the case even if the model held exactly, given the likely presence
of measurement error – so we present both a mean and a median to summarize the
results. This is detailed in Table 9. Because of outliers the mean values are erratic,
but the median is always strictly between zero and unity, with a median value of 0.784.
To summarize, although it is possible to find formulations of the problem for which
the estimate of

exceeds unity, the overwhelming tendency is for it to lie strictly

between 0 and 1. This provides evidence in favor of a swing-state bias in trade policy, of
the moderate sort predicted by the probabilistic voting model rather than the extreme
sort predicted by the benchmark model.20
20

Since tari↵ revenue is an unimportant source of funds in modern central government financing, it is
natural to ask whether these results are driven at all by the portions of M BiSS that capture revenue e↵ects
(the last two terms, multiplied by M i ) or are driven purely by the disproportionate-production e↵ect (the
first term). It turns out that the revenue terms really do matter. If we repeat the empirical procedures
omitting the revenue terms, the estimates are more erratic, with numerous estimates of in excess of 1. As
much as tari↵ revenues make up an insignificant fraction of government finances, at the margin tari↵ revenue
does seem to be relevant in determining the level of each individual tari↵. This is consistent with Matschke

46

10.5

Summary of Empirical Results.

Simple correlations show strong circumstantial evidence of a swing-state bias in trade
policy. Both MFN and pre-NAFTA discretionary Mexico tari↵s are higher for industries disproportionately located in swing states and for industries with higher import
penetration (which is consistent with a swing-state bias, given that those industries
have a greater potential for generating tari↵ revenue, and swing states tend to receive
more than their share of federal revenues). At the same time, industries with a higher
potential for distortion due to very elastic import demand tend to have lower tari↵s.
All of this is consistent with a model such as our benchmark in which policy makers
ignore non-swing-state welfare; however, a closer examination of the pattern of tari↵s
indicates that, in order to be produced by that model, tari↵s would need to be much
more aggressively used than they are.
Consequently, we estimated a model in which tari↵s are chosen to maximize a social
welfare function that puts some weight, , on non-swing-state welfare, as is suggested
by a version of the swing-state model with probabilistic election outcomes, and we
estimate what the weight is by making use of the first-order condition for the optimal
tari↵ vector. Using a wide range of swing-state criteria and estimation methods, we
find that the value for

most consistent with the data is typically strictly between

zero and unity. For our two broad approaches, we arrive at median values of 0.76, and
0.78 respectively, so we may well adopt 0.77 as a rule of thumb benchmark estimate.
It may be of interest to compare this exercise with estimates of the social welfare
weight in the protection-for-sale literature. In Grossman and Helpman (1994)’s notation, the equilibrium tari↵s maximize an objective function that is the sum of (i)
(2008), who finds that revenue considerations have explanatory power for the pattern of US tari↵s.

47

welfare of the interest groups buying protection, and (ii) total social welfare multiplied
by a weight equal to a > 0. A strong bias toward the interest groups would be indicated
by a value of a close to zero, while as a ! 1 the equilibrium policy converges to social
welfare maximization, hence free trade. Estimates of a have tended to find very large
values, often above 100 and even above 3,000 (see Gawande and Krishna (2003), who
point out that the high values are ‘troubling’ especially in face of how little interest
groups pay for the protection they receive). For example, Goldberg and Maggi (1999)
find estimates equivalent to approximately a = 50 to a = 70.21 We can compare those
results directly with ours as follows. In our notation, the equilibrium tari↵ maximizes
the sum of (i) swing-state welfare with (ii) non-swing-state welfare multiplied by
That can be equivalently written as swing-state welfare times (1

.

) plus total social

welfare times . Maximizing this is equivalent to maximizing swing-state welfare plus
total social welfare times

(1

).

Therefore, our

Helpman a. Given a benchmark estimate of

(1

)

corresponds to the Grossman-

= 0.77, this then takes a value of

0.77/0.23 = 3.5, as compared with estimates of a in the triple digits. Therefore, our
estimates provide a picture of swing-state bias that is orders of magnitude greater than
the interest-group bias implied by empirical protection-for-sale models. One interpretation is that the swing-state model is more useful than a protection-for-sale model in
understanding departures of US trade policy from free trade.

11

Conclusion.

We have studied a model of electoral competition in which national election victory
depends on winning a majority of states or electoral votes, and where states di↵er in
21

In their notation, is the weight on welfare for groups outside of organized lobbies, and groups in a
lobby receive a weight of 1. Their estimates range from = 0.981 to 0.986.

48

their degree of inherent partisan bias. In the simplest version of the model with no
uncertainty and one ‘swing state,’ which has no partisan bias at all, the only equilibrium
in pure strategies is one in which both parties commit to the policy that maximizes
welfare in the swing state, ignoring the welfare of all other states. This can be called
an ‘extreme swing-state bias.’ This equilibrium exists if the partisan bias of the other
states is strong enough or if the economic interests of the various states are not too
di↵erent. A richer version of the model with uncertainty added allows for a partial
swing-state bias, converging to the equilibrium with the extreme bias in the limit as
the uncertainty becomes vanishingly small.
Looking at data on US trade policy, both MFN tari↵s and preferential tari↵s on
imports from Mexico for the 1990’s, we find evidence that US trade policy exhibits a
strong bias in favor of citizens who live in swing states. We reject the extreme swingstate bias, but our estimates imply a welfare weight for citizens living outside of swing
states equal to about 77% of that for swing-state residents. This implies a bias orders
of magnitude greater than the bias estimated in numerous studies based on lobbying
models, suggesting that electoral pressures such as studied here may be a much larger
driver of trade policy than lobbying.
Finally, this all may have implications for proposals to reform or abolish the electoral
college, which has become an increasingly frequent topic of debate in the US following
a presidential election in 2000 and another in 2016 in which the candidate with the
most votes lost the election.22 Moving to a system in which the national vote total
determines the winner of the election (or equivalently, a system in which electoral
votes for each state are awarded in proportion to the share of the state’s vote) would
22

See Michelle Goldberg, “Tyranny of the Minority,” New York Times, September 25, 2017, for example.

49

move the system much closer to the basic Lindbeck and Weibull (1993) model. This in
general creates its own policy bias, if the distribution of partisan preferences is di↵erent
for voters with di↵erent economic interests, but it is possible that the policy outcome
would be very di↵erent from the current swing-state-favoring outcome.23 An analysis
of the outcome from that change lies beyond the scope of this paper, but identifying
the bias of the current system ought to be a useful first step.24

12

Appendix

Proof of Lemma 2.
Proof. The only part of the statement that requires proof is that the Pareto frontier
is concave, which requires checking because of the jump in G(m) at m = M/2. We
treat the case where M is even; the odd case is a trivial extension. For mA + 1 < M/2
(corresponding to the lower-right side of Figure 1), the slope of the frontier, or the
change in party-A welfare per unit change in party-B welfare when we transfer one
seat from B to A, is given by:

G(mA + 1)
G(M mA 1)
where 4g(m) = g(m)

g(m

G(mA )
=
G(M mA )

4g(mA + 1)
,
4g(M mA )

1). This slope is negative and greater than unity in

absolute value, and declines in magnitude as mA rises, due to the concavity of g. The
23

Consider the following stark example. There are two partisan states, A and B, and one swing state, C.
States A and B have the same economic structure and so the same tari↵ preferences. State C has a di↵erent
economic structure. States A and B have equal and opposition partisan preferences: Partisan preferences
for each economic type in A are distributed uniformly between
and 0, and in B between 0 and , where
> 0. In C, partisan preferences are distributed uniformly between
and . In the present model, if
there is an equilibrium in pure strategies, the swing-state welfare-maximizing tari↵ will be implemented,
which will be the tari↵ vector that maximizes C welfare. But if the electoral college is eliminated, partisan
preferences will have, for each economic type, mean zero and the same distribution, and so the Lindbeck
and Weibull (1993) equilibrium will maximize national social welfare.
24
Note that even with the electoral college abolished, the bias revealed in the Senate would remain.

50

slope from point mA = M/2

G(M/2)
G(M/2)

1 to mA = M/2 is given by:

G(M/2 1)
G(M/2 + 1)

=

=

4g(M/2) + 12
4g(M/2 + 1)) + 12
⇣
⌘
4g(M/2)
4g(M/2 + 1) 4g(M/2+1)
+

1
2

.
4g(M/2 + 1) + 12
⌘
⇣
4g(M/2)
> 1 and unity, and so by the
This is ( 1) times a weighted average of 4g(M/2+1)

concavity of g it is smaller in magnitude than any of the slopes with mA + 1 < M/2.
Thus, the slope of the frontier declines in magnitude from mA = 0 to mA = M/2, and
by similar logic it is straightforward that the slope continues to decrease to the point
at which mA = M . Thus, the frontier is concave.
Proof of Proposition 11.
Proof. The first part of the proof follows the proof of Lindbeck and Weibull (1993),
Proposition 1. If we define G̃Pk ⌘ GP (t⇤ , t⇤ ; µ̂k ,

k)

as the ‘natural payo↵s’ for P = A, B,

then it is easy to see that for any k, in any pure-strategy equilibrium, the payo↵s will be
the natural payo↵s. Since each party always has the option of choosing the other party’s
policy vector, each party must receive at least its natural payo↵ in equilibrium; but
since the payo↵s have a constant sum, this also ensures that each party will receive no
more than its natural payo↵. Now, suppose that for some k there is an equilibrium, say
B
A
B
A A B
(tA
k , tk ), with tk 6= tk . This implies that G (tk , tk ; µ̂k ,

k)

B
= GA (tA
k , tk ; µ̂k ,

k)

= G̃A
k.

B
But then by quasi-concavity, any choice for tA that is a weighted average of tA
k and tk

must give party A a strictly higher payo↵. This is a contradiction, so only symmetric
B
equilibria are possible, say (tA
k , tk ) = (tk , tk ).

Now, suppose that there is a value ✏ > 0 such that |tk

t⇤ | > ✏8k. If we adopt the

notation that ⇡1i (tA , tB ; µ̂i , ) refers to the gradient of the ⇡ i function with respect to

51

the tA vector and ⇡2i the gradient with respect to the tB vector, then ⇡1i (tk , tk ; µ̂i , ) =
⇢( µ̂i ;

k )Wt (tk , i).

This takes a limit of 0 as k ! 1 for i 6= i⇤ , because ⇢( µ̂i ;
⇤

(since µ̂i 6= 0). But since ⇢( µ̂ik ;

k)

⇤

⇤

! 1 as k ! 1, ⇡1i (tk , tk ; µ̂i ,

k)

k)

!0

does not

converge to 0. (If it did, then we could find a subsequence of tk that converges to
a policy vector t̂ with |t̂

t⇤ | > ✏ and Wt (t̂, i⇤ ) = 0. But this would contradict the

regularity of W (t, i⇤ ).) As a result, eventually the first-order condition will fail for both
parties, contradicting the assumption that this was an equilibrium.

52

53

States based on the
“Presidential 5%” standard
AZ, CO, FL, GA, KY, LA, MT, NC, NH,
NJ, NV, OH, SD, TN, TX, VA, WI
AZ, CO, GA, KY, MT, NC, NV, SD,
TN, TX, VA
AZ, CO, FL, GA, KY, MT, NC, NV,
OH, SD, TN, TX, VA

States based on the “Presidential 10%”
standard (excluding those in Column 2)
AK, AL, CT, DE, IA, IN, KS, ME,
MI, MS, NM, OK, OR, PA, SC, WV
AL, FL, IN, MO, MS, ND, NH, NM,
OH, OK, OR, PA, SC
AL, IA, IN, LA, MO, MS, ND, NH,
NM, OK, OR, PA, SC, WI, WY

Note: The first two rows show the swing states based on the criterion that a state is swing if the di↵erence in votes received by
the two parties is below 5% or 10% in the Presidential elections in 1992 and 1996. The last row shows the swing states based
on the average absolute value of the vote di↵erence over the 1990’s. States listed in Column (1) are omitted from Column (2)
to save space.

Averaged 1990s

1996

1992

Year

Table 1: List of Swing States
Panel A: Based on Presidential Elections

54

States based on the “Senate 10%”
standard (excluding those in Column 2)
CA, HI, IA, IN, NC, OR, SD
CO, IL, MO, OH, OR, WA, WI
CO, IL, MI, NE, NM, NV, OR, VT
AL, AR, CO, IA, ME, MN,
NC, NV, SC, VA, VT
GA, ME, MN, MO, NY, SC, VA
CA, MA, MN, NC, NJ, NV
-

States based on the
“Senate 5%” standard
CT, FL, KY, MN, NJ, NV, WA, WI
GA, MN, NC, NH, NJ, NY, PA, SC
CA, GA, MN, NC, NH, NJ, PA, SC, VA
CA, GA, LA, MA, MT,
NH, OR, PA, SD
IL, KY, MA, NC, NV, WI
None
-

AL, AR, AZ, CA, CO, DE, FL, GA, IA, IL, IN,
KY, MI, MN, MT, NC, NE, NM, NY, OH,
OK, OR, RI, SC, SD, TN, VA, VT, WA

States based on party
switching standard
-

Note: The first five rows show the swing states based on the criterion that a state is swing if the di↵erence in votes received
by the two parties is below 5% or 10% in the indicated Senate elections from 1990 to 1998. The sixth row shows the swing
states based on the average absolute value of the vote di↵erence over the 1990’s. The last row shows swing states based on the
‘switching’ criterion. States listed in Column (1) are omitted from Column (2) to save space.

1998
Averaged 1990s
1990-1998
Window

1996

1990
1992
1994

Year

Table 1: List of Swing States
Panel B: Based on Senate Elections

Table 2: Statistics of Pre-NAFTA Mexican Tari↵s

1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999

Observations
8,382
8,439
8,485
8,502
8,508
8,497
9,498
7,690
8,011
7,875
6,657

Mean
0.034
0.034
0.032
0.032
0.031
0.023
0.018
0.017
0.013
0.008
0.005

Standard Deviation
0.064
0.064
0.063
0.063
0.063
0.055
0.053
0.038
0.031
0.024
0.019

Note: This table contains the mean and standard deviation of the Mexico-specific tari↵s
from 1989 to 1999, based on the Harmonized System 8-digit code. As shown, Mexican tari↵s
started falling before NAFTA was launched. There was a small drop from 1990 to 1991 and
a large drop from 1993 to 1994. The values from 1991 to 1993 are similar.

55

56

0.224
0.262
0.24
0.249
0.225
0.263
0.242
0.251
0.225
0.263
0.241
0.25
0.225
0.263
0.243
0.252

0.141
0.12
0.202
0.198
0.226
0.252
0.245
0.25
0.154
0.135
0.065
0.083

(2)
Fiscal Redistribution
Term

0.165
0.146
0.22
0.218

(1)
Disproportionate Production
Term

0.01
0.014
-0.037
-0.04

0.01
0.014
-0.037
-0.04

0.01
0.014
-0.037
-0.04

0.01
0.014
-0.037
-0.04

(3)
Import Distortion
Term

-0.143
-0.153
-0.098
-0.089

-0.069
-0.069
-0.015
-0.016

0.001
-0.005
0.018
0.028

0.108
0.105
0.084
0.097

(4)
‘Predicted’ tari↵
With Extreme Bias

Note: This table shows the correlation of tari↵s with the three terms of the optimal tari↵ expression under an extreme swingstate bias, as shown in equation (16). Each row reports the results of a sample using di↵erent trade barriers and swing-state
criteria. Data, apart from tari↵s, are averaged over the 1990s. The last column shows the correlation between the right-hand
side of (16) (the ‘predicted’ tari↵ with an extreme swing-state bias) and the left-hand side, the actual tari↵.

(1) 5% Presidential Swing Criterion
Using MFN tari↵ in 1996
Using averaged MFN tari↵ in 1990-1996
Using Mexican tari↵ in 1993
Using averaged Mexican tari↵ in 1991-1993
(2) 10% Presidential Swing Criterion
Using MFN tari↵ in 1996
Using averaged MFN tari↵ in 1990-1996
Using Mexican tari↵ in 1993
Using averaged Mexican tari↵ in 1991-1993
(3) 10% Senate Swing Criterion
Using MFN tari↵ in 1996
Using averaged MFN tari↵ in 1990-1996
Using Mexican tari↵ in 1993
Using averaged Mexican tari↵ in 1991-1993
(4) ’Switching’ Swing Criterion
Using MFN tari↵ in 1996
Using averaged MFN tari↵ in 1990-1996
Using Mexican tari↵ in 1993
Using averaged Mexican tari↵ in 1991-1993

Correlation of Tari↵ With:

Table 3: Analysis of the Extreme Swing-State Bias Case.

57

Averaged
Mexican Tari↵
in 1991-1993
0.404†††
(0.149)***
0.478
79

MFN
Tari↵
in 1996
1.132
(0.153)***
0.372
79

Averaged
Mexican Tari↵
in 1991-1993
1.182
(0.163)***
0.478
79

Note: This table presents the estimates of from regression (15) using: MFN tari↵s in 1996; MFN tari↵s averaged over the
1990s; tari↵s on imports from Mexico in 1993; and tari↵s on imports from Mexico averaged over 1991-1993. The swing-state
criterion is the 5% Presidential standard, and the other variables in (14) are averaged over the 1990’s. Columns (1)-(4) present
the basic regressions and Columns (5)-(8) present the reversed regressions. The notations ***, **, * indicate the significance of
regression coefficients at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, while †††, ††, † indicate the significance of rejection of the Wald test on the
hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to 1 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

R2 (within)
Number of Observations

Estimate of .

MFN
Tari↵
in 1996
0.329†††
(0.137)**
0.372
79

Reversed Regressions
Averaged
Mexican
MFN Tari↵
Tari↵
in 1988-1996
in 1993
1.155
1.168
(0.166)***
(0.151)***
0.390
0.491
79
79

Using 5% Presidential Swing-state Criterion.

Basic Regressions
Averaged
Mexican
MFN Tari↵
Tari↵
in 1988-1996
in 1993
0.337†††
0.421†††
(0.135)**
(0.159)**
0.390
0.491
79
79

Table 4: Estimated

58

Averaged
Mexican Tari↵
in 1991-1993
0.646†††
(0.115)***
0.750
79

MFN
Tari↵
in 1996
1.215†
(0.123)***
0.691
79

Averaged
Mexican Tari↵
in 1991-1993
1.162†
(0.094)***
0.750
79

Note: This table presents the estimates of from regression (15) using: MFN tari↵s in 1996; MFN tari↵s averaged over the
1990s; tari↵s on imports from Mexico in 1993; and tari↵s on imports from Mexico averaged over 1991-1993. The swing-state
criterion is the 10% Presidential standard, and the other variables in (14) are averaged over the 1990’s. Columns (1)-(4) present
the basic regressions and Columns (5)-(8) present the reversed regressions. The notations ***, **, * indicate the significance of
regression coefficients at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, while †††, ††, † indicate the significance of rejection of the Wald test on the
hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to 1 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

R2 (within)
Number of Observations

Estimate of .

MFN
Tari↵
in 1996
0.568†††
(0.119)***
0.691
79

Reversed Regressions
Averaged
Mexican
MFN Tari↵
Tari↵
in 1988-1996
in 1993
1.214†
1.121
(0.124)***
(0.077)***
0.700
0.753
79
79

Using 10% Presidential Swing-State Criterion.

Basic Regressions
Averaged
Mexican
MFN Tari↵
Tari↵
in 1988-1996
in 1993
0.576†††
0.672†††
(0.116)***
(0.121)***
0.700
0.753
79
79

Table 5: Estimated

59
0.711
395

Senate 10%
Swing-state
FOCs
0.697†††
(0.106)***
0.618†††
(0.101)***
0.627†††
(0.0806)***
0.616†††
(0.115)***
0.470†††
(0.110)***

By Year.
Reversed Regressions
Presidential 10% Senate 5%
Swing-state
Swing-state
FOCs
FOCs
0.700
(0.240)***
1.044
1.162†††
1.311
(0.119)***
(0.0433)***
(0.206)***
1.307
(0.198)***
1.031
1.345†
0.985
(0.254)***
(0.179)***
(0.199)***
1.036
(0.323)***
Swing-state FOC * Year dummies
0.437
0.816
0.533
158
158
395
Presidential 5%
Swing-state
FOCs

0.708
395

Senate 10%
Swing-state
FOCs
0.964
(0.099)***
1.236††
(0.115)***
1.308†††
(0.064)***
1.085
(0.180)***
1.267†
(0.150)***

Note: This table presents the estimates of from regression (15) using MFN tari↵s year by year during the 1990’s. The
swing-state criterion is the 5% or 10% Presidential standard or the 5% or 10% Senate standard, depending on which elections
were held in each year. Columns (1)-(4) present the basic regressions and Columns (5)-(8) present the reversed regressions. The
notations ***, **, * indicate the significance of regression coefficients at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, while †††, ††, † indicate the
significance of rejection of the Wald test on the hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to 1 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Fixed E↵ects
R2 (within)
Number of Observations

Year1998

Year1996

Year1994

Year1992

Year1990

Presidential 5%
Swing-state
FOCs

Basic Regressions
Presidential 10% Senate 5%
Swing-state
Swing-state
FOCs
FOCs
0.358†††
(0.170)***
0.471†††
0.761†††
0.564†††
(0.161)***
(0.065)***
(0.0725)***
0.537†††
(0.0857)***
0.385†††
0.530†††
0.500†††
(0.136)***
(0.100)***
(0.151)***
0.196†††
(0.104)*
Non-swing-state FOC * Year dummies
0.441
0.836
0.564
158
158
395

Table 6: Estimated

60

Averaged
Mexican Tari↵
in 1991-1993
0.622††
(0.157)***
0.643
79

MFN
Tari↵
in 1996
0.986
(0.186)***
0.549
79

Averaged
Mexican Tari↵
in 1991-1993
1.034
(0.111)***
0.643
79

Note: This table presents the estimates of from regression (15) using: MFN tari↵s in 1996; MFN tari↵s averaged over the
1990s; tari↵s on imports from Mexico in 1993; and tari↵s on imports from Mexico averaged over 1991-1993. The swing-state
criterion is the 10% Senate standard, and the other variables in (14) are averaged over the 1990’s. Columns (1)-(4) present
the basic regressions and Columns (5)-(8) present the reversed regressions. The notations ***, **, * indicate the significance of
regression coefficients at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, while †††, ††, † indicate the significance of rejection of the Wald test on the
hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to 1 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

R2 (within)
Number of Observations

Estimate of .

MFN
Tari↵
in 1996
0.556†††
(0.145)***
0.549
79

Reversed Regressions
Averaged
Mexican
MFN Tari↵
Tari↵
in 1990-1996
in 1993
1.030
1.022
(0.164)***
(0.094)***
0.575
0.654
79
79

Using 10% Senate Swing-state Criterion.

Basic Regressions
Averaged
Mexican
MFN Tari↵
Tari↵
in 1990-1996
in 1993
0.558†††
0.640††
(0.143)***
(0.167)***
0.575
0.654
79
79

Table 7: Estimated

61

Averaged
Mexican Tari↵
in 1991-1993
0.755†††
(0.073)***
0.878
79

MFN
Tari↵
in 1996
1.294†††
(0.063)***
0.868
79

Averaged
Mexican Tari↵
in 1991-1993
1.164†††
(0.034)***
0.878
79

Note: This table presents the estimates of from regression (15) using: MFN tari↵s in 1996; MFN tari↵s averaged over the
1990s; tari↵s on imports from Mexico in 1993; and tari↵s on imports from Mexico averaged over 1991-1993. The swing-state
criterion is the ‘switching’ criterion, and the other variables in (14) are averaged over the 1990’s. Columns (1)-(4) present the
basic regressions and Columns (5)-(8) present the reversed regressions. The notations ***, **, * indicate the significance of
regression coefficients at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, while †††, ††, † indicate the significance of rejection of the Wald test on the
hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to 1 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

R2 (within)
Number of Observations

Estimate of .

MFN
Tari↵
in 1996
0.670†††
(0.056)***
0.868
79

Reversed Regressions
Averaged
Mexican
MFN Tari↵
Tari↵
in 1990-1996
in 1993
1.256†††
1.122†††
(0.046)***
(0.034)***
0.862
0.877
79
79

Using ‘Switching’ Swing-state Criterion.

Basic Regressions
Averaged
Mexican
MFN Tari↵
Tari↵
in 1990-1996
in 1993
0.687†††
0.782†††
(0.066)***
(0.075)***
0.862
0.877
79
79

Table 8: Estimated

632

Note: This table presents the mean and the median of the
barriers.

0.501
0.499
0.919
0.895
0.690
0.661
0.963
0.946

-1.030
-1.757
1.022
0.257

0.751
0.732
0.987
0.976

-2.557
-3.055
-0.429
-0.442
-0.179
0.095
0.642
9.509

0.517
0.449
0.889
0.817

0.215
0.232
0.701
-1.303

Median estimate.

parameter across industries using all swing state criteria and trade

(1) 5% Presidential Swing Criterion.
Using MFN tari↵ in 1996
Using averaged MFN tari↵ in 1990-1996
Using Mexican tari↵ in 1993
Using averaged Mexican tari↵ in 1991-1993
(2) 10% Presidential Swing Criterion.
Using MFN tari↵ in 1996
Using averaged MFN tari↵ in 1990-1996
Using Mexican tari↵ in 1993
Using averaged Mexican tari↵ in 1991-1993
(3) 10% Senate Swing Criterion.
Using MFN tari↵ in 1996
Using averaged MFN tari↵ in 1990-1996
Using Mexican tari↵ in 1993
Using averaged Mexican tari↵ in 1991-1993
(4) ‘Switching’ Criterion.
Using MFN tari↵ in 1996
Using averaged MFN tari↵ in 1990-1996
Using Mexican tari↵ in 1993
Using averaged Mexican tari↵ in 1991-1993

Mean estimate.

Table 9: Industry-by-industry estimates of : Summary statistics.

References
[1] Ansolabehere, Stephen, Jonathan Rodden and James M. Snyder Jr. (2006). “Purple America.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2 (Spring), pp. 97-118.
[2] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger (1999). “An economic theory of GATT.”
The American Economic Review 89:1, pp. 215-48.
[3] Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992). “Convergence.” Journal of Political Economy 100:2 (April), pp. 223-251.
[4] Besley, Tim and Ian Preston (2007). “Electoral Bias and Policy Choice: Theory
and Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122:4, pp. 1473-1510.
[5] Bishop, Bill (2004). “The schism in U.S. politics begins at home Growing gaps
found from county to county in presidential race.” American-Statesman Sta↵ Sunday, April 4, 2004.
[6] Black, Duncan (1948). ”On the Rationale of Group Decision Making,” Journal of
Political Economy, February.
[7] Brams, Steven J. and Morton D. Davis (1974). ”The 3/2’s Rule in Political Campaigning,”American Political Science Review 68 (March 1974).
[8] Calvert, Randall L. (1985). ”Robustness of the Multidimensional Voting Model:
Candidate Motivations, Uncertainty, and Convergence,”American Journal of Political Science 29:1 (February), pp.69-95.
[9] Colantoni, Claude S.; Terrence J. Levesque; and Peter C. Ordeshook (1975).
”Campaign Resource Allocations under the Electoral College,”The American Political Science Review 69:1 (March), pp. 141-54.

623

[10] Conconi, P., G. Facchini and M. Zanardi, (forthcoming). Fast track authority and
international trade negotiations. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
[11] Conybeare, John (1984). “Politicians and Protection: Tari↵s and Elections in
Australia.” Public Choice 43, pp. 203-9.
[12] Dhingra, S. (2014). “Reconciling Observed Tari↵s and the Median Voter Model,”
Economics and Politics, 26, pp. 483-504.
[13] Dixit, Avinash and John Londregan (1996). ”The Determinants of Success of Special Interests in Redistributive Politics,”The Journal of Politics 58:4 (November),
pp. 1132-55.
[14] Dutt, P. and D. Mitra (2002). “Endogenous trade policy through majority voting:
an empirical investigation,” Journal of International Economics, 58, pp. 107-33.
[15] Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis, and Peter K. Schott (2002). “U.S. Imports,
Exports, and Tari↵ Data 1989-2001.” NBER Working Paper 9387.
[16] Fredriksson, P. G., X. Matschke, and J. Minier (2011). “Trade policy in majoritarian systems: the case of the US.” Canadian Journal of Economics 44, pp.
607-26.
[17] Gawande, Kishore and Usree Bandyopadhyay (2000). “Is Protection for Sale? Evidence on the Grossman-Helpman Theory of Endogenous Protection.” The Review
of Economics and Statistics 82:1 (February), pp. 139-152.
[18] Gawande, Kishore and Pravin Krishna (2003). “The Political Economy of Trade
Policy: Empirical Approaches,” in E. Kwan Choi and J. Harrigan (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics (Oxford, UK: Blackwell).

64

[19] Glaeser, Edward L. and Bryce A. Ward (2006). “Myths and Realities of American
Political Geography.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2 (Spring), pp. 119-44.
[20] Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Maggi, Giovanni (1999). “Protection for Sale: An
Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review, 89:5, pp. 113555.
[21] Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan (1994). “Protection for Sale.” American Economic Review 84:4, pp. 833-50.
[22] Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan (2004). “A Protectionist Bias in Majoritarian Politics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, pp. 1239-82.
[23] Hakobyan, Shushanik (2015). “Accounting for underutilization of trade preference
programs: The U.S. Generalized System of Preferences.” Canadian Journal of
Economics 48:2.
[24] Hakobyan, Shushanik and John McLaren (2016). “Looking for Local Labor-Market
E↵ects of NAFTA.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98:4 (October), pp. 72841.
[25] Irwin, Douglas A. (2008). “Antebellum Tari↵ Politics: Coalition Formation and
Shifting Regional Interests.” Journal of Law and Economics (November), pp. 71542.
[26] Lindbeck, Assar and Jörgen W. Weibull (1993). ”A model of political equilibrium
in a representative democracy,” Journal of Public Economics 51:2 (June), pp.
195-209.
[27] Lukas, Aaron (1998). “Consumers See Red (tomatoes).” Center for Trade Policy
Studies, Cato Institute, March 2.

65

[28] Matschke, Xenia (2008). “Costly revenue-raising and the case for favoring importcompeting industries.” Journal of International Economics 74:1, pp.143-157.
[29] Matschke, Xenia and Shane M. Sherlund (2006). “Do Labor Issues Matter in
the Determination of U.S. Trade Policy? An Empirical Reevaluation.” American
Economic Review 96:1, pp. 405-421.
[30] Mayer, W. (1984). “Endogenous tari↵ formation.” The American Economic Review, 74, pp. 970-85.
[31] McGillivray, Fiona (1997). ”Party Discipline as a Determinant of the Endogenous
Formation of Tari↵s,”American Journal of Political Science 41:2 (April), pp. 584607.
[32] McLaren, John (2016). “The Political Economy of Commercial Policy.” Chapter
2 of Kyle Bagwell and Robert Staiger, Handbook of Commercial Policy, Vol. 1A,
pp. 109-59, Elsevier.
[33] Muûls, Mirabelle and Dimitra Petropoulou (2013). “A Swing-State Theory of
Trade Protection in the Electoral College.” Canadian Journal of Economics 46:2,
pp. 705-24.
[34] Peltzman, Sam (1985). “An Economic Interpretation of the History of Congressional Voting in the Twentieth Century.” The American Economic Review 75:4
(September), pp. 656-675.
[35] Persson, T. and G. E. Tabellini (2002). Political economics: explaining economic
policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[36] Plott, Charles R. (1967). ”A notion of equilibrium and its possibility under majority rule,”American Economic Review 57 (September), pp.787-806.

66

[37] Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew
B. Schroeder and Matthew Sobek (2010). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
[38] Sanger, David E. (1996). “President Wins Tomato Accord For Floridians.” New
York Times October 12, 1996.
[39] Strömberg, David (2008). “How the Electoral College Influences Campaigns and
Policy: The Probability of Being Florida.” The American Economic Review 98:3
(June), pp.769-807.
[40] Tolbert, Charles M., and Molly Sizer (1996). “US Commuting Zones and Labor
Market Areas: A 1990 Update.” Economic Research Service Sta↵ Paper 9614.
[41] Wallis, John Joseph (1998). “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending Revisited, Again: With and without Nevada.” Explorations in Economic History 35,
pp. 140-70.
[42] Wright, Gavin (1974). “The political economy of New Deal spending: An econometric analysis.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 30-8.

67

Party A’s payoff.

a

b

1
c
½

d
0

½

Party B’s payoff.

1

Figure 1: The Pareto frontier for the two parties.

