                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ESTIMATING THE EFFECTS OF A LARGE FOR-PROFIT CHARTER SCHOOL
                               OPERATOR

                                       Susan Dynarski
                                       Daniel Hubbard
                                         Brian Jacob
                                        Silvia Robles

                                     Working Paper 24428
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24428


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2018, Revised April 2018




We are grateful to our partners at the Michigan Department of Education (MDE) and Michigan’s
Center for Educational Performance and Information (CEPI), especially Thomas Howell and
Venessa Keesler. Mahima Mahadevan provided expert project management. We thank the
Institute of Education Sciences (Grant R305A120269) and the Smith Richardson Foundation for
funding this research. This research uses data structured and maintained by the Michigan
Consortium for Educational Research (MCER). We are also grateful to a number of fantastic
research assistants, including Max Gross, Andrew Litten, Julian Hsu and Brittany Vasquez.
MCER data are modified for analysis using rules governed by MCER and are not identical to data
collected and maintained by MDE and CEPI. Results, information and opinions are the authors’
and do not reflect the views or positions of MDE or CEPI. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Susan Dynarski, Daniel Hubbard, Brian Jacob, and Silvia Robles. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Effects of a Large For-Profit Charter School Operator
Susan Dynarski, Daniel Hubbard, Brian Jacob, and Silvia Robles
NBER Working Paper No. 24428
March 2018, Revised April 2018
JEL No. I0,I21,J0

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper, we leverage randomized admissions lotteries to estimate the impact of attending a
National Heritage Academy (NHA) charter school. NHA is the fourth largest for-profit charter
operator in the country, enrolling more than 56,000 students in 86 schools across 9 states. Unlike
several of the other large for-profit companies that operate virtual charters, NHA only has
standard bricks-and-mortar schools. Our estimates indicate that attending a NHA charter school
for one additional year is associated with a 0.04 standard deviation increase in math achievement.
Effects on other outcomes are smaller and not statistically significant. In contrast to most prior
charter school research that finds the largest benefits for low-income, underrepresented minorities
in urban areas, the benefits of attending an NHA charter network are concentrated among non-
poor students attending charter schools outside urban areas. Using data from a survey of school
administrators in traditional public and charter schools, we document several aspects of school
organization, culture and instructional practice that might explain these positive effects.


Susan Dynarski                                   Brian Jacob
University of Michigan                           Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
Weill Hall                                       University of Michigan
735 South State Street                           735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091                         Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                         and NBER
dynarski@umich.edu                               bajacob@umich.edu

Daniel Hubbard                                   Silvia Robles
University of Michigan                           Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
735 S. State Street                              University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                              robles.silvia@gmail.com
danieldh@umich.edu
I. Introduction

           Charter schools have expanded rapidly over the past decade, with charter enrollment

growing from 2.4% to 6.2% of the public school population between 2008 and 2017 (National

Alliance for Public Charter Schools, n.d.; Snyder and Dillow 2015). Growth in this sector has

been particularly strong among schools that are part of large charter networks. The share of

charter school students in non-profit Charter Management Organizations (CMOs) grew from

10.6% in 2008 to 26.5% in 2017. The market share enjoyed by for-profit charters in Education

Management Organizations (EMOs) grew as well, and now EMOs educate roughly 20% of all

charter school students in the country (National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, n.d.).

           Yet, evidence of charter school effectiveness is almost exclusively based on non-profits,

many (but not all) of which are independent or part of small management organizations. 1 In the

postsecondary sector, evidence indicates that students at for-profit colleges do far worse than

their peers at other schools, even controlling for underlying differences in student characteristics.

Those who attend for-profit colleges are less likely to graduate, take on far more debt, are more

likely to default on that debt, and do worse on the labor market than comparable college students

(Cellini and Turner 2016). Across all levels of education, it is difficult to monitor effort, which

may lead schools to skimp on inputs in order to maximize profits. In fact, this is sometimes

offered as a justification for the role of the public and non-profit sectors in education (Poterba

1996).

           Given their very negative record at the postsecondary level, we might expect that for-

profits would also harm students enrolled in elementary and secondary education. Indeed, the

following eight states currently ban for-profit charters: Alaska, Connecticut, Mississippi, New

Mexico, New York, Rhode Island, Tennessee, and Washington (National Alliance for Public

1
    A notable exception is the research done on KIPP Academies (see, for example, Angrist et al., 2010).

                                                           2
Charter Schools, n.d.). Other states impose strict restrictions on for-profit charters, including

Massachusetts and Kentucky where evidence must be shown that the organization is a “proven

provider,” and Maine, which restricts for-profit management to virtual charters (National

Alliance for Public Charter Schools, n.d.). Additional states such as California are mobilizing to

restrict or ban for-profits (AB-406, 2017).

        We provide the first lottery-based evidence on the effect of for-profit charter schools on

student outcomes. 2 Our analysis focuses on the universe of National Heritage Academy charter

schools in the state of Michigan. NHA is the second largest for-profit, brick-and-mortar charter

operator in the country, enrolling more than 56,000 students in 86 schools across 9 states. 3 A few

for-profit charter operators in the U.S. are larger than NHA but have a substantial (or solely) on-

line schooling presence (K-12 Inc., Connections Academy, and Academica). The only larger

brick-and-mortar for-profit charter school operator is Charter Schools USA.

        We leverage randomized admissions lotteries from 44 NHA schools between 2003 and

2012 to estimate their impact on student achievement. Contrary to the experience in the

postsecondary sector, we find that these for-profit schools improve some academic outcomes for

their students. Our estimates indicate that attending a NHA charter school for one additional year

is associated with a 0.04 standard deviation increase in math achievement. Effects on reading are

smaller (0.026) and not statistically significant. We find no significant effects (either positive or

negative) on attendance, grade progression, disciplinary incidents or special education

placement. The effects, while not as large as the marquee results from the high-profile Harlem

Children's Zone and Boston charters, are substantial.

2
  Throughout the paper, the term “for-profit charter school” refers to a charter school managed by a for-profit
operator. For-profit companies are not allowed to hold a charter in Michigan.
3
  Source: Author calculations using information from the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools and charter
operator websites. As a point of comparison, the well-known and frequently studied KIPP Charter School network
serves roughly 90,000 students in 209 schools (http://www.kipp.org/).

                                                         3
       This result is somewhat surprising, but makes sense once we consider how funding

structures and incentives differ at for-profit charters and colleges. For-profit colleges are fully

funded by tuition, which is largely covered by the financial aid dollars that students bring with

them. The schools are unconstrained in the prices they can charge, and typically charge much

higher tuition than public colleges. For this reason, compared with public colleges, for-profits

have a much stronger incentive to enroll as many students as possible—even if those students are

not expected to succeed. The marginal revenue produced by a for-profit college student is far

higher than that generated by a student at a public college, which typically charges tuition prices

considerably below the marginal cost of educating a student. They can charge these artificially

low prices because of subsidies they receive from state and local governments.

       In the elementary and secondary sectors, by contrast, for-profit charter schools cannot set

prices. They are barred from charging students for attendance, and receive the same, per-pupil

allocation from the state whether they are operated by a non-profit or for-profit management

organization. Hence, non-profit and for-profit charters receive the same marginal revenue.

       Our analysis reveals another interesting finding. In contrast to most of the prior lottery-

based charter impact literature which has consistently found that low-income, underrepresented

minorities in urban areas benefit most from attending the lottery schools, the largest impacts of

attending the NHA charter network are concentrated among non-poor students attending charter

schools outside urban areas. These findings further highlight the importance of exploring the full

range of possibilities in the large, diverse charter school sector.

       To explore potential mechanisms, we leverage data from a survey administered to all

charter schools and a sample of traditional public schools in the same geographic areas as the

charters. The survey asked school administrators about a variety of school policies and practices



                                                   4
in five domains: instruction, school culture, organization and leadership, teacher compensation,

and time use. We find that NHA schools share many of the same practices as the highly effective

non-profit charters in Boston, New York and other urban areas, including a “No Excuses” culture

and a focus on extra time and frequent assessment in core academic subjects. This is particularly

interesting insofar as it suggests that the benefits of these practices and policies may generalize

beyond the types of students and neighborhoods previously studied.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we discuss the prior

literature on charter schools, including research focusing on the performance of Michigan charter

schools. In Section III, we provide background on the charter school market in Michigan.

Sections IV and V describe our empirical strategy and data respectively. In Section VI, we

present our findings and Section VII concludes.



II. Prior Literature on Charters

       There is a large literature on charter schools, including many studies that seek to estimate

the causal impact of attending charter schools on student academic achievement. A key challenge

in this literature is addressing the selection bias that stems from the fact that students and

families choose to attend charters.

       A small but growing number of studies exploit admissions lotteries to account for such

selection. In general, these studies have found that urban charter schools have large and

statistically significant impacts on student performance (for example Abdulkadiroglu et al.,

2011; Dobbie & Fryer, 2011, 2015; Gleason et al., 2010; Hoxby & Murarka 2009). This research

includes several studies that focus on individual schools or schooling models. Angrist et al.

(2010) studied a KIPP middle school in Lawrence, MA and found positive effects. Gleason et al.



                                                  5
(2014) found similar results in a non-experimental study of 41 KIPP middle schools nationwide.

Dobbie & Fryer (2011, 2015) studied the Harlem Children’s Zone charter school in NYC, and

found very large positive effects.

       The lottery-based studies find that non-urban charters do not systematically outperform

traditional public schools (Angrist et al., 2013, Gleason et al., 2010). Some research suggests that

the relative effectiveness of charters serving urban students is explained not only by the type of

students they serve (and the fact that charters seem to be more effective for students with lower

baseline achievement), but also by the fact that many urban charters employ a specific set of

policies and practices which has come to be known as the “No Excuses” model (Angrist et al.,

2013; Dobbie & Fryer, 2013).

       While these lottery-based studies have strong internal validity, they have important

limitations. First, even collectively, such lottery-based studies have examined few charter

schools. Lottery studies to date have examined only 113 schools out of roughly 6,000 charters

operating in the U.S (Chabrier, Cohodes, & Oreopoulos, 2016). The present study will increase

that number by 44.

       Second, most of these studies have focused on charter schools that enroll students at the

start of middle school and high school, because these students have pre-lottery achievement

scores that allow researchers to assess the randomness of the lotteries. As a result, an important

subset of charter schools has not yet been examined using lottery methods. This study examines

the performance of K-8 charter schools, helping to close this gap in the evidence.

       Third, no lottery-based study to date has examined the effect of for-profit charter schools.

Nationwide, non-profit charters are certainly the most common, but for-profit schools represent a

substantial portion of the sector in many states. In Florida, 40 percent of charters are for-profit.



                                                  6
In Michigan, the state with the highest representation, for-profits enroll two-thirds of charter-

school students. 4

         While lottery studies are the “gold standard” from the perspective of internal validity,

there is also non-experimental evidence on charter schools. Booker et al. (2011) find that Florida

students attending charter high schools are more likely to graduate high school. Sass et al. (2016)

find that these students are also more likely to persist in college and have higher earnings in their

mid-twenties. A small but growing literature has begun to non-experimentally evaluate the

behavior and impacts of charters managed by for-profit operators. For example, Singleton (2017)

documents differences in per-pupil spending among for-profit operators in Florida and relates

them to student performance in Florida.

         The Center for Research on Education Outcomes (CREDO) has produced several high-

profile studies. CREDO constructs matching estimators of charter school impacts by using

student-level administrative data. CREDO matches charter students to traditional public school

students from the same feeder schools (the traditional public school a student attended the year

prior to entering a charter). Students are matched on demographic characteristics 5 and test scores

from the previous grade. 6 Each charter student may be matched with multiple observations, and

these comparison records are averaged into one “virtual control.” Their outcome is student

growth in achievement defined as the year over year difference in state standardized test scores

(normalized into z-scores relative to the state and grade-level distribution that year).




4
  Information on for-profit status of charters compiled by authors using data from the Michigan Department of
Education; the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, Charter School Data Dashboard; Miron & Gulosino,
2013; and Mao & Landauer-Menchik, 2013.
5
  Students are matched exactly on gender, race/ethnicity, special education status, English language learner status,
lunch status, and grade level.
6
  Matched student must have prior-year assessment scores within 0.1 standard deviations.

                                                          7
         A 2013 CREDO analysis of impacts for roughly 5,000 charter schools across 27 states

finds that charter school students gain slightly more in reading and are no different in math

relative to peers in traditional public schools (CREDO 2013a). They note that the average effect

of charter schools in their sample has improved somewhat over time, due more to the closure of

ineffective schools than to the improvement among existing schools. Another CREDO report

that focuses on urban charter schools find that they are more effective than other charter schools,

generating positive growth in test scores on average (0.05 standard deviations in math and 0.039

standard deviations in reading), and are especially effective for poor and minority students

(CREDO 2013b). Finally, a 2017 CREDO report examined charters by organizational structure,

comparing independent charters to CMOs, vendor operated schools, and hybrids. 7 This report

generally finds that schools within a network perform better than individual charters or

traditional public schools.

         Several studies have looked at the evolution of charter schools over time. Studying

charters in Texas using administrative data and a non-experimental design, Baude et al. (2016)

find the effectiveness of charter schools in the state has increased over time due to exits from the

sector by less effective charter schools, improvements of existing charter schools and expansions

of effective charter management organizations. However, the authors also note that an

increasingly positive selection of students might help explain the rising performance. A similar

study in North Carolina by Ladd et al. (2017) finds that charter schools in that state have been

shifting to serve a more affluent and white population of students over time. They conclude that

the shift in the type of students enrolling in charters explains a corresponding rise in value added

estimates for charter schools over the same period.

7
 The organizational classifications differ from those used in this paper. CMOs are networks where the operator
holds the charter and there are more than three schools. Vendor operated schools provide services to at least three
schools, but do not hold the charter.

                                                          8
Prior Evidence on Michigan Charter Schools

        The most recent evidence on charter schools in Michigan comes from CREDO (2009,

2013a, 2015, 2017). Most relevant for this study are the findings from the 2013 and 2017 studies,

which produced estimates for the NHA network specifically (although these were not confined to

campuses in Michigan and estimated the average impact over 71 schools in 2013). According to

CREDO (2013a), NHA charters caused a statistically significant 0.03 standard deviation

improvement in reading test scores relative to “virtual twins” at traditional public schools and a

0.04 standard deviation improvement in math test scores. These are assumed to be linear effects

per year enrolled. When scaled linearly, this would translate to a 0.36 standard deviation

improvement in math for a student who enrolled in kindergarten and stayed through eighth

grade. The 2017 study paints an even rosier picture, and estimated that an additional year at an

NHA school is associated with a 0.14 standard deviation increase in math scores and a 0.11

standard deviation increase in reading scores.

        Several other studies have looked at charter school impacts on test scores in Michigan

during the late 1990s. Eberts and Hollenbeck (2001) ran student-level regressions controlling for

observable characteristics and prior test scores, estimating that charter schools cause students to

score 2-4% lower on math in 4th grade. Using school-level data, Bettinger (2005) estimates a

difference in differences and lagged dependent variable model comparing charter schools to

traditional public schools within five miles and finds null or negative impacts of attending a

charter school on average.

        Bettinger (2005) also estimated the effect of charter school entry on traditional public

school students’ test scores. This is part of a rich literature on charter school spillovers in


                                                   9
Michigan that has looked at the impact of charter schools on enrollment in traditional public

schools, fiscal health at traditional public schools, and enrollment in private schools, usually

finding a negative impact of charter school entry (Ni, 2009; Chakrabarti and Roy, 2010; Arsen

and Ni, 2012; and Arsen et al., 2015).

        Overall, the CREDO results support the conclusion that urban charters in Detroit, and the

NHA in particular, are improving student test scores. Earlier Michigan-focused studies seem to

argue the opposite. All of these studies are vulnerable to selection bias.



III. Background on Charters in Michigan

        Charter schools first arrived in Michigan in 1994 following legislation passed in 1993.

They serve a large and growing proportion of public school students in the state. As of the 2015-

16 school year, there were 359 charter schools in Michigan, educating about ten percent of the

state’s students (Figure 1). The sector has expanded rapidly: in 2003, 204 schools enrolled less

than four percent of the state’s students. Across the state, charters enroll nearly 150,000 students.

As of 2014, there is no cap on charters in Michigan (except for virtual, online charter schools). 8

Over two-thirds of states cap the total number of charter schools (including Massachusetts and

New York).

        The majority of charter funding comes from the state and is currently equal to the

minimum per-pupil allowance for traditional public schools. In 2014-2015, the per-pupil

allocation from the state was $7,391. 9 However, charters can raise additional funds through

private donations (if non-profit), investment (if for-profit), and are eligible to apply for local and

federal grants just as any public school would be. They have more leeway to charge fees for

8
  Source: MDE charter FAQ (“Michigan Charter Schools - Questions and Answers,” 2016). While there was
initially a cap, a 2011 law raised the cap to 300 through 2012, 500 through 2014, and removed it thereafter.
9
  Source: Bulletin 1014 (MI, 2016).

                                                        10
services such as transportation. In 2014, the average, per-pupil expenditure was $9200 for charter

schools, and $9600 for traditional publics. In contrast to traditional public schools, however,

charter schools must pay for capital costs (such as their building) out of these funds as well.

According to the Center for Education Reform, charters are funded at about 64 percent of their

district counterparts on average. Across the country, they average $7,131 in per-pupil

expenditures compared to the average of $11,184 in the traditional public schools in 2009-2010.

It is also common for charter schools to receive no additional funding for school facilities

(Rebarber & Zgainer, 2014).

        The charter landscape in Michigan differs from that in many other states in several

important ways. 10 While the charter laws are not consistently more or less stringent than other

states, they are notably looser when contrasted to Massachusetts and New York, two states where

charter schools have been studied extensively. Anyone can apply for a charter, and multiple

authorizers receive, review, and decide upon these applications. By contrast, about half of states

with charter laws have only one authorizer. In Massachusetts, school districts can authorize

charter schools, but the only other authorizer is the state itself. Michigan’s authorizers also

oversee the operation of charters, receiving a share of the state allocation to compensate them for

their effort. Authorizers in Michigan include public universities, community colleges, traditional

K-12 school districts, and intermediate school districts.

        The guidelines for authorizing, evaluating and renewing a charter are not precisely

specified by state law. While the Michigan Council for Charter School Authorizers has a

common set of standards for approving and renewing charter applications, these are not

mandated by law (National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, n.d.). Thus, authorizers have

10
  Information on state charter laws and policies comes from the National Alliance for Public Charters Law
Database, the Michigan Dept. of Education FAQ website “Michigan Charter Schools - Questions and Answers”;
Rebarber & Zgainer, 2014; the Michigan legislature (MI, 2011); and the Education Commission of the States.

                                                     11
considerable discretion in creating their own protocols for assessing charter applicants, selecting

charter board members, and evaluating a charter’s performance, including the timeline for

renewal. 11 These provisions are placed in a charter contract. If a charter fails to meet the

standards laid out in the contract, the consequences are at the discretion of the authorizer. One

exception is if a charter has been operating for at least four years, is in the bottom 5% of all

public schools in the state, and is in its second year of restructuring sanctions, in which case the

state does require revocation of the charter (National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, n.d.).

Although the intent of the law is clear (an authorizer must hold a charter school accountable),

there are few mandated guidelines for how to implement accountability protocols.

           Michigan is among states that require the authorizer to evaluate and renew the charter,

although it does not specify an explicit timeline for renewal. In Massachusetts and New York,

the state takes an active part in evaluating and renewing charters. In the former, the state is the

sole authorizer (except for districts themselves), and in the latter, the state evaluates schools in

addition to the authorizer.

           The management and ownership structure of Michigan’s charters is also distinctive.

Nationwide, charters are typically non-profit organizations that are locally managed. That is,

they are not part of a national network or chain. The next most common arrangement is a non-

profit charter attached to a network, such as the KIPP schools. These non-profit charter networks

are often called charter management organizations (CMOs).

           In sharp contrast, Michigan is dominated by for-profit schools that are connected to a

national network. Michigan has more for-profit charters – by far – than any other state. Two-

thirds of Michigan’s charter schools are run by for-profit operators, known as education

management organizations (EMOs); see Figure 2. In 2015-2016, 74% of Michigan students
11
     Only urban charter high schools have a mandated timeline for renewal, which is 10 years (MI, 2011).

                                                          12
enrolled in a charter school were attending a school managed by a for-profit. In all other states,

only a minority of charter schools are operated by for-profit firms; in New York and many other

states, they are prohibited outright. The only state that comes anywhere close to Michigan on this

dimension is Florida, where 40 percent of charter schools are run by for-profit firms.



Characteristics of Michigan Charters

       Charter schools are concentrated in Michigan’s urban areas. Roughly half of charters are

in cities, compared to 14.5 percent of traditional public schools (Table 1, Columns 1 and 2).

Charters therefore reflect the demographics of cities, with their students more likely than those at

traditional public schools to be Black (54 percent vs. 16 percent), Hispanic (nine percent vs.

seven percent) and economically disadvantaged (73 percent vs. 47 percent). Standardized scores

are substantially lower in the charter sector than in traditional public schools: the gap is about 0.4

and 0.3 standard deviations in math and reading, respectively. Charters and traditional public

schools also differ in the share of students who are categorized as English learners (nine percent

and six percent, respectively), though they are relatively close in the share of students who

qualify for special education (about 13 percent in both sectors).

       Given that they dominate the state’s charter sector, the profile of Michigan’s for profit-

schools (Table 1, Column 3) closely tracks that of charters overall (Column 2). A more

instructive contrast is with the non-profit charters in the state (Column 5). For-profit charters,

compared to non-profits, are less concentrated in urban areas (46 percent vs. 55 percent) and

more concentrated in the suburbs (40 percent vs. 18 percent). For-profit schools enroll a greater

share of White (36 percent vs. 28 percent), Hispanic (nine percent vs. six percent) and Asian




                                                 13
(four percent vs. one percent) students than the non-profits. They enroll a smaller share of Blacks

as non-profits (50 vs. 62 percent).

       Charter schools also differ from traditional public schools in their grade structure. Over

35 percent of Michigan’s charter schools combine elementary and middle grades, compared to

about four percent of traditional public schools (Table 1, Columns 1 and 2). In the traditional

public schools, the standard progression is from an elementary school to a middle school, with

the transition at grade six or seven, depending on the district. A typical charter-school

configuration in Michigan enrolls children from kindergarten through eighth grade, with some

also providing pre-kindergarten.



National Heritage Academies (NHA) Charter Schools

       The first NHA charter opened its doors in 1995. Since the inception of the first NHA

school in Grand Rapids, the NHA network has expanded to 86 schools in nine states, with over

half located in Michigan. Currently NHA is the largest charter operator in Michigan with 48

schools operating in 2016.

       NHA schools served 5% of all third through eighth graders in Michigan in 2015-2016, or

about 47% of all charter students in those grades. Figure 2 plots the share of Michigan students

attending a school in the NHA network, as well as the share enrolled in any charter managed by

a for-profit EMO. The figure shows most of the growth in charter school enrollment since 2003

has come from for-profit charter schools. In addition, enrollment at NHA has grown steadily, if

not quite as quickly as charter enrollment overall.

       Table 2 compares NHA schools with other charter schools in the state, as well as with

traditional public schools. For the purpose of comparison, we only show schools that serve



                                                 14
elementary or middle school students. The statistics are from the 2011-12 school year, when the

data for this study was first collected, although the general patterns remain the same today.

       Unlike the schools featured in many other lottery-based charter studies, NHA schools are

not found predominantly in urban areas, as the network itself did not originate in Michigan’s

largest urban center, Detroit. Table 2, column (5) shows that almost half of NHA schools are

located in suburban areas, with 40 percent in urban areas and 12 percent in towns or rural areas.

Figure 3 shows the location of NHA schools across the state. The student demographics reflect

the geographic distribution as well. Students served by the NHA are less likely to be Black and

more likely to be Asian, Hispanic, or White than students enrolled in other charter schools in the

state. Likewise, the share of NHA students who qualify for free or reduced price lunch is lower

on average than other charter schools at 61% relative to 71% in columns (5) and (2) of Table 2,

respectively.

       Like other charter schools, NHA schools have a higher proportion of novice teachers

relative to traditional public schools (7.7 percent vs. 1.1 percent). Similarly, the percent of

teachers each year who are new to an NHA school is higher than in traditional public schools

(19.5 percent vs. 11.7 percent).




The NHA Model

       In contrast to some other charter organizations, NHA maintains full operational control

over all of its schools, meaning they make all decisions including for hiring, training, and




                                                  15
curriculum. 12 Generally organized as K-8 schools, the stated mission of the NHA is to develop a

student’s academic ability in tandem with her moral character.

         The curriculum at NHA charters focus on math, social studies, science and literacy.

Initially, curriculum was based on the Core Knowledge program, founded by E. D. Hirsch Jr. at

the University of Virginia. Later, the NHA developed its own curriculum based on the ACT

college-readiness standards and the subject areas covered by state tests. The curriculum now

represents a combination of commercially-purchased curricular tools and internally-developed

resources in order to better align to state standards and college readiness expectations.

         However, the NHA network retains some unique features. NHA schools advertise a

philosophy of partnering with parents to “reinforce the moral guidance a child receives at home,”

with a moral focus curriculum that is worked into the school day in many different ways. For

example, each month a secular virtue, modeled on Plato’s cardinal virtues, is integrated into

lessons. Readings may focus on themes related to the virtues, which include wisdom, respect,

gratitude, self-control, integrity, perseverance, courage, encouragement, and compassion. 13 And,

in the past, the social studies and history curriculum has had a distinctly patriotic and America-

centric perspective.

         As discussed in more detail later, the instructional approach in NHA has several features

that distinguish it from most traditional public schools. NHA schools somewhat more time to

core academic subjects of math and ELA than other schools. In addition, they are much more

likely than other schools to group students by ability level for instruction in core subjects,

particularly math.

12
   In contrast, at KIPP, the largest nonprofit charter networks, individual schools license the KIPP name, which the
national organization can revoke if a school is considered to be out of compliance with KIPP goals and standards,
and no school staff are employed by the national KIPP organization (Angrist et al. 2011).
13
   The distinctive focus on character and virtue have occasionally generated controversy, including a lawsuit by the
ACLU which was dismissed in 2000 that accused one academy of promoting religious education.

                                                         16
        According to NHA staff, however, the most important feature of the NHA model is an

emphasis on professional and leadership development. 14 In other schools, the principal or other

top administrators are constrained by time and other responsibilities which make it difficult to

respond to challenges within individual classrooms in a timely manner. Central to the school

level leadership structure is what NHA refers to as the “Dean Model.” At each school, three or

four deans each govern a hall or wing (e.g., K-2, 3-5, 6-8) and manage about 15 direct reports.

The day-to-day duties of a dean vary by school, but their primary goal is to coach the teachers.

This relatively small administrator-to-teacher ratio allows deans to provide teachers with

frequent and specific feedback. In addition, deans are responsible for duties such as overseeing

student culture, managing parent relationships, and participating in teacher recruitment. At NHA,

the principals meet weekly with the deans to set goals and train them to effectively coach the

teachers. This approach frees up the principal to manage the larger logistics of the school.

        NHA schools place a high priority on developing talent within their schools. Beginning

with teachers, NHA has developed a clear framework for developing goals and fostering growth.

As teachers grow in their capacity and skills, they have opportunities to take on leadership roles

within the school. In particular, high-performing teachers are identified by their principals to

enter into the Dean Prep Academy. The Academy is a year-long online program which

introduces teachers to the mindset and skills of an effective dean with the goal of investing in

and preparing them to become a dean. All new deans enter into a two-year program that

combines online sessions and in-person trainings that is specifically designed to meet the needs

of new deans. After the first two years, all deans continue to participate in ongoing professional

development at the school, regional, and national level.


14
  Much of the description of NHA in this section is based on personal communications with various NHA officials
during 2017 and 2018.

                                                      17
         NHA has developed additional leadership opportunities to maintain their highest

performing deans. Deans who are not looking to become principals can serve as dean content

leaders, which enables them to lead some of the professional development during regional

meetings or participate in mentoring of new deans. Aspiring principals are selected to enter the

Principal Prep Academy which prepares them to lead their own NHA school within one to two

years.

         The Principal Prep Academy is similar in structure to the track for deans, exposing

candidates to all aspects of what is required of principals including foundational NHA

procedures such as instructional leadership and data-driven instruction, developing school

culture and a high performing staff, and school accounting and budgeting. New principals

participate in a two-year new principal program to help ensure a smooth transition. Additionally,

both principals and deans participate in an annual four-day leadership summit each summer.

High performing principals are chosen to become executive principals, which requires them to

visit other schools to provide feedback and support, and beyond these established tracks may

move on to higher level positions at NHA.



IV. Empirical Strategy

         The existence of admission lotteries simplifies the analysis dramatically. Assuming that

the lotteries were indeed random, which we verify below, we can estimate the Intent-to-Treat

(ITT) impact of charter schools simply by comparing outcomes of lottery winners and losers.

         Lotteries occur by grade, school, and year. A student would apply, for example, to enroll

in the first grade of School A for school year 2016-17. If that school-grade-year combination is




                                                 18
over-subscribed, a lottery is held. Lotteries are therefore uniquely defined in our data by the

interaction of school, year and grade dummies.

         However, many students apply to more than one lottery. Since lotteries are independent,

the probability a student wins will rise with the number of applications she makes. Further,

admissions probabilities vary across schools. Following Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2011), we define

a lottery risk set as the group of non-degenerate lotteries to which a student applied. 15 To

estimate the ITT, we regress outcome y for student i on an offer indicator and additional

covariates:

                                   yikτ=
                                       t β 0 + initialofferikτ t β1 + X i Γ + γ kτ +ε ikτ t        (1.1)

where y is an outcome for student i in year t in risk set k in year τ . We define initialoffer to take

a value of one if a student wins at least one lottery within her risk set. A set of lottery risk-set

fixed effects ( γ ) limits the comparison to winners and losers within the same lottery. Student

covariates, X, can increase the precision of estimates. The coefficient β1 provides a consistent

estimate of the impact of winning at least one lottery to an NHA school. In most models, we

present standard errors clustered by the risk-set, although we also show that clustering by student

or the school attended in year t yields similar inferences.



Testing for Covariate Balance & Differential Attrition

         Table 3 contains sample means for students in the analysis sample, pooled and separately

by lottery status. Half of NHA applicants are female, while 27 percent are Black and seven



15
   Suppose, for example, student 1 applied to lotteries A and B, student 2 applied to lotteries B and C, student 3
applied to lottery A only, and student 4 applied to lotteries A, B and C. In this case, the risk set for students 1 to 4
would be AB, BC, A, ABC. In our analysis, we identify the impact of charters by comparing students within lottery
risk set. Hence, in the example above, student 1 would not serve as a comparison for student 2 even though both
applied to lottery B.

                                                            19
percent are Hispanic. Applicants live in census block-groups where the median income is

$64,632. The average age at application is 6.6 years, reflecting the fact that most apply by first

grade for admission. For this reason, baseline test scores, reduced price lunch eligibility, special

education eligibility, and limited English proficiency are only reported for students who were

enrolled in Michigan public schools prior to the lottery, or about 40 percent of students. Means

and adjusted differences in Table 3 for these outcomes are only for students with pre-lottery

characteristics, and reported in columns (5) through (8).

        To test for correlations between these characteristics and lottery status, we run

regressions of the listed variables against the instrument and risk-set dummies. There are no

significant differences by lottery status, except for age at application. Those who win the lottery

are 0.015 years younger, which while statistically significant, is small in magnitude and plausibly

due to chance. Joint tests of significance fail to reject the null.



Estimating the Impact of Attending an NHA School

        To obtain the impact of the local average treatment effect of attending an NHA school,

we estimate the following instrumental variable model:

                                yikτ=
                                    t β 0 + cumyrsikτ t β1 + X i Γ + γ kτ +ε ikτ t   (1.2)

where cumyrs measures the number of years student i attended an NHA school in the risk set

between the time of the lottery (τ) and the current year (t). The first stage model is:

              cumyrsikτ=
                       t α 0 + initialofferikτ tα1 + X i Α + γ kτ +uikτ t            (1.3)




                                                        20
V. Data

        This analysis focuses on the National Heritage Academies. We collected application data

for lotteries that took place between 1999 and 2012 in 46 NHA schools (unless otherwise noted,

we denote academic years by the Spring year, so that 1999 refers to the 1998-99 academic year).

        Each school is responsible for managing its own application and admissions process, and

is required to hold lotteries to allocate spaces for any year-grade that is oversubscribed. NHA

stores the records centrally. For some schools, we obtained electronic records on all applicants

that included information on which applicants were offered spots. Some schools also had

physical “lottery boards” in which the names of applicants and their lottery results were

recorded. Data from these boards were entered by hand and checked for accuracy. Our resulting

records include school name, year of the lottery, grade to which the student is applying, and the

student’s student name, birthdate, gender, home address, and ethnicity. Appendix A provides

more detail on the data collection process and the type of information we obtained.



Construction of Lottery Instrument

        Students can apply to as many NHA schools as they like; the lotteries are independent,

both statistically and administratively. When admitted students decline a seat, spots open for

students farther down the lottery waitlist. Thus, some students are offered spots immediately,

while others are offered admission later.

        In theory, this allows for two binary charter instruments: initial offer and ever offer.

Initial offer is an indicator variable set to one if a student is offered a seat at a school in the

applicant’s risk set at the time of the lottery. Ever offer is equal to one if initial offer is one, but

also counts offers made after the lottery, as the schools move down their waiting lists.



                                                    21
        In practice, initial-offer records are kept meticulously by NHA, but only about 75 percent

of schools maintained consistent data on whether they ever offered admission to a student. We

therefore focus on the initial offer instrument. Appendix B provides additional detail about the

construction of these instruments.



Sample Construction

        We begin with 79,459 applications to 2,907 lotteries at 46 NHA schools. We apply a

series of restrictions to obtain the final analysis sample, as outlined in Appendix Table 1.

Because state administrative data does not exist prior to 2001, we focus on lottery records

collected for the years 2002-12. We exclude roughly eight thousand applications of children who

had siblings enrolled in the school and thus did not participate in the lotteries. In addition,

applications by individuals who are never observed in Michigan public schools in any years

following the lottery are dropped. These students will have enrolled in private school or

homeschool, or left the state. A key concern for the analysis is whether this type of sample

attrition is correlated with lottery outcomes, as would be the case if lottery losers were more

likely to enroll in private schools, for example. This type of sample selection could bias the

estimates if lottery losers who chose to attend private schools were systematically different than

lottery losers who chose to attend traditional public schools. As described in the next section,

there is no difference in the match rate for lottery winners and losers.

        We drop the small number of applicants who either previously attended the school or

previously won a charter lottery (to the same or different school). As described in the prior

section, the preferred estimation strategy utilizes one observation per student and controls for

lottery risk sets.



                                                  22
        A more important restriction, both conceptually and empirically, is that we limit the

analysis to students applying to non-degenerate lotteries – that is, lotteries in which there is at

least one winner and one loser. If all (or no) students in a lottery are offered admission to the

school, there is no win-lose contrast to estimate and the lottery cannot contribute to the analysis.

This restriction reduces the number of applications by nearly half, to about 31,000 (from about

57,000) and to 749 lotteries (from 2,809) for 44 schools (out of 46).

        Students in degenerate risk sets, that is risk sets where all the students received an offer

of admission or all failed to receive an offer, are also omitted. This removes an additional 4,157

applications and 14 lotteries. We are left with an analytical sample of 27,143 applications to 735

lotteries at 44 NHA schools, with 20,255 unique students.

        We are able to observe at least one post-lottery achievement score for 90% of students in

the sample. We observe outcomes through grade 8 for roughly 51% of students in the sample,

and through grade 12 for about 15%. For this reason, we limit the analysis to outcomes measured

through grade 8. A little over 55% of lottery applications are for kindergarten entry, the most

common entry grade for the NHA. The next most common application grade is first, at just under

10% of applications. Applications to grades pre-K and 2nd through 6th each make up about four

or five percent of the sample. Finally, only one or two percent of the sample are applications for

8th or 7th grade, respectively.



Matching to State Outcome Data

        We matched charter school applicants to administrative data from the Michigan

Department of Education (MDE) which included all students enrolled in any Michigan public

school (including charter schools) from 2002-03 through 2015-16.



                                                  23
         Because neither lottery records nor state data contain a common unique identifier such as

social security number, we relied on name, date of birth, gender and ethnicity to match records.

We used probabilistic as well as exact matching techniques to account for minor misspellings,

nicknames, date and month swaps in date of birth, and other common errors. Appendix C

provides more detail on the matching.

         We matched 93 percent of lottery application records to the state data. We find no

statistically significant differences in the match rate of lottery winners and losers, as shown in

Appendix Table 2. This table shows estimates from regressions in which the dependent variable

is a dummy indicating a match to the state data. Paralleling our analysis of outcome effects, these

regressions include risk-set dummies. The coefficient on the indicator for winning a lottery is

small in magnitude (less than one percent) and statistically insignificant.



Outcome Measures

         Administrative records from the MDE provide information on the school of enrollment

and achievement scores. To facilitate comparisons over time and with previous research, we

focus on scores in math and reading, which occur in grades three through eight. We standardize

exams by grade, year and subject to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. We also

examine grade retention, special education placement, and disciplinary incidents as well as for an

indicator for scoring within the “proficient” range as defined by the state of Michigan. 16




16
   This definition changed over the span of the analytic sample, because the state raised the threshold for proficiency
in 2011. We have coded the definition consistently, applying the more stringent threshold to all years of data.

                                                          24
VI. Results

        Table 4 presents first-stage estimates of the relationship between lottery offer and

enrollment in an over-subscribed NHA charter school in the fall after the lottery. Recall that the

instrument here is a dummy indicating that an applicant won admission at the time of the lottery;

that is, she received an initial offer.

        Lottery winners are 19 percentage points more likely than lottery losers to enroll in an

NHA school the following fall. The F-statistic on this estimate is 97.75. The control mean

indicates that a third of those who lose the lottery still manage to enroll in an oversubscribed

NHA charter in the fall after the lottery. These are likely applicants from the randomly-ordered

waitlists who received an offer after winners further up the list declined the offer of admission.

        The other columns of Table 4 show that the relevant counterfactual for lottery winners is

a traditional public school. Winning an NHA lottery decreases the likelihood of attending a

traditional public school by 16 percentage points. By contrast, winning a lottery decreased the

likelihood of attending a non-NHA charter by only half a percentage point, and of attending an

NHA school outside the student’s risk set by 1.6 percentage points.

        It is possible that these initial differences in enrollment grow or shrink over time. To

examine this, Figure 3 plots reduced form estimates of the difference between lottery winners

and losers in the cumulative years enrolled in a risk-set school, estimated separately each year

after the lottery. Figure 3 also presents the treatment-control difference in the share of years a

student enrolled out of all the years she could potentially have done so. The coefficients in

Figure 3 are estimated controlling for student characteristics and risk-set fixed effects as in

equation (1.1). While the difference in cumulative enrollment grows over time, the fraction of

potential years remains constant or even falls slightly.



                                                 25
Main Outcome Estimates

          Table 5 shows estimates of the relationship between attending an NHA charter school

and student test scores. These estimates are based on a student-year panel that includes data on

post-lottery test scores in grades three through eight. The 2SLS estimates reflect the impact of

attending a charter school for one additional year. In Appendix Table 2, we confirm that

receiving an initial offer is not associated with the likelihood of enrolling in Michigan public

schools, on-time grade progression or having a standardized test score.

          Consistent with prior lottery-based charter studies, we find that an additional year spent at

an NHA charter is causally associated with positive test score gains in math, with smaller effects

on reading scores that are not significant at conventional levels. The yearly gain in math is

estimated at 0.04 standard deviations, and is significant at the ten percent level. In addition, there

is a 1.4 percentage point increase in the likelihood of scoring above the proficiency cutoff. When

scaled by the nine years a student could potentially spend at an NHA charter (given that it serves

grades K-8), it suggests a maximum potential increase of 0.36 standard deviations in math

scores.

          We have also examined non-score outcomes, including the attendance rate, classification

as a special-education student, and on-time grade progression. Effects for all of these outcomes

were small and statistically insignificant. Results available upon request.



Heterogeneity in Effects

          We explore heterogeneity of effects along several dimensions. To begin, we examine

whether the effects vary by grade level. The impact of attending a charter school may differ



                                                   26
across grade levels for various reasons, including (i) a nonlinear effect of years attended (e.g. one

year attended is important but three years makes no additional difference), (ii) a change in the

quality of the counterfactual (e.g., if traditional public middle schools are particularly weak), or

(iii) differences in the nature of the material covered and school expertise (e.g., charter schools

may be particularly good at teaching early, basic skills, in which case the impacts in early grades

may be larger than impacts in later grades).

           Figures 5a and 5b show the 2SLS estimates of math and reading scores separately by

grade. The estimates are noisy, and exhibit an odd saw tooth pattern. Because the later lottery

cohorts have not yet reached the older grades, it is possible that the patterns we see here are due

in part to compositional changes and heterogeneity in effects by cohort. Figures 5a and 5b show

the patterns for cohorts we can observe through grade eight. Here we see some evidence that the

point estimates appear somewhat larger for students in the middle school grades, although the

estimates are not precise enough that they are significantly different by grade.

           We next examine how these effects differ by student demographics. Table 6 reports

estimates of the impact of an additional year spent at an NHA school for different student

characteristics. Several interesting patterns emerge. First, female students benefit more than male

students (0.059 versus 0.010). Second, in contrast to prior research on charter schools,

economically disadvantaged students do not appear to benefit as much as other students. For

example, the reduced form estimate for non-poor students is 0.045 compared with -0.012 for

poor students. Similarly, the 0.034 reduced form effect for White/Asian students is larger than

the 0.015 estimate for Black/Hispanic students. 17

           Interestingly, these subgroup differences appear to be driven in part by differences in

dosage. Economically disadvantaged students who won the lottery accumulated just 0.396 more
17
     Patterns are similar, though less pronounced, for reading scores. Results available upon request.

                                                            27
years in an over-subscribed NHA school than those who lost the lottery (Column 4 first stage).

For applicants who are not economically disadvantaged, the first stage is almost three times

larger: 0.942 years. There is a similar, but less pronounced, pattern by race/ethnicity: the first

stage for Whites/Asians is 0.851 additional years, while for Black/Hispanics it is 0.622. Indeed,

our first-stage estimates are particularly low for applicants to NHA schools in urban areas.

       If we focus on students who were applying to NHA schools in an urban area, we see that

winning the admissions lottery is associated a mere 0.26 additional years of enrollment in an

NHA school. While the urban sample size is too small to split further, we can split the non-urban

sample into economically disadvantaged and less disadvantaged students within (columns (10)

and (11) of Table 6). The same pattern holds, and is even more pronounced, with non-poor

students benefitting more from enrollment in an NHA, and exhibiting a dosage almost three

times the size of poor students.

       We conducted several supplementary analyses to better understand the pattern of first-

stage estimates. To determine whether the differential first stages shown in Table 6 result from

differences in immediate enrollment versus subsequent mobility, we estimated the first-stage

effect by year since lottery separately for each subgroup. We find that the differential effects are

driven by the fact that disadvantaged students who win a lottery are substantially less likely to

enroll in the NHA school next Fall when compared to more advantaged peers. For example, the

first stage effect on enrollment next Fall is 22 percentage points for non-poor students, and only

13 percentage points for poor students. Similarly, the first stages for non-urban and urban

students are 23 percentage points and 8.6 percentage points respectively (more detailed results

are available upon request.)




                                                  28
         One reason the first-stage could be lower for poor and urban students is that they face a

relatively higher cost of commuting to an NHA school. To examine this, for each student we

calculate the distance from his or her census block centroid to the nearest NHA school in the

student’s choice set, as well as the distance to the nearest other public school the student could

have attended (based on district boundaries and grade level). We then calculate the difference

between these distances – i.e., how much further would the student have to travel to attend the

nearest NHA option in his or her risk set compared with the closest public school.

         The average (s.d.) for poor children is -3.6 miles (7.74) compared with -3.2 (6.15) for

non-poor children. For poor students, the nearest NHA school is on average 3.6 miles further

than the nearest TPS, while it is 3.2 miles further than the nearest TPS for non-poor students. The

urban and non-urban mean and standard deviations are -3.0 (6.3) and -3.5 (6.8), respectively.

Theoretically, both the differential in relative distance to an NHA, and the fact that charter

schools are not required to provide transportation for students, could create differential costs for

poor students.

         To examine this further, we include the interaction between winning an offer and student

subgroup (e.g. poor or urban) in the first-stage regression. The regression also includes the

differential distance measure, the two-way interactions between the distance measure and

winning a lottery, and the distance measure and the student subgroup, and the triple interaction

of the subgroup, offer, and distance measure, allowing the “cost” of distance to vary for poor vs.

non-poor (or urban vs. non-urban) students separately. The regression shows no differential

effect of the distance measure on poor or urban student take-up rates, 18 and does not explain the


18
  The coefficient is a precisely estimated zero for the triple interaction of subgroup, any initial offer, and the
distance differential. The coefficient on the double interaction of any initial offer and the distance differential is a
statistically significant 0.4 percentage points; for each mile closer that the closest NHA gets relative to the closest
TPS, take-up increases by 0.4 points for all students. Results available upon request.

                                                            29
initial take-up gaps, though the difference in distance between NHA and TPS schools is strongly

associated with enrollment in the NHA in general.

       We conduct a similar exercise using the number of different schooling options available

within a two, three and five-mile radius of a child’s home census block. Once again, while the

number of alternative options is negatively associated with NHA enrollment, it does not explain

the differential take-up across demographic groups.

       For the purpose of understanding the impact of attending the benefit of actually attending

an NHA school, the differences in dosage do not change the patterns seen in the reduced form –

namely, less disadvantaged students appear to benefit more from NHA. It does, however,

provide information on the compliers who are identifying our IV estimate. Specifically, the

pattern of results shown in Table 6 suggests that our average 2SLS estimate of .04 standard

deviations is driven by students who are less economically disadvantaged, more likely to be

white and/or Asian and more likely to be attending an NHA school in a non-urban area.



Effects on School Inputs

       The results above suggest that attending an NHA school increases standardized math test

scores, particularly in the middle school grades. In order to explore potential mechanisms, we

estimate the models described above where the outcomes are characteristics of the schools

actually attended by lottery applicants in years following the lottery (rather than the student’s

own standardized test scores). As above, Table 7 presents the reduced form estimates which

capture the impact of receiving an initial offer as well as the 2SLS estimates which reflect the

impact of attending an NHA school for an additional year. The results in this table tell us how




                                                 30
NHA schools differ from the counterfactual school a student would have attended had she or he

not received an offer from an NHA school.

       A few differences stand out. First, attending an NHA school increases the likelihood of

the student attending a K-8 school by 15 percentage points on average over all years in the panel

(relative to baseline of 49 percent), and reduces the number of students per grade in the school by

8 (relative to baseline of 127).

       Second, attending an NHA school changes the composition of peers a student faces.

Students who are induced to attend an NHA school through winning an admissions lottery end

up attending schools with two percentage points (five percent) fewer poor children, 0.8

percentage points (seven percent) fewer special education students, and peers who score 0.08

standard deviations higher on state math exams.

       Third, attending an NHA school exposes students to a notably different set of teachers.

Teachers in NHA schools have less experience and are more likely to turnover than teachers in

schools that students would have attended otherwise. Attending an NHA school is associated

with a 4.8 percentage point increase in the share of novice teachers, and reduces median teacher

experience by a year relative to a baseline of 6.4 years. Further, receiving an offer to an NHA

school exposes students to teachers who are slightly less likely to have attended competitive

colleges. However, it also exposes students to teachers who, on average, score 0.05 standard

deviations higher on the teacher certification exam.

       In an effort to explore school policies and practices, we administered a survey to all

general education charter schools in Michigan that were open during the 2012-13 and 2013-14

school years as well as the traditional public schools that each charter school’s students would




                                                31
most likely have attended based on their neighborhood. 19 School leaders responded at very high

rates, with 85% of charter school leaders and 76% of traditional public school leaders

participating in the survey. A total of 435 schools, including 226 charter and 209 traditional

public schools are represented in the study. We created 20 measures of school practices within 5

domains – instruction, school culture, organization and leadership, teacher compensation, and

time – each of which is described in detail in Appendix Table 3.

        Because we did not survey all nearby traditional public schools, students in our sample

who won a lottery to an NHA school were substantially more likely to attend a school that had

completed a survey. For this reason, we cannot replicate the analysis from Table 7 with our

survey measures. However, we can compare school practices at the NHA schools to nearby

traditional public schools that many, though not all, lottery losers attended. To do so, we regress

each survey measure on binary indicators for NHA charter school and other charter schools as

well as match group fixed effects, which serve to ensure that each charter school is being

compared to the set of traditional public schools nearby. Results are reported in Table 8.

        Several findings stand out. First, there are notable differences in school culture and

organization. NHA schools score a full standard deviation higher on the “No Excuses” measure

used in Dobbie & Fryer (2013). They also score 0.75 standard deviations higher on a measure of

parent engagement.

        There are also some potentially important differences in instructional practices –

including the use of time – between NHA and other schools. While there is no difference in total


19
   Because a given charter school can draw students from a number of different traditional public schools,
we assign each charter school a counterfactual public school based on the modal school students would
likely otherwise attend. In cases where charter schools span more than one school level (e.g., a K-8
charter school), we assign each grade span (e.g. K-5 and 6-8) its own traditional public school. See online
appendix at http://edpolicy.umich.edu/publications/#policy-briefs for further explanation.


                                                    32
instructional hours per year, NHA schools devote 0.23 more hours per week to math instruction

than comparison traditional public schools. NHA schools are substantially more likely to use

ability grouping in core academic subjects. Indeed, virtually all NHA schools report grouping

students by ability for math instruction and 80 percent doing so for reading instruction. In

contrast, only half of traditional public schools report doing so for either subject. NHA schools

report administering diagnostic or benchmark assessments more frequently than other schools – a

difference of 0.7 standard deviations on our measure of overall test frequency. 20 On the other

hand, we found no significant differences in the nature or amount of tutoring provided in NHA

schools, or the uniformity of instruction.

         Third, we see some differences in the domain of school organization and leadership.

NHA schools are 47 percentage points (150 percent) more likely to report that administrators act

as mentors to teachers. NHA principals report observing teachers roughly 9 hours per year

compared with principals in traditional public schools who report doing so only 2 hours per year.

The high reported rates of administrative mentorship could be related to an organizational feature

of the NHA. NHA schools employ three instructional deans in addition to a principal. The deans

are primarily responsible for mentoring teachers in instructional practices and generally spend an

hour a week observing them.

         Administrators in NHA schools report having substantially more control over hiring

decisions than administrators in other schools, and are substantially less likely to report that “bad

teachers” are an important problem in their school.

         The starting teacher salaries at NHA schools is roughly $1,500 less than the $37,400

reported by comparison traditional public schools, but about $2,400 higher than starting salaries


20
  Because charters are required to take the same state exams as all public schools, the difference stems from the use
of diagnostic or benchmark exams.

                                                         33
in other charter schools. However, teachers at NHA charters are much more likely to be eligible

for performance bonuses compared with teachers in traditional public schools or other charters. 21

Only 20 percent of comparison schools report having performance bonuses while all NHA

schools report such bonuses. Conditional on the existence of bonuses, there is not a significant

difference in the amount of the bonus, but the estimates are very noisy.



VII.    Discussion and Conclusion

        To the extent that there is consensus in the charter literature to date, it seems to be that

while charter school impacts vary considerably, they tend to be most effective in urban settings

for poor and minority students. The most effective schools identified to date have been non-

profits, and the most rigorous, non-experimental evidence suggests that, on average, for-profit

charters are less effective than the traditional public schools students would have attended in the

absence of the charter.

        The current study of NHA schools in Michigan presents a counterpoint to these

consensus views, examining schools with a different management structure that tend to locate on

the fringes of urban centers more often than within them, and which are effective among an

entirely different population of students. Our estimates indicate that attending a NHA charter

school for one additional year is associated with a 0.04 standard deviation increase in math

achievement, not as large as the marquee results from the high-profile Harlem Children's Zone

and Boston charters, but economically meaningful nonetheless. 22

        Our analysis reveals another interesting finding. In contrast to most of the prior lottery-

based charter impact literature which has consistently found that low-income, underrepresented

21
  The NHA reports that this practice is less prevalent in recent years relative to the survey year.
22
  These estimates are consistent with the most recent non-experimental estimates of NHA reported by CREDO
(2017).

                                                     34
minorities in urban areas benefit most from attending the lottery schools, the largest impacts of

attending the NHA charter network are concentrated among non-poor students attending charter

schools outside urban areas. These findings further highlight the importance of exploring the full

range of possibilities in the large, diverse charter school sector.

       Of course, the present analysis only examines a single charter school network, and thus

cannot speak to the effectiveness of all for-profit charter schools in Michigan. In ongoing non-

experimental work, we are examining the population of charter schools in Michigan, allowing us

to explore factors associated with charter effectiveness, including for-profit status and network

membership. However, by leveraging rich survey data, the present study sheds some light on

potential mechanisms through which schools may influence student achievement.

       Despite its different management structure and student population, NHA shares many of

the policies and practices of previously studied successful charter schools. NHA schools provide

extra time for core academic subjects, utilize ability grouping and frequent benchmark

assessment, employ relatively young teachers, maintain a “No Excuses” culture, and have

principals actively engaged in observing and mentoring teachers. These findings provide further

support for the set of policies associated with successful schools in other work (Abdulkadiroǧlu

et al. 2011, Angrist et al. 2013, Dobbie and Fryer 2013, and Fryer 2014).

       As powerful forces in domestic policy move to increase the prevalence of school choice

mechanisms, including charter schools, it is more important than ever to understand the settings

that are most conducive to their success.




                                                  35
References

Abdulkadiroǧlu, A., Angrist, J. D., Dynarski, S. M., Kane, T. J., & Pathak, P. A. (2011).

     Accountability and flexibility in public schools: Evidence from boston’s charters and pilots.

     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 699–748. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjr017

Angrist, J. D., Dynarski, S. M., Kane, T. J., Pathak, P. A., & Walters, C. R. (2010). Inputs and

     impacts in charter schools: KIPP Lynn. In American Economic Review.

     https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.100.2.239

Angrist, J. D., Pathak, P. A., & Walters, C. R. (2013). Explaining charter school effectiveness.

     American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.5.4.1

Arsen, D., Deluca, T. A., Ni, Y., & Bates, M. (2015). Which Districts Get Into Financial Trouble

     and Why: Michigan’s Story.

Arsen, D., & Ni, Y. (2012). The Effects of Charter School Competition on School District

     Resource Allocation. Educational Administration Quarterly, 48(1), 3–38.

     https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161X11419654

Baude, P. L., Casey, M., Hanushek, E. A., & Rivkin, S. G. (2016). The Evolution of Charter

     School Quality.

Bettinger, E. P. (2005). The effect of charter schools on charter students and public schools.

     Economics of Education Review, 24, 133–147.

     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2004.04.009

Booker, K., Sass, T. R., Gill, B., & Zimmer, R. (2011). The Effects of Charter High Schools on

     Educational Attainment. Journal of Labor Economics, 29(2), 377–415.

     https://doi.org/10.1086/658089

CA. Charter Schools: Operation, Pub. L. No. AB 406 (2017). Retrieved from



                                                36
    http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient.xhtml?bill_id=201720180AB406

Cellini, S. R., & Turner, N. (2016). Gainfully Employed? Assessing the Employment and

    Earnings of For-Profit College Students Using Administrative Data (NBER Working Paper

    Series No. 22287). Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w22287

Chabrier, J., Cohodes, S., & Oreopoulous, P. (2016). What Can We Learn From Charter School

    Lotteries? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3), 1–63. https://doi.org/10.3386/w22390

Chakrabarti, R., & Roy, J. (2016). Do charter schools crowd out private school enrollment?

    Evidence from Michigan. Journal of Urban Economics.

    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2015.10.004

CREDO. (2009). Multiple Choice: Charter School Performance in 16 States. Center for

    Research in Education Outcomes. Stanford, CA. Retrieved from http://credo.stanford.edu

CREDO. (2013a). Charter School Performance in Michigan. Stanford, CA. Retrieved from

    http://credo.stanford.edu

CREDO. (2013b). National Charter School Study. Stanford, CA. Retrieved from

    http://credo.stanford.edu

CREDO. (2015). Urban Charter School Study Report on 41 Regions. Stanford, CA. Retrieved

    from http://credo.stanford.edu

Dobbie, W., & Fryer, R. G. (2011). Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement

    Among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone. American Economic

    Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3), 158–187. Retrieved from

    http://www.jstor.org/stable/41288642

Dobbie, W., & Fryer, R. G. (2013). Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence

    From New York Cityt. Source: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics American



                                                37
     Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(54), 28–60. Retrieved from

     http://www.jstor.org/stable/43189452

Dobbie, W., & Fryer, R. G. (2015). The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving Charter

     Schools. Journal of Political Economy, 123(5), 985–1037.

Eberts, R. W., & Hollenbeck, K. M. (2001). An Examination of Student Achievement in

     Michigan Charter Schools. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research Working Paper

     Series. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0278-0984(06)14005-5

Education Commission of the States. 2016. 50-State Comparison. Retrieved from

     http://ecs.force.com/mbdata/mbquestNB2?rep=CS1521

Fryer, R. (2014). “Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public Schools:

     Evidence from Field Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3), 1355-1407.

Gleason, P. M., Clark, M. A., Tuttle, C. C., & Dwoyer, E. (2010). The Evaluation of Charter

     School Impacts Final Report. Education. https://doi.org/10.1037/e598992011-001

Gleason, P. M., Clark Tuttle, C., Gill, B. P., Nichols-Barrer, I., & Teh, B. (2014). Do Kipp

     Schools Boost Student Achievement? Education Finance and Policy, 9(1), 36–58.

Hoxby, C. M., & Murarka, S. (2009). Charter Schools in New York City: Who Enrolls and How

     They Affect Their Students’ Achievement (National Bureau of Economic Research Working

     Paper Series No. 14852). Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w14852

Ladd, H. F., Clotfelter, C. T., & Holbein, J. B. (2017). The Growing Segmentation of the Charter

     School Sector in North Carolina. Education Finance and Policy, 12(4), 536-563.

Mao, L., & Landauer-Menchik, B. (2013). A Comparison of Education Service Providers In

     Michigan Charter Schools. Lansing, MI.

MI. The Revised School Code Act 451 of 1976, Pub. L. No. MCL 380.501 (2011). Retrieved



                                                38
     from http://www.legislature.mi.gov/documents/2011-2012/publicact/pdf/2011-PA-0277.pdf

MI. (2016). Bulletin 1014. Retrieved from

     http://mdoe.state.mi.us/SAMSStatusReports/Others/b1014_15.pdf

Michigan Charter Schools - Questions and Answers. (2016). Retrieved from

     http://www.michigan.gov/documents/PSAQA_54517_7.pdf

Miron, G., & Gulosino, C. (2013). PROFILES OF FOR-PROFIT AND NONPROFIT

     EDUCATION MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATIONS FOURTEENTH EDITION—2011-2012.

     Boulder, CO. Retrieved from http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/EMO-profiles-11-12

National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. (n.d.). Charter School Data Dashboard. Retrieved

     from http://dashboard2.publiccharters.org/#school

National Alliance for Public Charters Law Database. (n.d.). Retrieved from

     http://www.publiccharters.org/get-the-facts/law-database)

Ni, Y. (2009). The impact of charter schools on the efficiency of traditional public schools:

     Evidence from Michigan. Economics of Education Review.

     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2009.01.003

Porterba, J. (1996). Government Intervention in the Markets for Education and Health Care:

     How and Why? In V. R. Fuchs (Ed.), Individual and Social Responsibility: Child Care,

     Education, Medical Care, and Long-Term Care in America (pp. 277-308). Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press.

Rebarber, T., & Zgainer, A. C. (2014). The essential guide to charter school operations: Survey

       of America’s charter schools 2014. Retrieved from https://www.edreform.com/wp-

       content/uploads/2014/02/2014CharterSchoolSurveyFINAL.pdf

Sass, T. R., Zimmer, R. W., Gill, B. P., & Booker, T. K. (2016). Charter High Schools’ Effects



                                                39
     on Long-Term Attainment and Earnings. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,

     35(3), 683–706. https://doi.org/10.1002/pam.21913

Snyder, T. D., de Brey, C., & Dillow, S. A. (2016). Digest of Education Statistics 2015. National

       Center for Education Statistics.

Singleton, John D. (2017). Putting Dollars Before Scholars? Evidence from For-profit Charter

       Schools in Florida. Economics of Education Review, 58, 43-54.




                                               40
                 Table 1: Summary Statistics on Michigan Charter Schools in 2014-15

                                                                      Charter Schools
                           Traditional
                               Public                     All For-    Independent     All Non-     Independent
                              Schools          All         Profits      For-Profits     Profits     Non-profits
                                   (1)         (2)              (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)
Number of Schools               2,687         367              237              31          105             46
Number of Students          1,331,666     147,525         108,743           10,766     32,658           12,827
% Urban Schools                   14.5       49.4             46.4            48.4         55.2           34.8
% Suburban Schools                41.1       33.7             40.1              29         18.1           26.1
% Town/Rural Schools              44.4       16.9             13.5            22.6         26.7           39.1
% Elementary Schools                54       20.2             20.3            19.4           21           19.6
% Middle Schools                  17.5         5.7              5.5            6.5          6.7            6.5
% High Schools                    18.2       20.7             15.6            12.9         29.5           34.8
% Elementary + Middle              4.4       35.4                43           41.9           20           23.9
% Elementary + High                1.5       10.9             10.5            16.1         12.4            8.7
% Middle + High                    4.4         7.1              5.1            3.2         10.5            6.5
% Black                           16.4       53.6             49.9            55.7         62.4           50.7
% Hispanic                         7.0         8.6              9.3            8.1          6.4            4.7
% Asian                            3.7         3.5              4.3            1.1          1.0            1.1
% White                           71.7       33.4             35.9            34.4         27.9           39.2
% Female                          48.8       49.9             50.0            50.0         49.8           50.6
% Poor                            46.8       73.2             72.7            70.2         73.3           68.6
% Special Education               13.1       12.5             12.1            11.8         13.0           12.6
% LEP                              5.9         9.0            10.9             8.1          3.3            2.3
Std. Math Score                   0.04      -0.37            -0.32           -0.47        -0.47          -0.39
Std. Reading Score                0.03        -0.3           -0.25           -0.38        -0.38          -0.29
Neighborhood Poverty
Rate                             16.46       29.13          29.67            26.80       26.90           24.43
Neighborhood % BA+               24.49       18.11          17.97            20.54       19.29           20.02

Notes: Sample is taken from all schools in the MSDS student/year-level file for the 2014-15 academic
year, merged to charter designations from the EEM/CCD school-level file and to state standardized
assessment data. Elementary schools begin in kindergarten or 1st grade and end in grade 5 or 6; middle
schools begin in grade 6 or 7 and end in grade 8 or 9. Statistics are weighted by the number of students in
the school.




                                                     41
                                       Table 2: Summary Statistics for NHA Schools

                                                  K-8 Schools in 2011-2012                              NHA Schools
                                                                              For-Profit                              Weighted by
                                    Traditional                  Non-Profit    Charters,                               Prevalence
                                        Public         Charter     Charter    Excluding                                 in Lottery
                                       Schools        Schools      Schools        NHA      2011-2012    2003-2015          Sample
                                            (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)
Number of Schools                        2,452            246           62          138           43           49               44
Number of Students                   1,009,940        106,617       21,320       55,593       28,654      312,057          28,255
Number of Applications                                                                                                     20,986
School Characteristics
 Median Enrollment Per Grade            140.29          75.83        75.39        75.02        78.17        76.89           80.28
 Pct. Urban Schools                      17.01          50.71        64.13        51.74        39.48        36.66           23.26
 Pct. Suburban Schools                   47.08          36.71        17.08        37.40        48.75        53.07           45.52
 Pct. Town/Rural Schools                 35.92          12.58        18.79        10.86        11.77        10.26           31.23
 Pct. Elementary Schools                 60.69          18.73        26.21        21.72         7.04         6.11            7.68
 Pct. Middle Schools                     28.00           5.20        10.09         5.53         0.00         0.03            0.00
 Pct. Elementary + Middle Schools         5.45          51.92        34.68        37.54        92.96        93.86           92.32

Student Characteristics
 Standardized Math Score                  0.01          -0.30        -0.33        -0.42        -0.04        -0.04            0.32
 Standardized Reading Score               0.00          -0.27        -0.28        -0.38        -0.05        -0.05            0.20
 Pct. Black                              17.08          54.83        62.93        56.34        45.55        41.83           29.07
 Pct. Hispanic                            6.88           7.24         4.91         7.58         8.50         9.17            8.36
 Pct. Asian                               3.29           2.94         0.98         1.70         6.87         5.77           15.86
 Pct. White                              71.40          34.06        28.48        33.90        38.53        42.58           46.09
  Pct. Female                            48.38          50.20        49.39        50.67        49.83        49.63           49.82
 Pct. Economically Disadvantaged         51.04          71.10        70.11        76.64        60.89        54.96           41.23
 Pct. Special Education                  14.44          11.67        12.02        11.73        11.19        11.81            9.24
 Pct. Limited English Proficient          5.17           6.80         1.97         9.80         4.82         5.07            5.24
 Neighborhood Poverty Rate               15.98          29.24        29.34        31.88        24.65        24.47           15.80
 Neighborhood Pct. with BA+              26.16          18.26        19.65        15.68        21.92        22.28           32.09
                                                             Table 2 (continued)

                                                           K-8 Schools in 2011-2012                                  NHA Schools
                                                                                         For-Profit                                 Weighted by
                                             Traditional                    Non-Profit    Charters,                                  Prevalence
                                                 Public       Charter         Charter    Excluding                                    in Lottery
                                                Schools       Schools         Schools        NHA        2011-2012     2003-2015          Sample
                                                     (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)

Teacher Characteristics
 Pupil-Administrator Ratio                        78.25         82.93          129.79        81.67           55.78         56.93           75.63
 Pupil-Aide Ratio                                360.13        200.48          259.92       196.44          169.02        204.16          167.55
  Pupil-Teacher Ratio                             18.52         17.38           16.86        16.99           18.50         17.66           19.51
 Pct. Novice Teachers                              1.07          9.28            8.73        10.44            7.65          9.12            7.15
 Median Teacher Experience                        10.65          4.29            4.45         4.10            4.50          3.79            4.41
 Pct. Teachers New to School                      11.71         23.17           22.51        25.50           19.47         25.50           20.25
 Pct. Teachers from Competitive
Colleges                                           4.86          4.26            5.09         4.24            3.59          3.80            5.08
 Pct. Teachers with BSE Scores                    57.92         88.50           87.12        88.72           89.24         85.99           88.76
 Average BSE Score                                -0.06         -0.22           -0.19        -0.29           -0.10         -0.08            0.00

Notes: Sample in columns (1) through (5) is taken from all schools in the MSDS student/year-level file for the 2011-12 academic year, merged to
charter designations from the EEM/CCD school-level file and to state standardized assessment data. Sample in column (7) is all applicants to
NHA lotteries between 2003 and 2012, observed in the 2011-2012 school year, with all sample restrictions detailed in Appendix Table 1.
Elementary schools begin in kindergarten or 1st grade and end in grade 5 or 6; middle schools begin in grade 6 or 7 and end in grade 8 or 9.
Statistics in columns (1) through (6) are weighted by the number of students enrolled in each school (except for the total number of schools, the
total number of students, and the median enrollment per grade). Column (7) is weighted by the number of applications in the lottery analysis
sample.




                                                                        1
                                        Table 3: Covariate Balance

                                                                                 Students with Pre-Lottery
                                          All Students                                Characteristics
                              Overall                                     Overall
                               Mean      Treat.   Control    Adj. Diff.    Mean       Treat. Control Adj. Diff.
                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)           (5)        (6)     (7)       (8)
Female                           0.50     0.49       0.50      -0.01          0.49      0.47      0.49        -0.02
                                                              (.008)                                         (.013)
Black                            0.27     0.29       0.24       0.00          0.35      0.37      0.34         0.01
                                                              (.006)                                         (.011)
Hispanic                         0.07     0.07       0.08       0.00          0.08      0.07      0.09        -0.01
                                                              (.004)                                         (.007)
Age                              6.62     6.47       6.74       0.02          7.99      7.84      8.07         0.02
                                                              (.007)                                         (.013)
Median Household
Income, Thousands              64.63     61.90      66.70       0.48        63.65      62.71     64.24        -0.30
                                                              (.415)                                         (.681)
Enrolled MI Public
Schools Pre-Lottery              0.41     0.37       0.44       0.00          1.00      1.00      1.00         0.01
                                                              (.006)                                         (.008)
Prior Math Score                                                             -0.02      0.00     -0.04        -0.03
                                                                                                             (.051)
Prior Reading Score                                                          -0.05     -0.04     -0.05         0.01
                                                                                                             (.047)
Subsidized Lunch Eligible                                                     0.39      0.40      0.39         0.01
                                                                                                             (.011)
Special Education                                                             0.15      0.16      0.14         0.02
                                                                                                             (.009)

Limited English Proficiency                                                   0.10      0.09      0.11         0.00
                                                                                                             (.007)
Number of Students            21,661     9,173    12,488     21,661         8,836      3,388     5,448       8,836
P-value for Joint Test                                           0.20                                           0.41
Notes: This table reports means and treatment-control differences in pre-lottery characteristics for students who
applied to a NHA lottery between 2003 and 2012, subject to all restrictions in Appendix Table 1. Columns (1)
through (4) report on pre-lottery characteristics available for all students, while the remaining columns report on
characteristics for students who were enrolled in MI public schools prior to the lottery. The sample includes one
observation per student, lottery grade, and lottery year grouping. Columns (4) and (8) report the coefficients on
receiving an initial offer in a regression controlling for risk set fixed effects, with standard errors clustered by
the risk set reported in parentheses. "Median Household Income, Thousands" is in 2015 U.S. dollars, defined at
the block-group level, and taken from the 2010 Census.
    Table 4: First Stage Estimates of the Impact of Winning a Charter School Lottery


                                Dependent variable = Enrolled in Fall after Lottery in
                                          NHA School,       Non-NHA          Traditional
                            NHA School, Not In Risk           Charter           Public
                             In Risk Set       Set            School            School
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)

Initial Offer                 0.19***         -0.016***        -0.005***         -0.16***
                              (0.019)           (0.004)          (0.001)          (0.018)

Control Mean                    0.339            0.074           0.009            0.546

F-Statistic                     97.75            14.29           11.66            78.71



Number of students              21,593          21,593           21,593            21,593
Notes: This table reports estimates of the effect of receiving an initial offer on the day of
the lottery on whether the student enrolled in various types of schools during the
following fall. The sample includes all students in NHA risk sets between 2003 and 2012,
subject to the restrictions in Appendix Table 1. There is one observation per student, risk-
set, and lottery year grouping. Standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered by
the risk set. All models control for demographic variables including the full interaction of
female, ethnicity, and poverty status, as well as census block-group characteristics,
missing indicators for covariates, and pre-lottery test scores, special education status,
limited English proficiency status, and poverty status if available.
                                          Table 5: Lottery Results

                                                                       Reduced
                                     First Stage    Control Mean         Form            2SLS        CCM
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)         (5)
Math Standardized Score               0.745***        [0.407]           0.029*          0.040*      {0.324}
                                       (0.102)                         (0.016)          (0.023)
Obs.                                   80,828                           80,832          80,828

Proficient in Math                    0.745***         [0.458]          0.010*          0.014*      {0.468}
                                       (0.102)                          (0.005)         (0.008)
Obs.                                   80,828                           80,832          80,828

ELA Standardized Score                0.744***         [0.335]           0.019           0.026      {0.282}
                                       (0.102)                          (0.015)         (0.020)
Obs.                                   80,805                           80,809          80,805

Proficient in ELA                      0.744***         [0.561]           0.006          0.008       {0.570}
                                        (0.102)                         (0.005)         (0.007)
Obs.                                    80,805                           80,809         80,805
Notes: This table reports reduced form and 2SLS estimates of the effect of each additional year spent in an
NHA charter school. The instrument is an indicator for receiving an initial offer on the day of the lottery
for at least one school in a student’s risk-set. The sample includes all students in NHA risk sets between
2003 and 2012, subject to the restrictions in Appendix Table 1. There is one observation per student, risk-
set, year grouping. The full panel includes all observations through a student's expected 8th-grade year.
Column (1) reports the effect of an initial offer on the cumulative years spent in any risk-set school (the
first stage). All standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered by the risk set. Column (5) reports
control complier means in curly braces. All models control for demographic variables including the full
interaction of female, ethnicity, and poverty status, as well as census block-group characteristics, tested
grade fixed effects, missing indicators for covariates, and pre-lottery test scores, special education status,
limited English proficiency status, and poverty status if available.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                  Table 6: Differences in Lottery Effect on Last Observed Math Score, by Subgroup

                                                                                                                                      Non-          Non-
                                                                               Black-       White-                      Non-          Urban/        Urban/
               All         Male       Female        Poor       Non-Poor       Hispanic      Asian         Urban         Urban          Poor        Non-Poor
               (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)             (6)         (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)          (11)
Reduced
Form       0.029*       0.008        0.042*       -0.012      0.045**       0.015          0.034*       0.036        0.028         -0.031         0.046**
           (0.016)      (0.025)      (0.022)      (0.025)     (0.020)       (0.025)        (0.020)      (0.031)      (0.019)       (0.032)        (0.022)

First
Stage      0.745***     0.820***     0.722***     0.396***    0.942***      0.622***       0.851***     0.259**      0.894***      0.421***       1.093***
           (0.102)      (0.125)      (0.108)      (0.088)     (0.132)       (0.092)        (0.133)      (0.116)      (0.123)       (0.110)        (0.148)

2SLS       0.040*       0.010        0.059*       -0.030      0.048**       0.025          0.041        0.140        0.031         -0.073         0.042*
           (0.023)      (0.030)      (0.031)      (0.063)     (0.024)       (0.040)        (0.025)      (0.129)      (0.022)       (0.080)        (0.022)
CCM        {0.324}      {0.381}      {0.278}      {-0.085}    {0.621}       {-0.186}       {0.616}      {-0.113}     {0.459}       {0.042}        {0.687}

Obs.        80,828       40,301       40,501       28,950        51,814       27,245        52,947       20,169        60,659        17,576         43,045
Notes: This table reports reduced form and 2SLS estimates of the effect of each additional year spent in an NHA charter school, estimated separately by
student subgroups. The instrument is an indicator for receiving an initial offer on the day of the lottery for at least one school in a student’s risk-set. The
sample includes all students in NHA risk sets between 2003 and 2012, subject to the restrictions in Appendix Table 1. There is one observation per
student, risk-set, tested year grouping. The full panel includes all observations through a student's expected 8th-grade year observed through 2017.
Column (1) reports the effect of an initial offer on the cumulative years spent in any risk-set school (the first stage). All standard errors are reported in
parentheses, clustered by the risk set. Column (5) reports control complier means in curly braces. All models control for demographic variables
including the full interaction of female, ethnicity, and poverty status, as well as census block-group characteristics, tested grade fixed effects, missing
indicators for covariates, and pre-lottery test scores, special education status, limited English proficiency status, and poverty status if available.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                Table 7: Lottery Effects on School Inputs

                                              Control      Reduced
                                               Mean            Form        Obs.         2SLS      CCM
                                                  (1)             (2)        (3)           (4)      (5)
Grade Size                                     146.7      -4.62***      150,791     -7.79***      134.1
                                                              (1.17)                   (1.67)
Number of Students in School                    708.4     12.17***      150,791     20.52***      712.2
                                                              (3.82)                   (6.08)
Fraction of Black Students                      0.241       -.006**     150,791    -0.009***      0.292
                                                             (0.002)                  (0.004)
Fraction of Hispanic Students                   0.082          0.001    150,791         0.001     0.086
                                                             (0.001)                  (0.002)
Fraction of Special Education Students          0.118    -0.004***      150,791    -0.007***      0.118
                                                             (0.001)                  (0.001)
Fraction of Economically
Disadvantaged Students                          0.397    -0.012***      150,791    -0.021***      0.455
                                                            (0.003)                   (0.004)
School Is a K-8 School                          0.366     0.079***      150,791     0.133***      0.482
                                                            (0.012)                   (0.009)
School Is in a City                             0.242        -0.001     150,243        -0.002     0.276
                                                            (0.005)                   (0.009)
School Is in a Suburb                           0.571    -0.048***      150,243    -0.080***      0.591
                                                            (0.012)                   (0.017)
Students' Average Standardized Math
Score                                           0.205     0.042***      131,547     0.078***      0.101
                                                            (0.008)                   (0.010)
Fraction of Students New to School              0.123         0.001     150,791         0.002     0.132
                                                            (0.002)                   (0.003)
Pupil/Teacher Ratio                            19.492         0.178     150,403         0.299    19.277
                                                            (0.148)                   (0.245)
Pupil/Administrator Ratio                      82.193      2.089**      146,973        3.51**    76.645
                                                            (0.991)                     (1.59)
Pupil/Aide Ratio                             301.280    -22.21***       147,507    -37.39***      280.1
                                                             (3.41)                     (3.20)
Fraction of Novice Teachers                     0.195     0.028***      150,403     0.046***      0.238
                                                            (0.004)                   (0.005)
Median Teacher Experience                       7.365    -0.589***      150,403    -0.989***      6.417
                                                            (0.084)                   (0.083)
Fraction of Teachers New to School              0.168     0.009***      150,403     0.015***      0.184
                                                            (0.002)                   (0.004)
Fraction of Teachers from Competitive
Colleges                                        0.017         0.001     150,403      0.002**      0.017
                                                            (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                            Table 7 (continued)



                                               Control       Reduced
                                                Mean             Form         Obs.         2SLS         CCM
                                                   (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)
Fraction of Teachers with BSE Scores            0.719       0.028***      150,320 0.048***              0.764
                                                              (0.004)                    (0.003)
Teachers' Average BSE Score                       0.014      0.006**      150,235         0.009*       -0.018
                                                              (0.003)                    (0.005)
Notes: The sample includes all students who entered kindergarten-8th grade lotteries, subject to the
restrictions in Appendix Table 1. There is one observation per student, risk-set, tested year grouping.
The full panel includes all observations through a student's expected 8th-grade year observed through
2016. All models control for demographic variables including the full interaction of female, ethnicity,
and poverty status, as well as census block-group characteristics, tested grade fixed effects, missing
indicators for covariates, and pre-lottery test scores, special education status, limited English proficiency
status, and poverty status if available. Coefficients on any initial offer (Reduced Form), followed by
standard errors clustered by risk set in parentheses. Control Mean is mean of outcome variable among
students with no initial offers; CCM stands for Control Complier Mean. The endogenous variable in the
2SLS regressions is the cumulative years spent at a school in the student’s risk-set. The instrument is
whether a student received any initial offer to a school in her risk-set.




                                                     1
                      Table 8: Differences in Survey Responses by School Type

Domain      Measure                                    Control Mean   Other Charter   NHA Charter
                                                            (1)            (2)           (3)
School      No Excuses culture (std)                      -0.206          0.168         1.09***
Culture
                                                          (0.941)        (0.112)        (0.176)
            School discipline (std)                       -0.285        0.596***        1.28***
                                                          (0.953)        (0.122)        (0.166)
            Parent Engagement (std)                       -0.255        0.447***       0.745***
                                                          (0.804)        (0.117)        (0.186)
Time        Instructional hours per year                  1,133          71.7***         -3.67
                                                           (122)          (21.3)         (31.6)
            Instructional hours per week (reading)         1.42           0.100          0.136
                                                          (0.437)        (0.280)        (0.129)
            Instructional hours per week (math)            1.19           0.023        0.231***
                                                          (0.347)        (0.067)        (0.066)
Instruction Test frequency (std)                          -0.183         0.358**        0.685**
                                                          (0.864)        (0.112)        (0.230)
            Instructional uniformity                      0.621           -0.017        -0.137
                                                          (0.456)        (0.078)        (0.122)
            Hours/year principal observes teachers         2.09           0.565         7.10***
                                                          (1.45)         (0.332)         (1.59)
            Ability grouping in math                      0.488           -0.056       0.475***
                                                          (0.449)        (0.068)        (0.114)
            Ability grouping in reading                   0.474          -0.135*        0.315*
                                                          (0.458)        (0.067)        (0.123)
            Offers tutoring                               0.819           -0.040         0.137
                                                          (0.349)        (0.050)        (0.090)
            Mandatory tutoring                            0.326           0.115          0.160
                                                          (0.445)        (0.103)        (0.126)
            Hours/month tutoring                           9.18          -3.47***        -1.49
                                                          (8.40)          (1.06)         (1.83)
                                           Table 8 (continued)



                                                                 Control        Other
   Domain                        Measure                          Mean         Charter       NHA Charter
                                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)
School                                                            9.38          -1.33*           -2.10
Organization     Principal tenure
and                                                              (4.42)        (0.521)          (1.29)
Leadership
                 Administrators are mentors                      0.294          0.092          0.474***
                                                                 (0.428)       (0.071)          (0.093)

                 Bad teachers are a problem (std)                0.424         -1.12***        -0.546**
                                                                 (0.968)       (0.125)          (0.186)

                 Hiring control difference (std)                 -0.390       0.974***         0.633**
                                                                 (0.880)       (0.122)          (0.206)

                 Curriculum control difference (std)             -0.361       0.992***          -0.364
                                                                 (0.764)       (0.123)          (0.190)

                 School autonomy (std)                           -0.366       0.970***           0.167
                                                                 (0.650)       (0.095)          (0.134)
Compensation                                                     37,363       -3,938***         -1,469
                 Average Salary of New Teacher
                                                                 (5,899)       (756.2)          (1,026)
                 Teachers are eligible for performance-
                                                                 0.203        0.342***         0.868***
                 based bonuses
                                                                 (0.376)       (0.061)          (0.062)

                 Average amount of performance bonus             971.8           537            269.94
                                                                 (2,125)       (2,381)          (562.4)
Notes: This table reports coefficients from separate, school-level regressions of each survey measure on
an indicator for whether the school is an NHA charter, an indicator for whether the school is a non-NHA
charter, comparison group fixed effects, and a constant. Comparison groups are determined by
geographic        proximity       and       detailed      in       an       online       appendix        at
http://edpolicy.umich.edu/publications/#policy-briefs. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity.




                                                    1
                      Growth of Charter Schools in Michigan
         Number of Charters              Share of K-12 Students Enrolled in a Charter
400                                                                                  20%

350                                                                                             18%
                                                                                                16%
300
                                                                                                14%
250                                                                                             12%
200                                                                                             10%

150                                                                                             8%
                                                                                                6%
100
                                                                                                4%
 50                                                                                             2%
   0                                                       0%
    1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

Figure 1: The number of charters and the share of K-12 students enrolled in a charter in Michigan has
increased by a factor of ten between 1996 and 2016. The figure has a series break between 2002 and
2003. Data on enrollment from 1996 to 2002 comes from the National Center for Education Statistics
Common Core of Data (CCD), and data after 2002 comes from the Michigan Department of Education,
student-level administrative records.
              Growth in For-Profit Enrollment in Michigan
               Share of K-12 Students Enrolled in Charters
               Share of K-12 Students Enrolled in a For-Profit Charter
               Share of K-12 Students Enrolled in APA Schools

                                                                                                9.8%

                                                                                               7.2%



              0.3%                                                                              2.3%
  0.1%
 0.01%
      1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

Figure 2: Almost three-quarters of the growth in charter school enrollment between 1996 and 2016 in
Michigan has come from enrollment in for-profit charter schools. NHA enrollment has increased as well,
and represents about a fifth of charter enrollment in 2016. The figure has a series break between 2002 and
2003. Data on enrollment from 1996 to 2002 comes from the National Center for Education Statistics
Common Core of Data (CCD), and data after 2002 comes from the Michigan Department of Education,
student-level administrative records.
Figure 3: Location of NHA charters in Michigan as of 2017.
Figure 4a: This figure plots the OLS coefficient on receiving an initial lottery offer for two regressions.
The top line is the reduced form effect of winning a lottery on the cumulative years a student spent in any
school within her risk-set, estimated separately by years since the lottery. The bottom line is the reduced
form effect of winning a lottery on the share of years that a student enrolls in any school in her risk-set,
out of all possible years a student could have been enrolled. Again, this is estimated separately by years
since the lottery for all lottery applicants, subject to the sample restrictions in Appendix Table 1. See
Table 5 notes for details of the regression model.
Figure 4b: This figure plots the OLS coefficient on receiving an initial lottery offer for two regressions.
The top line is the reduced form effect of winning a lottery on the cumulative years a student spent in any
school within her risk-set, estimated separately by years since the lottery. The bottom line is the reduced
form effect of winning a lottery on the share of years that a student enrolls in any school in her risk-set,
out of all possible years a student could have been enrolled. Again, this is estimated separately by years
since the lottery, for all lottery applicants between 2003 and 2008, subject to the restrictions in Appendix
Table      1.     See       Table      5     notes    for    details   of     the      regression     model.




                                                     1
(a)
                                                   (b)

Figure 5: This figure plots the 2SLS coefficient from a regression of test scores on the cumulative years
spent at an NHA charter, estimated separately by grade for all lottery applicants, subject to the sample
restrictions in Appendix Table 1. See Table 5 notes for details of the regression model.
(a)




1
                                                   (b)

Figure 6: This figure plots the 2SLS coefficient from a regression of test scores on the cumulative years
spent at an NHA charter, estimated separately by grade. The sample is all lottery applicants between 2003
and 2008. All regressions use the same model as reported in Table 5.




                                                    2
Appendix Tables and Figures




            3
Appendix Table 1: Sample Restrictions
                                                                                              Number of      Number of      Number of         Number of
Sample     Restriction                                                                       Applications      Schools       Lotteries         Students
1          All NHA applications                                                                   79,459           46           2,907           50,854
2          Remove applications that predate the SRSD                                              78,892           46           2,881           50,316

3          Remove applicants with enrolled-sibling preference                                     69,373             46           2,869            42,175
           Remove applications from students who have previously won a charter
4          lottery                                                                                63,300             46           2,855            42,175

5          Remove applications from students who never match to SRSD                              58,807             46           2,844            39,113

6          Remove applications without later SRSD matches                                         57,820             46           2,837            38,518
           Remove applications from students who have previously attended their
7          target school                                                                          56,827             46           2,809            37,671

8          Remove applications from degenerate lotteries on InitialOffer                          31,300             44             749            21,576

9          Remove applications in risk sets that are degenerate on InitialOffer                  27,143              44             735           20,255
Notes: This table lists all sample restrictions for the main analysis sample, as well as the number of applications, schools, lotteries, and students that
remain after the restriction.
Appendix Table 2: Effect of Lottery Offer on Enrollment in Michigan Public Schools After Lottery
                                                                                     Lottery Fixed Effects Specification
                                                                              Treatment Mean           Control Mean      Adjusted Difference

All applicants                                                                               0.932                  0.905                    -0.001
                                                                                          [20,238]               [43,062]                   (0.004)

Applicants to Pre-K and K Lotteries                                                          0.935                  0.911                     0.004
                                                                                          [12,140]               [15,525]                   (0.005)

Applicants to Grade 1-8 Lotteries                                                            0.929                  0.901                    -0.011
                                                                                           [8,098]               [27,537]                   (0.008)

Notes: Regressions contain one observation per lottery application. Adjusted differences are coefficients from a regression of an indicator for
whether the applicant enrolls in a Michigan public school regressed on an indicator for receiving an initial offer at any point after the lottery,
controlling for lottery fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by lottery; treatment and control sample sizes in brackets in their
respective columns. Sample subject to all restrictions detailed in Appendix Table 1.
Appendix Table 3 - Description of Survey Composite Measures


Domain          Measure                 Description                                                                                   Variable
Assessment      Test frequency          This is a scale ranging from 0 to 4 that measures the frequency of both internal and          testfreq
                                        external type assessments. It was created by taking the mean value of Q41a (internally
                                        developed assessment), Q41b (externally purchased assessment), Q41c (norm-referenced
                                        assessment), Q41d (criterion reference assessment), with the values of 0 = Never; 1 = per
                                        semester; 2 = quarterly; 3 = monthly; and 4 = weekly.
Compensation    Average Salary of       The average salary at each school for a first year teacher without a master's degree.         salary
                New Teacher
Compensation    Teachers are eligible   Binary indicator for whether teachers are eligible for a performance-based bonus              bonus
                for performance-based
                bonuses
Compensation    Average amount of       Performance-based bonus pay. This is set to 0 (in regressions only) if respondent's           bonus_amount
                performance bonus       answered no that teachers are not eligible for a performance-based bonus.
Instruction     Instructional           if classroom instruction is standardized or customized by teacher. This was created from      inst_unif
                uniformity              questions 11 (are teachers expected to adhere to scripted lessons) and 12 (does your school
                                        provide common templates). If either one was selected as yes, then the composite is set to
                                        1. If both are not selected, then the composite is set to 0.
Instruction     Hours/year principal    The average of questions 64a (how many minutes per year do principals observe new             principal_observe
                observes teachers       teachers?) and 64b (how many minutes per year do principals observe experienced
                                        teachers?).
Instruction     Ability grouping in     Students are assigned to math classes based on ability.                                       trackm
                math
Instruction     Ability grouping in     Students are assigned to reading classes based on ability.                                    trackr
                reading
Instruction     Offers tutoring         The school offers tutoring outside classroom hours.                                           hastutor
Instruction     Mandatory tutoring      Students are assigned to mandatory tutoring based on low performance.                         mantutor
Instruction     Hours/month tutoring    The variable indicates hours of tutoring per month, which is the product of Q36 (how often    tutorfreq
                                        tutoring sessions are) and Q37 (how long tutoring sessions are). The coding for question 36
                                        was converted from daily, weekly, or monthly to numeric values for days/week (assuming
                                        a 5 day week): daily = 20; weekly = 4; monthly =1; and "other" that indicated 2-4
                                        times/week = 12. Question 37 was coded with the midpoint for each range so that 1-30
                                        minutes = 15; 31-60 = 45; 61-90 = 75; and over 90 minutes = 90.
School         No Excuses culture   A composite that ranges from 0-10. It is the sum of the 10 binary variables for the no          noexcuse
Culture                             excuses questions: 1) school-wide policies enforced the same way; 2) new student
                                    orientation to learn school policies; 3) teacher dismisses class, not bell; 4) teacher
                                    addresses student problems immediately; 5) student does other work if task completed
                                    early; 6) students sit up & track teacher with eyes; 7) only necessary items on student desk;
                                    8) silence in hallways during transition time; 9) students silently working on activity at
                                    start of class; and 10) all backpacks consistently stored in one place. Standardized into z-
                                    score form for regressions in columns M and N.
School         School discipline    A scale ranging from 0 to 3. This is the sum of three binary variables for school behavioral    schdiscip
Culture                             questions: 1) students required to wear school uniforms; 2) students required to sign
                                    behavior contract; and 3) parents required to sign contract. Standardized into z-score form
                                    for regressions in columns M and N.
School         Parent Engagement    The average fraction of parents involved across the following 5 school activities: 1) open      pareng
Culture                             house; 2) parent-teacher conference; 3) volunteer at school; 4) PTA; and 5) homework
                                    notification service. Each of the five questions were coded so that the answer choices
                                    corresponded to few = .1; less than half = .25; half = .5; more than half = .75; and almost
                                    all = .9. Standardized into z-score form for regressions in columns M and N.
Organization   Principal tenure     The sum of years the principal has served as an administrator, both at the current school       prinyears
& Leadership                        and prior.
Organization   Administrators are   An indicator for whether school administrators are teachers' typical mentors.                   mentors
& Leadership   mentors
School         Bad teachers are a   On a 0-3 scale, how much does firing bad teachers prevent the school from improving?            badtch
Organization   problem              Standardized into z-score form for regressions in columns M and N.
& Leadership




                                                                 1
School         Curriculum control        This variable is created from two variables, int_cur and ext_cur, which are each composed             curr_ctrl
Organization   difference                of questions asking about curriculum decisions based on the balance of power between
& Leadership                             internal actors (principals, teachers, and non-instructional staff) and external actors
                                         (management company, authorizer, district/central office, superintendent, school board,
                                         and consultants). Int_cur int_cur is based on questions 13a, 13b, and 13g (how much
                                         influence do principals, teachers, and staff have on curriculum development?); ext_cur is
                                         based on questions 13c, 13d, 13e, and 13g (how much influence do management
                                         companies, authorizers, school district, school board, and other outside groups have on
                                         curriculum development?). 13g is a free response question in which respondents can list
                                         the groups that are relevant; staff, school board, and other outside groups are common
                                         responses. For each of these two variables, a school is coded as 0 for no influence, 1 for
                                         minor influence, 2 for moderate influence, or 3 for high influence for the respective group.
                                         The difference is then taken between int_curr and ext_curr and the variable is standardized.




School         Hiring control            This variable is created from two variables, int_hire and ext_hire, which are each                     hire_ctrl
Organization   difference                composed of questions asking about hiring decisions based on the balance of power
& Leadership                             between internal actors (principals, teachers, and non-instructional staff) and external
                                         actors (management company, authorizer, district/central office, superintendent, school
                                         board, and consultants). int_hire and ext_hire are based on questions 52a and 52b (who
                                         performs initial screening of teachers, and who makes final hiring decisions?); int_hire
                                         includes principals only, while ext_hire includes district offices, superintendents, and
                                         school boards for traditional public schools and management companies and school boards
                                         for charters. For each of these two variables, a school is coded as 9 for having no part of
                                         either initial or final teacher hiring, 1 for part of either initial or final teacher hiring, or 2 for
                                         having part of both initial and final teacher hiring for the respective group. The difference
                                         is then taken between int_hire and ext_hire and the variable is standardized.
School         School autonomy            The school autonomy variable is the mean of the curriculum and hiring control difference             sch_aut
Organization                             variables.
& Leadership
Time           Instructional hours per   The number of instructional hours per year; the product of question 26 (number of                     hrsyr
               year                      instructional days) and 28-30 (number of instructional hours per day for grade 3 or grade
                                         8).


                                                                        2
Time             Instructional hours per   From question 28-30 for ELA: the number of minutes per week spent on English language ela_hrs
                 week (reading)            arts. Multiplied by 5 if less than 120; set to missing if greater than 600, and divided by 60
                                           to convert to hours.
Time             Instructional hours per From question 28-30 for math: the number of minutes per week spent on math. Multiplied          math_hrs
                 week (math)               by 5 if less than 120; set to missing if greater than 600, and divided by 60 to convert to
                                           hours.
Notes: This table describes the construction of all the survey measures tested in Table 8. Each measure is created from a survey of Michigan public schools.
See online appendix at http://edpolicy.umich.edu/publications/#policy-briefs for further description of the survey, and Appendix Table 4 for descriptive
statistics.




                                                                       3
                                        Appendix Table 4 - Summary Statistics for School Practice Measures
                                                                                              TPS
                                                                                          Comparison       All     All non-   All for-
                                                            All schools                     Schools     Charters    profit     profit    NHA

                         Measure            Obs.    Min.      Max.      Mean      SD                               Mean
                 Average Salary of New
Compensation     Teacher                    362    17,500    53,000    35,728    4,501      36,420      34,785      33,947    34,998     35,299
                 Teachers are eligible
                 for performance-based
Compensation     bonuses                    379       0         1       0.387    0.488       0.15        0.743      0.441      0.817       1
                 Average amount of
Compensation     performance bonus          143      50      10,000     1,483    1,416       893         1,634      2,251      1,561     1,537
Instruction      Test frequency             397       0         4       1.62     0.694       1.51        1.78        1.76      1.79       1.92
Instruction      Instructional uniformity   372       0         1       0.64     0.481      0.627        0.657      0.651      0.655     0.602
                 Hours/year principal
Instruction      observes teachers          363      0.15      45       2.97      3.94       2.05        4.39        3.24      4.69       7.34
                 Ability grouping in
Instruction      math                       400       0         1       0.488     0.50      0.452        0.544      0.372      0.588     0.799
                 Ability grouping in
Instruction      reading                    375       0         1       0.440    0.497      0.452        0.42       0.301      0.445     0.564
Instruction      Offers tutoring            392       0         1       0.825    0.381      0.787        0.881       0.91      0.873     0.893
Instruction      Mandatory tutoring         306       0         1       0.329    0.329      0.269        0.411      0.541      0.379     0.293
Instruction      Hours/month tutoring       370      0.5       30       7.90      7.92       8.26        7.38        8.10      7.27       6.59
School Culture No Excuses culture           411       0        10       4.64      1.96       4.3         5.17        4.32      5.39       6.17
School Culture School discipline            391       0         3         2       2.00       1.61        2.56        2.32      2.62       2.79
School Culture   Parent Engagement          388      0.1       0.9      0.486    0.142      0.465        0.517      0.537      0.513     0.574
Organization
& Leadership     Principal tenure           410       1        20        9.2      4.66        10         7.89        8.11      7.81       7.75
Organization     Administrators are
& Leadership     mentors                    384       0         1       0.332    0.472      0.256        0.443      0.239      0.498     0.506
Organization     Bad teachers are a
& Leadership     problem                    386       0         3       0.995     1.05       1.37        0.439      0.172      0.512     0.664
Organization     Curriculum control          397       -3         3          0.031   1.40      -0.338        0.601       1.62       0.330       0.452
& Leadership     difference
Organization     Hiring control
& Leadership     difference                  391       -2         2          0.241   1.25      -0.218        0.898       1.29       0.792       0.567
Organization
& Leadership      School autonomy              404        0         1       0.333     0.383       0.206       0.527      0.745       0.470      0.299
                  Instructional hours per
Time              year                         284       850      1,680     1,151      123        1,141       1,165      1170        1165       1119
                  Instructional hours per
Time              week (reading)               269       0.5       2.25      1.39     0.444        1.33        1.49       1.45        1.49       1.59
                  Instructional hours per
Time              week (math)                  295       0.5        2        1.20     0.343        1.14        1.28       1.24        1.28       1.40
Notes: Descriptive statistics for all measures tested in Table 8. Each measure is created from a survey of Michigan public schools. See online
appendix at http://edpolicy.umich.edu/publications/#policy-briefs for further description of the survey, and Appendix Table 3 for detailed description
of the measures.




                                                                         1
Appendix A – Collection of Lottery Data


         We solicited lottery data from all existing and eligible charter schools in Michigan from May

2011 to June 2012 and attended a subset of school lotteries in spring 2012 and 2013. Out of the 252

eligible 23 charter schools we contacted, we obtained usable lottery records from 67 schools (27%) (See

Table A1). We collected lottery data from as many years as available in each school.



        Table A1: Lottery Data Collection Status by School Level

                                                       Schools         Schools
                      Eligible Participating               with     with usable
                     schools*       schools           lottery**        data***
 K-5                       18             16                  5               3
 K-8                       99             86                 51             46
 K-12                      29             23                  7               6
 9th-12th                  24             18                  7               4
 Other                     82             69                 20               8
 Total                    252           212                  90             67

 * Schools open in 2011-12, remained open in 2012-13, and general
 education focused (not alternative schools).
 ** Schools where the principal or school staff recalled conducting a
 lottery
 *** Schools with usable lottery records as determined by project team.


         Since no central body collects lottery data from all schools, we had to reach out to each school to

learn its lottery history and gain access to its records. Schools fell into one of three categories: 1) they

had no memory of a prior lottery; 2) they could recall a prior lottery but did not save sufficient records; 3)

they had a prior lottery and saved sufficient records.

         Rather than cold-calling charter schools, we reached out to the charter school authorizers (through

the Michigan Council of Charter School Authorizers) and larger management companies to get their buy-



23
  We did not include alternative schools, i.e., strict discipline academies, vocational academies, and second-chance
schools.
in and assistance with contacting their schools. We then contacted school principals, explained the study,

asked about their lottery history, and in most cases, worked with the staff to locate, sift through, and

understand their lottery records. This entailed many in-person visits, emails, and phone calls to ensure we

had complete records with proper documentation. When we could, we attended the actual lotteries of

schools in our sample often as a way to fill in any gaps unintentionally left by school staff.

        Over the course of our year-long fieldwork, we took note of the significant role the open

enrollment period appeared to play in whether a school had a lottery or not. The open enrollment period

is the only time a lottery can be legally triggered. Each school sets its own period with the only

requirement that it be at least two weeks. During this period, if more students apply than open seats for a

grade, then legally a lottery must occur. If there are enough open seats for all the students that apply, then

all the students are accepted without needing a lottery. The timing of a school’s open enrollment period

could directly impact the likelihood of a lottery. For example, schools that had an earlier open enrollment

period for only two weeks could usually accept all the eager and savvy applicants that applied and keep a

first-come first-serve waitlist after the open enrollment period. Schools that had a longer and later open

enrollment period (when parents were more likely to be thinking about the next school year) were more

likely to need a lottery, since more students could apply during this time. And with a lottery came the

inability to just accept all the students, presumably with the savviest parents, who applied first. And since

each school set its own open enrollment period, parents had to be exceptionally organized if applying to

multiple schools with multiple deadlines. We also noticed schools getting into open enrollment bidding

wars, setting their open enrollment periods to be earlier than competing schools so as to not miss out on

prime students.



Cleaning Lottery Data

        Since each school managed their own lottery, there was little uniformity in lottery records across

schools and sometimes even within schools due to personnel changes. Due to this variation, we

developed a custom intake process by lottery record to standardize the format and information.

                                                      1
Fortunately, there was one large management company, National Heritage Academies (NHA), which

maintained physical and electronic records of lotteries from all of their schools. We applied the same

intake rules to these records.



Lottery Records from the NHA Network

        We received lottery records from the NHA in two formats: (1) an excel spreadsheet with

information from its centralized enrollment database; and (2) physical lottery boards collected from its

network of schools.

        The excel spreadsheet (or “electronic files”), contained first name, last name, date of birth, full

address, gender, school name, academic year, and grade for all applicants that participated in a lottery

from 2004-2012. They also contained the date admission was offered and the date a student was added to

the waitlist, which identified which students were admitted from the lottery, which were placed on the

waitlist and which, if any, of these waitlist students were later admitted. We did not know the waitlist

order, since the randomly drawn lottery number was not saved. We received a separate sibling file where,

for the most part, we could identify if an applicant had an applying or currently enrolled sibling.

        The physical lottery board files showed the order the applicant was drawn and whether they had

“won” an open seat or were placed on the waitlist. Since these were records from the day of the lottery,

we could not tell which waitlist students were later admitted. The lottery board also contained student and

sibling information but was missing student date of birth.

        The ideal combination was both the electronic and lottery board file for each lottery, since the

electronic file contained admission data and student date of birth, while the lottery board file contained

the waitlist order. We combined the information from both sources when available, but in some cases, we

only had one. Prior to 2004, only physical lottery boards were available, since electronic records did not

go back that far. And for some schools, we only had electronic lottery files, since it was up to the school

whether to save the physical lottery boards (not required by the NHA).



                                                      2
Appendix B – Construction of Lottery Instruments


           In any lottery study, there are several options for constructing a lottery instrument. The initial

offer instrument is an indicator variable equal to one if a student is offered a seat in at least one school in

her risk set at the time of the lottery. The ever offer instrument is equal to one if initial offer is one, but

also counts offers made later, that is, offers extended to students on the waiting list after a student with an

initial offer decides to turn it down. If offers are given in the ordering established on the day of the lottery,

both initial offer and ever offer should be unrelated to most other characteristics of the student and predict

enrollment.


           As explained in Appendix A, lottery information comes from two sources: pictures of lottery

boards (LBs) and electronic files (EFs). LB records contain lottery numbers and offers made on the day of

the lottery. EFs contain all offers (both initial and ever), but no lottery numbers. Thus, although ever offer

and initial offer can both be constructed from the EFs, verifying that a school complied with the lottery

ordering can only be achieved by cross- referencing the EF with the LB. In the full sample, 66% of lottery

applications with EFs have LB information. After sample restrictions, 58% of the EFs have corresponding

LB information.




Initial Offer


           When both EFs and LBs are available, initial offers correspond about 98% of the time, according

to Table B1 below. LB records supersede EF records when both are available. Skipped lottery numbers

and repeat lottery numbers within the same lottery are also rare at 6.2% and 1.8% of all lottery applicants

with LBs, respectively. Thus, initial offer plausibly captures the random ordering established by the

lottery.
 Table B1: Cross-tab of Initial Offer According to Electronic File
 Records Versus Lottery Board Records
                                          Lottery Board
 Electronic File                  0           1       Missing         Total
 0                           5,502      51         3,295       8,848
 1                             312   2,590         3,171       6,073
 Missing                       312     313             0         625
 Total                       6,126   2,954         6,466      15,546
 Notes: Comparison of recorded offers awarded on the day of the
 lottery according to two sources of information: lottery boards and
 electronic files. Comparison data only available for a subsample of
 schools that saved lottery boards.



         However, initial offer is less predictive of enrollment than ever offer. Some students do not

accept offers of admission, particularly in later grades where students must switch schools to take up an

offer.




Ever Offer


         We check whether there exists any student who never received an offer and has a smaller lottery

number than somebody who did receive an offer in the same lottery. That is, we check for offers given

out of order. About 13% of all offers where both EF and LB records are available are out of order. Within

a lottery, the average fraction of offers that is out of order is 0.16, and the median fraction of out-of-order

offers is 0.11. Only 40 lotteries give more than 20% of their offers out of order, and 30 of these lotteries

extend fewer than 30 offers (in this case even one out-of-order offer is a large share of the total offers). In

addition, while some lotteries seem to be worse than others, averaged across all observed lotteries, only

two schools with more than 30 applications give 20% or more offers out of order.


         This suggests that many lotteries and schools are doing a good job of following the lottery

number ordering, but for half of the sample, which schools and lotteries are doing a good job is

unobservable. It’s even possible that the sample for which we observe both LB and EF records has a

                                                       1
lower than average rate of out-of-order offers. Because some lotteries and schools are likely to be giving

non-random offers of admission, and it is impossible to observe this, the ever offer instrument is not

preferred.




Alternate Ever Offer Instruments


        For the subset of lottery applications where both LB and EF records, two alternative instruments

can be constructed to attempt to “fix” any out of order offers. The adjustment depends on the type of error

assumed. If schools are failing to record offers (as opposed to failing to give offers in order), the adjusted

instrument should fill in offers for applicants who were skipped. We call this a backfilled instrument. If

schools are failing to give offers in order, but never fail to record offers, then we can count the number of

offers recorded and assign them according to the lottery number. We call this the lottery number

instrument.


        However, both of these alternative instruments exist for a strange subset of students since schools

idiosyncratically saved LB information when it was not necessary to do so. Table B2 describes observable

characteristics for the different samples available for each instrument. Students in the alternate samples

apply to more lotteries (see Table B2). The alternate samples are observably different. For example,

students are more likely to come from non-urban areas, more likely to apply in 2009 or later, and are

slightly less likely to apply to middle school grades. Finally, the alternate samples are less likely to be

made up of underrepresented minorities (particularly Black students) and more likely to contain Asian

students. Because of the limited sample size and the irregularity of the sample, neither of the alternate

ever offer instruments are preferred, though results for these are reported in Table B3.




                                                       2
                     Table B2: Characteristics of samples used with each instrument
                                          Initial Offer Ever Offer Lottery Number          Backfilled Ever
                                                Sample       Sample             Sample       Offer Sample
                                                    (1)           (2)                (3)                (4)
Number of Students                               21661         14597             10159                4104
Number of Applications                           27264         18971             14460                5969
Number of Applications per Student
1                                                  0.84          0.81               0.74              0.71
2                                                  0.10          0.12               0.17              0.20
3 or more                                          0.06          0.07               0.09              0.09
Number of Offers per Student
0                                                  0.58          0.66               0.68              0.70
1                                                  0.41          0.33               0.30              0.28
2                                                  0.01          0.01              0.02               0.02
3 or more                                          0.00          0.00              0.00               0.00

Applied to Mostly Urban Schools                    0.25          0.20              0.20               0.21
Applied to Mostly Non-Urban Schools                0.75          0.80              0.80               0.79
Applied 2003                                       0.03          0.01              0.01               0.00
Applied 2004                                       0.06          0.05              0.00               0.00
Applied 2005                                       0.09          0.09              0.07               0.04
Applied 2006                                       0.08          0.05              0.06               0.03
Applied 2007                                       0.09          0.08              0.07               0.09
Applied 2008                                       0.10          0.11              0.09               0.06
Applied 2009                                       0.12          0.10              0.13               0.16
Applied 2010                                       0.08          0.07              0.11               0.16
Applied 2011                                       0.17          0.17              0.10               0.14
Applied 2012                                       0.18          0.25              0.37               0.33
Applied in Pre-K                                   0.07          0.04              0.05               0.09
Applied in Kindergarten                            0.55          0.53              0.59               0.52
Applied in Grades 1-5                              0.32          0.36              0.32               0.36
Applied in Grades 6-8                              0.07          0.07              0.04               0.04

Female                                             0.50          0.51               0.51             0.51
Black                                              0.27          0.24               0.20             0.18
Hispanic                                           0.07          0.08               0.07             0.06
Asian                                              0.16          0.18               0.20             0.22
Notes: Column (1) uses the full sample subject to the restrictions in Appendix Table 1. Samples differ
between columns due to the exclusion of degenerate lotteries and risk sets according to each instrument.
Column (2) reports on the ever offer sample, column (3) on the lottery number instrument, which counts the
number of ever offers and assigns them according to the lottery number, and column (4) reports on the
backfilled instrument, which assigns an offer to anyone with a lottery number smaller than the maximum
which received an "ever offer."



                                                  3
DREO Estimator


        Table B3 reports estimates using the initial offer instrument, the ever offer instrument, and the

ever offer instrument weighted to account for the fact that the number of ever offers depends on the

number of takers, following Behaghel and Chaisemartin (2017). Behaghel and Chaisemartin (2017) show

that without this weighting, the ever offer instrument is inconsistent. The reweighted estimator is called

the doubly-reweighted ever offer (DREO) estimator. The initial offer and DREO estimators should both

be consistent, though the initial offer instrument yields less precise estimates. The two-stage least squares
                                                  𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷
regressions for the DREO estimator use weights 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖  , which are constructed as follows:

                                                                         𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
                                       𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 𝑅𝑅 = 𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 �1 −                  � + (1 − 𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 )
                                                                          𝑆𝑆𝑘𝑘

                       𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷      𝑅𝑅              𝐿𝐿−𝐾𝐾       𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘 −1                       𝑁𝑁−𝐿𝐿         𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘 −1     𝑁𝑁
                    𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖  = 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 �𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ×   𝑁𝑁−𝐾𝐾
                                                         ×
                                                             𝐿𝐿𝑘𝑘 −1
                                                                     +   (1 − 𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) ×
                                                                                           𝑁𝑁−𝐾𝐾
                                                                                                    ×             � 𝑘𝑘 .
                                                                                                        𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘 −𝐿𝐿𝑘𝑘 𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘 −1


                                     𝑅𝑅
        The first set of weights, 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , down-weights each student with an offer in a way that is equivalent

                                                                        𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷
to removing one taker from each risk set. The second set of weights, 𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖  , acts like a propensity score

weighting. Here 𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 and 𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 denote whether applicant i in risk set k received an offer and whether she

enrolled in a charter, respectively. In addition, K denotes the total number of risk sets, 𝑁𝑁𝑘𝑘 is the number of

applicants in risk set k, N is the total number of applicants, 𝐿𝐿𝑘𝑘 is the number of offers in risk set k, and L

is the total number of offers across all risk sets. Finally, 𝑆𝑆𝑘𝑘 represents the number of seats in each risk-set,

and is imputed from the number of offers that are taken up in the data.


        Table B3, column (1) replicates the analysis in the paper. Columns (2) and (3) report results for

the sample where ever offer records are available, and columns (4) through (9) report results for the

alternate instruments. These show that the alternate instruments do not have much more predictive power

than the initial offer instrument, possibly suggesting that they are not more accurate than the recorded

offers. For example, the first stage in column (6) for the backfilled instrument is weaker than the first

                                                                   4
stage in column (4) for the initial offer instrument. If one takes the recorded offers at face value, then

results for the ever offer and DREO estimators in column (3) line up fairly well with the initial offer

results in column (2); they are not statistically distinguishable, even though the ever offer estimates are

possibly biased. The treatment on the treated estimates using the DREO estimator are more precise than

those estimated with the initial offer, and larger than the results using ever offer.




                                                       5
                                                  Table B3: Robustness to alternative instruments and samples.
                      Full Sample             Ever Offer Sample               Backfilled Ever Offer Sample                          Lottery Number Sample

                       Initial Offer       Initial Offer      Ever Offer     Initial Offer   Ever Offer      Ever Offer     Initial Offer    Ever Offer   Ever Offer
                                                                                                             Alternate 1                                  Alternate 2
                                 (1)                (2)          (3)                  (4)             (5)          (6)                 (7)          (8)            (9)
ITT                          0.030*              0.022      0.045**               0.068*           0.013       -0.013            0.041**        0.038*           0.01
                            (0.016)            (0.019)       (0.019)              (0.035)        (0.031)      (0.037)             (0.021)       (0.021)       (0.021)
TOT                          0.040*              0.024      0.018**               0.053*           0.006       -0.012              0.043*       0.016*          0.008
                            (0.023)            (0.021)       (0.008)              (0.030)        (0.013)      (0.035)             (0.023)       (0.009)       (0.018)
Cumulative Yrs.           0.745***           0.950***       2.45***              1.27***        2.35***      1.07***            0.950***       2.44***       1.16***
                            (0.102)            (0.129)       (0.092)              (0.176)        (0.127)      (0.190)             (0.154)       (0.101)       (0.131)
Obs.                         80,832             53,381       53,381               14,593         14,593       14,593               35,801       35,801        35,801

DREO - ITT                                                   0.046*                               -0.019       -0.039                             0.028         0.024
                                                             (0.024)                             (0.045)      (0.055)                           (0.025)       (0.021)
DREO - TOT                                                   0.020*                               -0.009       -0.033                             0.013         0.019
                                                             (0.011)                             (0.020)      (0.047)                           (0.011)       (0.017)
Cumulative Yrs.                                             2.28***                             2.23***      1.20***                           2.27***       1.25***
                                                             (0.091)                             (0.146)      (0.168)                           (0.109)       (0.132)
Obs.                                                         53,244                              14,558       14,566                            35,717        35,801
* = 10%, **=5%, ***=1%
Notes: Outcome is math standardized test score, endogenous regressor is cumulative years spent at a charter school in the student's risk set, and four
instruments are used: initial offer, ever offer, and two alternate ever offer instruments. Regressions cluster standard errors at the risk-set level, control for risk-
set fixed effects, and the standard vector of covariates. Column (1) uses the full analysis sample. Columns (2)-(3) drop lotteries and risk-sets that are
degenerate on the ever offer instrument. Columns (4)-(6) drop lotteries and risk-sets that are degenerate on the first alternative ever offer instrument, which
assigns an offer to anyone with a lottery number smaller than the maximum lottery number to have received an "ever offer." Columns (7)-(9) drop lotteries and
risk sets that are degenerate on the second alternative ever offer instrument, which counts the number of ever offers, and assigns them according to the lottery
number. DREO estimates reweight the estimates according to Behaghel and Chaisemartin (2017).
Appendix C – Matching Lottery Records to Michigan Department of Education Administrative
Data

            The analysis uses lottery records matched to administrative records maintained by the Michigan

Department of Education. Matching occurred using a combination of exact and probabilistic matching

techniques. Probabilistic matching can account for minor misspellings, nicknames, date and month swaps

in date of birth, and other common errors. We could also place a higher weight on certain variables like

date of birth compared to others, like ethnicity. In cases where it was difficult to read an applicant’s name

or date of birth, we would create multiple entries with the possible variations. We reconciled these

duplicates after the matching process. Overall, we matched 96% of the 98,499 lottery application student

records. We did not match 4,150 applicants and had to drop these applicants since we could not obtain

their state administrative outcome data.



Probabilistic Matching

            We used Link King software for the probabilistic matching. Note that this was only possible for

records with non-missing date of birth. 24 We then divided our date of birth records by twins and non-

twins, since Link King was less precise with twins. We ran the records lacking date of birth and the

records marked as twins through exact matching in STATA.

            Of the 87% of lottery applicants who had date of birth and were not a twin, we matched 97% of

these in Link King. At a minimum, we matched on the binding variables first name, last name and date of

birth, and whenever available, we included the non-binding variables zip code, gender, and ethnicity.

Link King outputted a match level of 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7 (no 5) to indicate match strength, with match

levels 1, 2, and 3 reflecting stronger matches; 4, 6, and 7 reflecting weaker matches; and no match level

for records with no match. We accepted all level 1, 2, and 3 matches (95%), manually reviewed level 4,

6, and 7 matches (2%), and accepted all no match level as unmatched (3%) If a lottery applicant matched




24
     Some schools did not retain date of birth with their lottery records.

                                                              1
to multiple students at the same match level, we considered these students unmatched to avoid false

positives (less than 1%).

        Of the 11% of lottery applicants that were missing date of birth, we matched 86% of these

applicants in STATA. We ran multiple rounds, matching on all available information for an applicant. For

example, if an applicant had first name, last name, gender, zip code, lottery year and grade, we ran a one-

to-many merge using all these variables. If a student uniquely matched, we considered this a proper

match. If a student had multiple matches, we checked street address if available to identify the correct

match. If we still could not identify a unique match, we considered this student unmatched to avoid false

positives. We then did the same for students with one less variable, and so on, establishing five sequential

matching rounds:


    1) Lottery year, grade, first name, last name, zip code, gender;

    2) Lottery year, grade, first name, last name, zip code;

    3) Lottery year, grade, first name, last name;

    4) First name, last name, zip code;

    5) First name, last name.

To prevent false positives in the later rounds, we used the lottery year and grade from the applicant lottery

record to estimate the applicant’s age. We then checked the date of birth from the matching state

administrative record to see if the date of birth lined up with the estimated age, within a plus or minus two

year range. For those that fell outside of this age range, we considered them false positives and classified

them as unmatched.

Of the 3% of records we identified as twins (same last name, same date of birth, different first name), we

matched 99% of these applicants in STATA. We followed the same process as above except with more

matching rounds:

    1) Lottery year, grade, first name, last name, zip code, gender, date of birth;

    2) Lottery year, grade, first name, last name, zip code; date of birth;


                                                      2
3) Lottery year, grade, first name, last name; date of birth;

4) First name, last name, zip code; date of birth;

5) First name, date of birth;

6) Last name, date of birth;

7) Manual match.




                                                 3
