                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DEMOGRAPHICS AND AUTOMATION

                                       Daron Acemoglu
                                       Pascual Restrepo

                                     Working Paper 24421
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24421


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




We thank participants at the Brown University microeconomics seminar and the NBER Summer
Institute, and especially our discussant, Valerie Ramey, for comments. We also thank Giovanna
Marcolongo, Mikel Petri, Joonas Tuhkuri and Sean Wang for excellent research assistance, and
Google, Microsoft, the Sloan Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the Toulouse
Network on Information Technology for generous financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Demographics and Automation
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo
NBER Working Paper No. 24421
March 2018
JEL No. J11,J23,J24,O33,O47,O57

                                         ABSTRACT

We argue theoretically and document empirically that aging leads to greater (industrial)
automation, and in particular, to more intensive use and development of robots. Using US data,
we document that robots substitute for middle-aged workers (those between the ages of 36 and
55). We then show that demographic change—corresponding to an increasing ratio of older to
middle-aged workers—is associated with greater adoption of robots and other automation
technologies across countries and with more robotics-related activities across US commuting
zones. We also provide evidence of more rapid development of automation technologies in
countries undergoing greater demographic change. Our directed technological change model
further predicts that the induced adoption of automation technology should be more pronounced
in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and those that present greater opportunities
for automation. Both of these predictions receive support from country-industry variation in the
adoption of robots. Our model also implies that the productivity implications of aging are
ambiguous when technology responds to demographic change, but we should expect productivity
to increase and labor share to decline relatively in industries that are most amenable to
automation, and this is indeed the pattern we find in the data.


Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E52-446
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu

Pascual Restrepo
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd
Boston, MA 02215
and Cowles Foundation, Yale
pascual@bu.edu
                                     1    Introduction
Advances in automation and robotics technology are poised to transform many aspects of the
production process (e.g., Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2012, Autor, 2015, Ford, 2016), and have already
made important inroads in modern manufacturing (e.g., Graetz and Michaels, 2015, Acemoglu and
Restrepo, 2017a). But there are major differences in how rapidly these technologies are spreading
across countries. The number of industrial robots per thousand workers in US manufacturing stands
at 9.14 in 2014, while the same number is considerably higher in Japan (14.20), Germany (16.95)
and South Korea (20.14). Similarly, the United States lags behind Germany and Japan in the
production of robots—a single major producer of industrial robots is headquartered in the United
States, compared to six in each of Germany and Japan (Leigh and Kraft, 2017). These differences in
automation are not only notable given the central role that this and other automation technologies
are likely to play in the next several decades, but they may also be related to a puzzling fact noted
in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017b): despite the potential negative effects of aging on productivity
and output, there is no negative relationship between aging and GDP growth across countries.
   In this paper, we advance the hypothesis that cross-country differences in automation are at least
in part explained by differential demographic trends, and emphasize the productivity implications
of automation induced by demographics. Focusing on robotics where we have access to comparable
data, the United States, and to some degree the United Kingdom, are lagging behind in robotics
because they are not aging as rapidly as Germany, Japan and South Korea. This is not because
of differential demand for robots and automation in the service sector in countries undergoing
rapid aging—our focus is on the manufacturing sector. Rather, we document that this pattern
reflects the response of firms to the relative scarcity of middle-aged workers, who appear to be
most substitutable for robots.
   We start with a simple model of technology adoption. Two types of workers, “middle-aged” and
“older”, are allocated across different tasks and industries. Middle-aged workers have a compara-
tive advantage in production tasks, while older workers specialize in nonproduction services. The
importance of production tasks relative to nonproduction services varies across industries. Firms
can also automate and substitute machines for labor in production tasks.
   In our model technology is endogenous: firms can invest to automate additional tasks in their
industry. Using this framework, we show that demographic changes that reduce the ratio of middle-
aged to older workers induce the adoption of additional automation technologies. This effect
is particularly pronounced in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and those that
have greater opportunities for automation. The productivity implications of demographic change
are however ambiguous: on the one hand, demographic change affects output per worker given
technology—and this effect is negative when middle-aged wage is greater than the wage of older
workers. On the other hand, the induced automation response enables the substitution of cheaper
machines for labor, increasing productivity.
   The bulk of the paper investigates these issues empirically, focusing on industrial robots as well


                                                 1
as a few other automation technologies. Our results point to a sizable impact of aging on the
adoption of robots and other automation technologies. We start with suggestive evidence on the
substitutability between robots and workers of different ages. We document that workers between
the ages of 31 and 55 are more likely to be employed in blue-collar occupations than in white-
collar or service occupations and in highly-robotized industries than in other industries. We also
show that the introduction of robots is associated with a relative decline of blue-collar occupations.
Finally, we find that exposure to robots has a negative impact on employment and earnings of
middle-aged workers across US commuting zones, with no corresponding negative impact on older
workers. These three pieces of evidence support our working hypothesis for the rest of the paper—
that robots are more substitutable for middle-aged workers than older workers.
   We then use country-level data on the stock of robots per thousand workers between 1993 and
2014 from that International Federation of Robotics (IFR) to investigate the effects of aging of
the workforce. Our main specifications focus on long differences, where our left-hand side variable
is the change in the number of robots per thousand (industry) workers between 1993 and 2014.
Our results indicate that countries undergoing more rapid aging—measured as an increase in the
ratio of workers above 56 to those between 26 and 55—invest significantly more in robotics. The
effects we estimate are quantitatively large. Aging alone explains close to 40% of the cross-country
variation in the adoption of industrial robots. Moreover, a 10 percentage point increase in our
aging variable is associated with 0.9 more robots per thousand workers—compared to the average
increase of 3 robots per thousand workers observed during this period. This estimated magnitude
suggests, for instance, that if the United States had the same demographic trends as Germany, the
gap in robotics between the two countries would be 25% smaller.
   These results are robust to a range of controls allowing for differential trends across countries in
investment in robotics. For example, they are virtually unchanged when we control for differential
trends by initial GDP per capita, population level, robot density, capital output ratio, various
human capital variables, wage levels, and unionization rates. Because age composition is potentially
endogenous due to migration patterns correlated with economic trends, we verify our baseline results
using an instrumental-variables (IV) strategy exploiting past birth rates and cohort sizes which
strongly predict aging and are unlikely to be correlated with subsequent automation decisions
through other channels. These estimates are very similar to the ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimates. We also confirm these results using an alternative estimate of investment in robotics:
imports of industrial robots computed from bilateral trade data.
   The effects of demographic change on technology are not confined to robotics. Using bilateral
trade data, we also show a similar relationship between aging and a number of other automation
technologies (such as numerically controlled machines, automatic welding machines, automatic
machine tools, weaving and knitting machines, and various dedicated industrial machines), and
also verify that there is no such relationship for technologies that appear more broadly labor-
augmenting (such as manual machine tools and non-automatic machines as well as computers).
   These effects are not confined to the adoption of automation technologies either. Using data


                                                  2
on exports of automation technologies and patents, we provide additional evidence that countries
undergoing more rapid demographic change are developing more automation technologies.
    We also estimate the effects of aging on the adoption of robots at the commuting zone level
in the United States. Though we do not have measures of investments in robots for commuting
zones, we use Leigh and Kraft’s (2016) measure of the number of integrators in an area as a proxy
for robotics-related activity. Since these integrators specialize in installation, reprogramming and
maintenance of industrial robots, their presence is indicative of significant installation of robots in
the area. Using this measure, we confirm the relationship between demographic change and the
adoption of robots.
    As noted above, a sharper prediction of the directed technological change approach to automa-
tion is that the effects of demographic change should be particularly pronounced in industries that
rely more on middle-aged workers and that present greater opportunities for automation. Using
industry-level data from the IFR, we find robust support for these predictions as well.
    Finally, we investigate the implications of aging on labor productivity and industry-level labor
share. Consistent with our theoretical expectations, we find a positive impact of demographic
change on labor productivity in industries that are most amenable to automation as well as a
pronounced impact on labor share in the same industries. These results suggest that the lack of a
negative relationship between aging and GDP mentioned above might be partly due to the more
rapid adoption of automation technologies in countries undergoing significant demographic change.
    Our paper is related to a few recent literatures. The first is a literature estimating the impli-
cations of automation technologies on labor markets. Early work (e.g., Autor, Levy and Murnane,
2003; Goos and Manning, 2007; Michaels, Natraj and Van Reenen, 2014; Autor and Dorn, 2013;
Gregory, Salomons and Zierahn, 2016) provides evidence suggesting that automation of routine jobs
has been associated with greater wage inequality and decline of middle-skill occupations. More re-
cently, Graetz and Michaels (2015) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a) estimate the effects of
the adoption of robotics technology on employment and wages (and in the former case, also on
productivity). Our work is complementary to but quite different from these papers since we focus
not on the implications of automation technologies, but on the determinants of their adoption.
    Second, a growing literature focuses on the potential costs of demographic change, in some cases
seeing this as a major disruptive factor that will bring slow economic growth (e.g., Gordon, 2016)
and potentially other macroeconomic problems such as an aggregate demand-induced secular stag-
nation (see the essays in Baldwin and Teulings, 2014).1 We differ from this literature by focusing
on the effects of demographic changes on automation—an issue that does not seem to have received
much attention in this literature.2 A few works focusing on the effects of demographic change on
    1
      A related literature explores the fiscal costs of demographic change for social security (e.g., Kotlikoff et al., 2002,
and Attanasio et al., 2007).
    2
      As mentioned above, our short paper, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017b), pointed out that despite these concerns,
there is no negative relationship between aging and GDP growth, and suggested that this might be because of the
effects of aging on technology adoption, but did not present any evidence on this linkage, nor did it develop the
theoretical implications of demographic change on technology adoption and productivity.




                                                             3
factor prices (e.g., Poterba, 2001, Krueger and Ludwig, 2007) and human capital (e.g., Ludwig,
Schelkle and Vogel, 2012) are more related, but we are not aware of any papers studying the impact
of aging on technology, except the independent and simultaneous work by Abelianisky and Prettner
(2017). There are several important differences between our work and this paper. These authors
focus on the effect of the slowdown of population growth—rather than age composition—on differ-
ent types of capital, one of which corresponds to automation (without any directed technological
change). They also do not consider the industry-level variation. We show further that the effects
we estimate are not driven by the level of population or its slower growth, thus distinguishing our
results from theirs.
   Third, our work is related to the literature on technology adoption. Within this literature,
most closely related to our conceptual approach is Zeira’s (1998) paper which develops a model
of economic growth based on the substitution of capital for labor, but does not investigate the
implications of demographic change on technology adoption. A few recent papers that study the
implications of factor prices on technology adoption are related to our work as well. Manuelli
and Seshadri (2010) use a calibrated model to show that stagnant wages mitigated the adoption of
tractors before 1940. Clemens et al. (2017) find that the exclusion of Mexican braceros—temporary
agricultural workers—induced farms to adopt mechanic harvesters and switch to crops with greater
potential for mechanization, while Lewis (2011) shows that in US metropolitan areas receiving
fewer low-skill immigrants between 1980 and 1990, equipment and fabricated metal plants adopted
more automation technologies. None of these papers investigate the implications of demographic
change on technology adoption or robotics technologies.
   Finally, our conceptual approach builds on directed technological change literature (e.g., Ace-
moglu, 1998, 2002). Our model is a mixture of the setup in Acemoglu (2007, 2010), which develops
a general framework for the study of directed innovation and technology adoption, with the task-
based framework of Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016, 2018), Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and Zeira
(1998). One contribution of the theory part of our paper is to analyze the effects of demographic
changes on technology without the specific functional form restrictions (such as constant elasticity
of substitution and factor-augmenting technologies) as in the early literature or the supermodular-
ity assumptions as in Acemoglu (2007, 2010). Existing empirical works on directed technological
change (e.g., Finkelstein, 2004, Acemoglu and Linn, 2005, Hanlon, 2016) do not focus on demo-
graphic changes. Acemoglu and Linn (2005) and Costinot, Donaldson, Kyle and Williams (2017)
exploit demographic changes as a source of variation, but this is in the context of the demand for
different types of pharmaceuticals rather than for technology adoption.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce our model of directed technology
adoption in the next section. Section 3 presents our data sources and descriptive statistics. Section 4
provides evidence that robotics technology is more highly substitutable to middle-aged workers than
older workers. Section 5 presents our cross-country evidence on the effect of demographic change
on the adoption of robots and other automation technologies. Section 6 provides evidence on the
impact of demographic change on innovation and development of automation technologies. Section 7


                                                  4
investigates the relationship between demographics and robots across US commuting zones. Section
8 presents evidence that the effects of demographic change on the adoption of robotics technology
are most pronounced in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and those with greater
opportunities for automation. Section 9 considers the relationship between demographic change
and productivity and the labor share at the industry level. Section 10 concludes, while the (online)
Appendix contains proofs omitted from the text and additional data details and empirical results.


                          2     Directed Technology Adoption
In this section, we introduce a simple model of directed technology adoption, which enables us to
derive the main implications of demographic change on automation technologies. In our model,
industries employ middle-aged workers, older workers and machines to perform the tasks necessary
for production, and technology monopolists invest in the development of new technologies that
automate tasks performed by middle-aged workers.3


2.1    The Environment

The economy produces a numeraire good Y by combining the output of a continuum of industries
(or varieties) through a CES aggregator:
                                           Z                          σ
                                                              σ−1      σ−1
                                   Y =                Y (i)    σ    di     , with σ > 1.                           (1)
                                                i∈I

Here Y (i) is the net output of industry i and I denotes the set of industries.
    In each industry, gross output is produced by combining production tasks, service or support
(non-production) tasks, and intermediates that embody the state of technology (in particular au-
tomation) for this industry:

                                           η −η h                    iη
                               Y g (i) =          X(i)α(i) S(i)1−α(i) q(θ(i))1−η .                                 (2)
                                           1−η

Firms first combine production inputs, X(i), with service inputs, S(i).4 The exponent α(i) ∈ (α, α),
with 0 < α < α < 1, designates the importance of production inputs relative to service inputs in
the production function of industry i. The aggregate of these two inputs is then combined with unit
elasticity with the quantity of intermediates for this industry, q(θ(i)). The term θ(i) designates the
extent of automation embedded in the intermediates that firms purchase. Finally, 1 − η ∈ (0, 1) is
the share of intermediates required for production.5
   3
     In our model, there is directed technological change (investment by technology monopolists in developing different
types of technologies) and endogenous adoption of these technologies. We emphasize both margins since our focus is
not just on the development but also on the adoption of the robotics technologies.
   4
     It is straightforward to extend this production function to have non-unitary elasticity of substitution between
X(i) and S(i), but we opted for the Cobb-Douglas specification for simplicity.
   5
     The assumption that σ > 1 is for simplicity. The model can be extended to cover the case with σ < 1 if we



                                                                    5
    Production inputs, X(i), are an aggregate of a unit measure of industry-specific tasks,

                                                   Z      1                         ζ−1
                                                                                       ζ
                                                                         ζ−1
                                         X(i) =                X(i, z)    ζ    dz           ,
                                                       0

where ζ is the elasticity of substitution between tasks. We can, but do not need to, impose that
ζ ≤ 1.
    Following Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016, 2018), we model automation as the substitution of
machines for labor in the production of tasks. Each production task X(i, z) is produced either by
labor or machines,
                                          (
                                              A(i)l(i, z) + m(i, z)                 if z ∈ [0, θ(i)]
                             X(i, z) =
                                                   A(i)l(i, z)                      if z ∈ (θ(i), 1],

where l(i, z) denotes the amount of production labor employed in task z in industry i, and m(i, z)
denotes machines used in industry i to produce task z. In addition, A(i) corresponds to the
productivity of labor relative to machines in production tasks in industry i. Labor and machines
are perfect substitutes in (technologically) automated tasks (those with z ≤ θ(i) in industry i).
An increase in θ(i) extends the set of tasks where machines can substitute for labor and hence
corresponds to an advance in automation technology for industry i.
    Intermediates embedding automation technology θ(i), q(θ(i)), are supplied by a technology mo-
nopolist that owns the intellectual property rights over these technologies and that serves industry
i. This technology monopolist produces each unit of q(θ(i)) using 1 − η units of industry i’s out-
put.6 The net output in industry i is then obtained by subtracting the total cost of intermediates,
(1 − η)q(θ(i)), from the gross output of the industry:

                                          Y (i) = Y g (i) − (1 − η)q(θ(i)).                                            (3)

    There are two types of workers: middle-aged workers and older workers. We simplify the
analysis throughout the paper by imposing:

Assumption 1 Middle-aged workers fully specialize in production inputs. Older worker fully spe-
cialize in service inputs.

    This assumption starkly captures the comparative advantage of middle-aged workers for produc-
tion tasks.7 As we document in Section 4, it is reasonable in the context of robotics technologies;
make two modifications to our baseline setup: (i) introduce limit pricing rather than monopoly pricing by technology
monopolists; (ii) change equation (2) so that the elasticity of substitution between intermediates and the aggregate
of production inputs, X(i)α(i) S(i)1−α(i) , is less than one.
   6
     This formulation, linking the cost of intermediates to industry i to that industry’s output, is convenient, because it
avoids any relative price effects that would have been present if other inputs had been used for producing intermediates.
   7
     This assumption simplifies the analysis relative to a more general setup where both types of workers can produce
both types of inputs but middle-aged workers have a comparative advantage in production tasks.



                                                                 6
these technologies are used mostly in industrial applications to automate tasks that used to be
performed by blue-collar workers. As such, this type of automation directly competes against
middle-aged workers who have the physical dexterity to perform such tasks.
   We denote the total supply of middle-aged workers by L. For older workers, we assume that
each produces one unit of service tasks, which implies that S(i) is also the total employment of
older workers in sector i, and thus with a slight abuse of notation, we also denote the supply of
older workers by S. We denote the wage of middle-aged workers by W , the wage of older workers
by V , and the total supply of machines by M . Market clearing requires the demand for each factor
to be equal to its supply, or more explicitly,
               Z      Z       1                            Z         Z   1                                 Z
           d                                           d                                               d
      L=L =                       l(i, z)dzdi, M = M =                       m(i, z)dzdi, and S = S =                s(i)di,
                i∈I       0                                    i∈I   0                                         i∈I

where the last equality in each expression defines the demand for that factor. Finally, we assume
that machines are supplied at a fixed rental price P .


2.2   Equilibrium with exogenous technology

Denote the set of technologies adopted across all industries by Θ = {θ(i)}i∈I . We first characterize
the equilibrium with exogenous technology, where the set of technologies, Θ, is taken as given.
An equilibrium with exogenous technology is defined as an allocation in which all industries choose
the profit-maximizing levels of employment of middle-aged workers, employment of older work-
ers, machines and intermediates, all technology monopolists set profit-maximizing prices for their
intermediates, and the markets for middle-aged workers, older workers and machines clear.
   Let PY (i) denote the price of output in industry i, and p(θ(i)) be the price of the intermediate
for industry i that embodies technology θ(i). The demand for q(θ(i)) is given by:

                                                                                           − 1
                                              1                                  p(θ(i)))      η
                                     q(θ(i)) = X(i)α(i) S(i)1−α(i)                                 .                           (4)
                                              η                                   PY (i)

Faced with this demand curve with elasticity 1/η, the technology monopolist for industry i will
set a profit-maximizing price that is a constant markup of 1/(1 − η) over marginal cost. Given
our normalization of the marginal cost of intermediate production to 1 − η units of the industry’s
product, the profit-maximizing price is p(θ(i)) = PY (i). Substituting this price into (4), and using
(2) and (3), we derive the net output of industry i as

                                                     2−η
                                           Y (i) =       X(i)α(i) S(i)1−α(i) .
                                                     1−η

The Cobb-Douglas production technology in equation (2) then implies

                                            PY (i) = λ(i)PX (i)α(i) V 1−α(i) ,



                                                               7
where PX (i) denotes the price of X(i), and λ(i) = (1 − η)α(i)−α(i) (1 − α(i))α(i)−1 .
       We next turn to the decision to adopt existing automation technologies. These decisions depend
on the cost savings from automation, which are in turn determined by factor prices. Let π(i) denote
the cost savings from automation in industry i, meaning the percent decline in costs when a task
is produced by machines rather than labor:
                                                   "           #
                                                1         A(i)P 1−ζ
                                        π(i) =       1−             .                                                      (5)
                                               1−ζ         W

           W                                                                                   W
When      A(i)   > P , the effective cost of producing with labor in industry i,              A(i) ,   is greater than the cost
                                                                                        W
of using a machine, P , and as a result, π(i) > 0. Conversely, when                    A(i)   < P , it is more expensive to
produce with machines in industry i and firms do not adopt the automation technologies because
it would raise their cost. Therefore, available automation technologies will be adopted if π(i) > 0.
       We can then summarize automation decisions by defining an automation threshold, θ A (i), which
satisfies                                             (
                                                          θ(i)     if π(i) > 0
                                          θ A (i) =                                                                        (6)
                                                           0       if π(i) ≤ 0,

where we are assuming without loss of any generality that when indifferent, firms do not switch
to machines. Equation (6) highlights a key point in our model: firms adopt existing automation
technologies when the effective wage of middle-aged workers is high.
       Using the threshold θ A (i), we can express the price of X(i) as

                                                                                      1−ζ !1−ζ
                                         A      1−ζ                A             W
                            PX(i) =    θ (i)P          + (1 − θ (i)(i))                                ,                   (7)
                                                                                A(i)

and the share of middle-aged labor in the production of X(i) as:8
                                                                           1−ζ
                                                   A              W
                                  sL (i) = (1 − θ (i))                             ∈ [0, 1]                                (8)
                                                               A(i)PX (i)

       Using the above expressions for prices and the share of labor in X(i), we can derive the demand
   8
               R1                           R1
   Let L(i) = 0 l(i, s)dsdi and M (i) = 0 m(i, s)dsdi denote the amounts of middle-aged labor and machines
employed in industry i, respectively. Then total production in industry i can be written as
                                              1      ζ−1               1     ζ−1
                                                                                   ζ−1
                                                                                     ζ

                                 X(i) = θA (i) ζ M (i) ζ + (1 − θA (i)) ζ L(i) ζ        .

Thus as also suggested by (7), an increase in θ(i) (and hence θA (i)) makes the production of X(i) less labor intensive
(Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2016, 2018).




                                                               8
for factors of production in the economy as:
                                    Z
                               Y
                        Ld =             λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ α(i)sL (i)di                                 (9)
                           (2 − η)W i∈I
                                   Z
                        d      Y
                       M =              λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ α(i)(1 − sL (i))di                          (10)
                           (2 − η)P i∈I
                                   Z
                        d      Y
                       S =              λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ (1 − α(i))di.                               (11)
                           (2 − η)V i∈I

   The next proposition establishes the existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium and charac-
                                             S
terizes it. In what follows, we let φ =     L+S    denote the share of older workers in the population, and
think of aging as an increase in φ.

Proposition 1

  1. An equilibrium with exogenous technology always exists and is unique. The equilibrium levels
      of middle-aged and older wages, W and V are the unique solutions {W E (φ; Θ), V E (φ, Θ)} to
      the system of equations given by: the ideal price index condition,

                                             Z                                1
                                                                               1−σ
                                                           1−σ        1−σ
                                       1=               λ(i)     PY (i)     di     ,                  (12)
                                                  i∈I

      and the relative demand for workers,
                                             R
                                     1−φ   V i∈I PY (i)1−σ α(i)sL (i)di
                                         =  R                                                         (13)
                                      φ    W i∈I PY (i)1−σ (1 − α(i))di.

      Aggregate output and machinery per worker, {y E (φ; Θ), mE (φ, Θ)}, can be then computed
      using {W E (φ; Θ),V E (φ, Θ)}.

  2. The middle-aged wage W E (φ, Θ) is increasing in φ, and the older worker wage V E (φ, Θ) is
      decreasing in φ. On the other hand, φ has an ambiguous impact on output per capita y E (φ, Θ).

   Like all other proofs, the proof of Proposition 1 is provided in the Appendix.
   Panel A of Figure 1 depicts the characterization of the equilibrium with exogenous technology.
Let C(W, V, P ) denote the cost of producing one unit of the final good, which is given by the
right-hand side of equation (12). The equilibrium values for W E and V E are then given by the
tangency of the isocost curve C(W, V, P ) = 1 (condition (12)) with a line of slope − 1−φ
                                                                                       φ (at which
                ∂C(W,V,P )/∂W       1−φ
point we have   ∂C(W,V,P )/∂V   =    φ ,   which is condition (13)). Aging—an increase in φ—raises W E
and lowers V E along the convex isocost curve C(W, V, P ) = 1, as shown in Panel A of Figure 1.
   Proposition 1 also shows that aging has an ambiguous effect on aggregate output per worker.
In particular, in the Appendix we show that

                       1
                         y E (φ, Θ) = V E (φ, Θ) − W E (φ, Θ) + P · mE
                                                                     φ (φ, Θ).                        (14)
                      2−η φ

                                                           9
This expression clarifies that the effect of aging on aggregate output depends on the wage of middle-
aged workers relative to the wage of older workers. In particular, if V E < W E , there will be a
negative effect on productivity (though mE
                                         φ can be positive, offsetting this effect). Existing evidence
(e.g., Murphy and Welch, 1990) suggests that earnings peak when workers are in their 40s, declining
thereafter, which in our model implies V < W , and thus creates a tendency for aging to reduce
productivity. This negative effect echoes the concerns raised by Gordon (2016) on the potential for
slower growth in the next several decades because of demographic change.
   The next proposition shows how demographic change affects the adoption of existing automation
technologies. For this proposition and for what follows, we denote by I + (φ, Θ) the set of industries
for which π(i) > 0 and new automation technologies are all adopted.

Proposition 2 The set I + (φ, Θ) satisfies the following properties:

   • For φ ≤ φ′ we have I + (φ, Θ) ⊆ I + (φ′ , Θ).

   • There exists a positive threshold φe < ∞ (independent of the θ(i)’s), such that for φ < φ,
                                                                                             e the
                                              e the set I + (φ, Θ) has positive measure.
     set I + (φ, Θ) has measure zero. For φ > φ,

   The proposition shows that aging encourages the adoption of existing automation technologies.
The intuition is similar to other models of technology adoption building on Zeira (1998) and works
                                                                                           e there
through the effect of higher wages on incentives to adopt automation technologies. For φ < φ,
is no adoption of automation technologies because middle-aged workers are relatively abundant and
thus cheap. When φ > φ,e the middle-aged wage is sufficiently high that automation becomes cost-
saving and profitable.
   What is the effect of automation on factor prices? As in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016, 2018),
this is determined by two competing forces. On the one hand, we have a displacement effect—when
automation technologies are adopted, they squeeze middle-aged workers into fewer tasks, reducing
the demand for middle-aged labor. On the other hand, we have a productivity effect—when au-
tomation technologies are adopted, they allow industries to reduce their costs and expand output,
raising the demand for middle-aged workers in non-automated tasks. When π(i) is small (but posi-
tive), the productivity effect is weak; available automation technologies will be adopted in industry
i, generating the displacement effect, but only a minimal productivity effect. This reasoning implies
that there exists a threshold π > 0 such that, when new automation technologies are introduced
in industry i with π(i) ∈ (0, π), the displacement effect dominates the productivity effect, and
automation reduces wages. This result is stated and some of its implications are developed in the
next proposition, where for simplicity we consider marginal changes in automation technologies,
denoted by {dθ(i)}i∈I (with dθ(i) ≥ 0).

Proposition 3 Suppose new automation technologies {dθ(i)}i∈I become available. Then:

                                                          e and are adopted in industries in
   • New automation technologies are not adopted when φ < φ,
                         e
     I + (φ, Θ) when φ > φ.

                                                     10
       • There exists a threshold φ(Θ) > φe such that, if φe < φ < φ(Θ), then π(i) < π for almost all
         industries. In this region, if dθ(i) > 0 for a (positive measure) subset of I + (φ, Θ), the wage
         of middle-aged workers declines and the wage of older workers increases.

       Panel B of Figure 1 illustrates the comparative statics presented in this proposition. The
displacement effect corresponds to a clockwise rotation of the isocost curve C(W, V, P ) = 1 around
the equilibrium point, reducing W and increasing V . The productivity effect corresponds to an
outward shift of the isocost curve, increasing both wages.9


2.3      Equilibrium with endogenous technology

Our analysis so far took the available automation technologies, Θ = {θ(i)}i∈I , as given. We now
endogenize these technologies using an approach similar to Acemoglu (2007, 2010).
       For industry i, there is a single technology monopolist who can develop new automation tech-
nologies and sell the intermediates embodying them—the q(θ(i))’s—to firms in that industry. De-
                                                                             1−η
veloping an automation technology θ(i) costs the monopolists                 2−η PY   (i)Y (i) · Ci (θ(i)) units of the
final good, where Ci (·) is an increasing and convex function that varies across industries. The spec-
                                                                                                1−η
ification imposes that the cost of introducing innovations is proportional to                   2−η PY   (i)Y (i), which
is adopted to simplify the algebra.
                                                                                      1−η
       Equation (4) shows that the monopolist in industry i earns profits             2−η PY   (i)Y (i). Using the fact
that Y (i) = PY (i)−σ Y , we can write the net profits from developing automation technology θ(i) as
1−η
2−η PY    (i)1−σ Y (1− Ci (θ(i))). Moreover, because monopolists, like their industries, are infinitesimal,
they take wages and aggregate output, Y , as given. Thus, we can write the profit-maximizing
problem of the technology monopolist for industry i in logs as:
                                                                                  1−ζ !
                M                          A      1−ζ           A            W
        max π (i) = (1 − σ)α(i) ln θ (i)P               + (1 − θ (i))                       + ln(1 − Ci (θ(i)))    (15)
   θ(i)∈[0,1]                                                               A(i)

This expression clarifies that monopolists have an incentive to develop automation technologies
that reduce PX (i), which translates into greater profits for them. We further simplify the analysis
by assuming that the cost function Ci (·) takes the form

                                                                            1
                                       Ci (θ(i)) = 1 − (1 − H(θ(i))) ρ(i) ,

where H is an increasing and convex function that satisfies H ′ (0) = 0, limx→1 H(x) = 1, and
h(x) ≥ 1/(1 − x), where h(x) = H ′ (x)/(1 − H(x)). The last assumption strengthens convexity
and will ensure that (15) has a unique solution. The exponent ρ(i) > 0 captures heterogeneity
   9
    Although the impact of automation on middle-aged wages is ambiguous when φ < φ(Θ), it is straightforward
to see that automation still reduces the demand for middle-aged workers relative to older workers in the industries
adopting the automation technologies. For example, if θ(i) increases in a single industry with π(i) > 0, we have that
L(i)/S(i) declines in that industry.




                                                         11
across industries in the technological possibilities for automation; a higher ρ(i) characterizes indus-
tries in which, due to engineering reasons, monopolists can more easily develop new automation
technologies.
       Given the convexity assumptions on H, the maximization problem in equation (15) yields a
unique technology choice for each industry, θiR (W ), which depends only on parameters and the
middle-aged wage, W . We define the mapping ΘR (W ) = {θiR (W )}i∈                         I   from the middle-aged wage
to the equilibrium technology choices.
       We define an equilibrium with endogenous technology as an allocation where technology choices
ΘR (W )     maximize (15), and given technology choices ΘR (W ), Proposition 1 applies. From this
proposition, technology choices Θ determine factor prices, and in particular, the middle-age wage
W as W E (φ, Θ). Thus, an equilibrium corresponds to a middle-aged wage, W ∗ , that is a solution
to the following fixed point problem:

                                              W ∗ = W E (φ, ΘR (W ∗ )).                                             (16)

       To study this fixed point problem, we first characterize the behavior of the equilibrium technol-
ogy choice θiR (W ) for industry i.

Lemma 1

   1. The maximization problem in equation (15) exhibits increasing differences in W and θ(i).
          Thus, θiR (W ) is nondecreasing in W .

   2. If θiR (W ) > 0, then π(i) > 0.

       The key result in this lemma is that the technology monopolists face stronger incentives to
develop new automation technologies when the middle-aged wage, W , is higher.10 Economically,
this is the case because automation allows firms to substitute machines for middle-aged labor, and
when this labor is more expensive, automation is more profitable.
       The last part of the lemma shows that, in an equilibrium with endogenous technology in which
θ A (i)   > 0, we always have π(i) > 0. Thus, monopolists only introduce technologies that will be
immediately adopted, and in an equilibrium with endogenous technology, we always have θ A (i) =
θ(i). An immediate corollary is that any comparative static result that applies to the innovation
margin θ(i) also applies to the adoption margin θ A (i).
       The next proposition establishes the existence of an equilibrium with endogenous technology.
  10
       In the Appendix we show that equilibrium technology satisfies the complementary slackness condition,
                                                                         sL (i)
                                      h(θiR (W )) ≥ (σ − 1)α(i)ρ(i)                π(i),                            (17)
                                                                      1 − θiR (W )

and θiR (W ) ≥ 0, and that a greater W leads to higher cost savings from automation, π(i). It is this property that
implies the maximization problem of monopolists exhibits increasing differences in W and θ(i).




                                                           12
Proposition 4 For any φ ∈ (0, 1), there exists an equilibrium with endogenous technology. In any
such equilibrium the middle-aged wage, W ∗ , satisfies the fixed point condition in equation (16). For
each fixed point W ∗ , there is a uniquely defined set of technology choices Θ∗ = {θi∗ }i∈             I   given by
Θ∗     =   ΘR (W ∗ ).

       To illustrate this proposition, suppose first that the mapping W E (φ, ΘR (W )) is decreasing
in W .11 In this case, automation decisions across industries are strategic substitutes and the
equilibrium with endogenous technology is unique as shown in Panel A of Figure 2.
       In general, W E (φ, ΘR (W )) need not be decreasing in W , because strong productivity gains from
automation could make the middle-aged wage increasing in automation. In this case, we could have
multiple equilibria, as automation in one sector increases the wage W and creates incentives for
further automation in other sectors. Nevertheless, there are still well-defined least and greatest
equilibria as shown in Figure 2, determined by the smallest and largest equilibrium values of the
wage W that solve the fixed point problem in equation (16). The Appendix shows that, in the least
and the greatest equilibrium, the mapping W E (φ, ΘR (W )) cuts the 45 degree line from above (as
shown in Panel B of Figure 2). Then we have:

Proposition 5 In the least and the greatest equilibrium, an increase in φ—aging—increases the
equilibrium wage W ∗ , expands the set of automation technologies Θ∗ , and expands the set of indus-
tries that adopt automation technologies I + (φ, Θ∗ ).

       This proposition thus provides one of our most important results: aging always encourages the
development and use of automation technologies, and this is regardless of whether automation has a
positive or negative effect on the middle-aged wage and whether or not there are multiple equilibria
(if there are multiple equilibria, it applies for the relevant equilibria, which are those with the
least and greatest values of the middle-aged wage). Intuitively, machines compete against middle-
aged workers, and a greater scarcity of these workers always increases the relative profitability of
automation.
       Finally, in the next proposition, we derive how the responsiveness of technologies to aging varies
by industry.

Proposition 6 In the least and the greatest equilibrium, θi∗ exhibits increasing differences in φ
and α(i), and φ and ρ(i).

       This proposition thus implies that aging—an increase in φ—should have a more pronounced
impact on automation in industries that rely more heavily on middle-aged workers (i.e., those with
high α(i)) and that present greater technological opportunities for automation (i.e., those with high
ρ(i)). In our empirical work, we investigate both implications.
  11
    The Appendix shows that a sufficient condition for this mapping to be decreasing is φ  e < φ < φ(Θ = ({0}i∈I ))
(so that the productivity gains from automation are positive for some industries but still smaller than π). In this
case, the mapping W E (φ, ΘR (W )) is constant for W ≤ W f and decreasing for W > W  f (here, Wf is the largest wage
          f < A(i)P
such that W     e                                                   e the unique equilibrium involves θ(i)∗ = 0.
                      for almost all i ∈ I). Note also that for φ ≤ φ


                                                        13
2.4   Implications for productivity

As noted in the Introduction, the endogenous response of automation technologies might fundamen-
tally alter the implications of demographic change for productivity. With exogenous technology,
Proposition 1 showed that the effects of aging for aggregate productivity are ambiguous. With
endogenous technology, aging creates a positive effect via the response of automation, and we
next show that as a result, when the workforce is aging, productivity in industries with greater
opportunities for automation tends to increase relative to others.

Proposition 7 In the least and the greatest equilibrium, equilibrium output in industry i, Y ∗ (i),
exhibits increasing differences between φ and ρ(i).

   From Proposition 6, the endogenous response of technology is stronger in industries with greater
α(i) and greater ρ(i), which implies that industries that have greater opportunities for automation
(a large ρ(i)) increase their relative performance in aging economies, and for the same reason, these
industries will also experience a greater decline in their labor share (recall from footnote 8 that
automation makes industry production less labor-intensive). But there are no unambiguous results
for industries that rely more heavily on middle-aged workers (i.e., those with high α(i)): on the one
hand, industries that rely more heavily on middle-aged workers are more exposed to the increase
in wages; on the other hand, as a result of this, they also have greater incentives to automate their
production process, increasing productivity.
   Propositions 1 and 7 together highlight too that the aggregate productivity implications of
aging will be ambiguous in the presence of endogenous developments of automation technologies,
and as a result, demographic change may not have as significant negative effects once technology
adjusts.


2.5   Extensions

In the Appendix, we consider two extensions of this framework. First, we endogenize the industry-
level labor-augmenting technology, A(i). In this case, demographic change impacts technology not
just by encouraging automation but also by directly influencing the productivity of middle-aged
labor in the production tasks it performs. We show that the effect of aging on the endogenous
choice of A(i) is ambiguous. By increasing the share of middle-aged workers in value added (when
ζ < 1), aging encourages the development of labor-augmenting technologies. But it also fosters
automation and thus reduces the set of tasks performed by middle-aged workers, making labor-
augmenting technologies less profitable. In our empirical work, we will indeed find that there are
no positive effects of aging on non-automation technologies.
   Second, we consider an extension to a global economy with multiple countries, where some of
them are ahead of others in the development of automation technologies. In this setup, not only
will we see imports and exports of automation technologies (as in our empirical work), but we also



                                                 14
find that advances in automation technologies in one country are later adopted in another country
and can lead to a decline in the wages of middle-aged workers in the adopting country.


                                       3     Data and Trends
In this section, we present our data sources and show some of the most salient trends in our data.
The Appendix contains additional description and details.


3.1      Cross-country data

We focus on demographic changes related to aging, and measure them by the change in the ratio
of older workers (56 and older) to middle-aged workers (between 21 and 55). The cutoff of 55
years of age is motivated by the patterns of substitution between robots and workers we document
in the next section. We obtained the demographic variables from the United Nations (UN) data,
which measure population by age and also provide a forecast of these variables up to 2050. As
Figure 3 shows, both our entire world sample and the OECD have experienced significant aging
starting around 1990—a trend that is expected to continue into the future. Aging is much faster
in Germany and South Korea and is slower in the United States than the OECD average. We use
the change in the ratio of older to middle-aged workers between 1990 and its expected level in 2025
as our baseline measure of aging. This latter choice is motivated by the fact that investments in
robotics and automation technologies are forward looking. The IFR estimates the average life-span
of a robot to be about 12 years, so investments in robots in the 2010s should take into account
demographic change until at least 2025. In our empirical exercises, we instrument aging using crude
birth rates between 1950 and 1985, which we also obtained from UN data.
       We use four sources of data to measure the adoption and development of robots and other
automation technologies across countries: data on the use of robots from the IFR; data on imports
of robots and other types of machinery from Comtrade; data on exports of robots and other types
of machinery also from Comtrade; and patents by different countries filed at the USPTO.
       The IFR provides data on the stock of robots and new robot installations by industry, country
and year. The data are compiled by surveying global robot suppliers. Table A1 in the Appendix
provides the list of countries covered by the IFR.12 In our cross-country analysis we use the change in
the stock of robots divided by industry employment as our dependent variable. The denominator is
constructed using employment data for 1990 from the International Labour Organization (ILO). To
account for differences in hours worked, we normalize the stock of robots using full-time equivalent
industry workers.13 The resulting measure of the stock of robots per thousand (industry) workers
  12
     Although the IFR also reports numbers for Japan and Russia, the data for these countries underwent major
reclassifications. For instance, the IFR used to count dedicated machinery as part of the stock of industrial robots
in Japan, but starting in 2000, stopped doing so, making the numbers reported for Japan not comparable over time.
We thus exclude both countries from our analysis.
  13
     ILO’s industry employment data includes employment in manufacturing, mining, construction and utility, which
cover the sectors currently using robots.



                                                        15
covers 52 countries between 1993 and 2014, and is illustrated in Figure 3. The figure underscores
the pattern we noted in the Introduction—that Germany and South Korea are considerably ahead
of the United States in terms of the adoption of robotics technology. Panel A of Table 1 provides
summary statistics separately for all the countries in our sample, for OECD countries, and for
rapidly-aging countries (above the median in terms of expected aging between 1990 and 2025) and
slowly-aging countries. In our full sample, the number of robots per thousand workers increased
from 0.72 in 1993 to 3.79 in 2014.
       We complement the IFR data with estimates of robot imports and exports from the bilateral
trade statistics obtained from Comtrade. When using the data on robot imports, we exclude
Japan, which mostly uses domestically produced robots (the other major producer, Germany, also
has significant imports; see Leigh and Kraft, 2016). In addition, to account for entrepôt trade, we
remove re-exports of robots and keep only countries whose imports of robots net of re-exports are
positive. Likewise, we keep only countries whose exports of robots (without including re-exports)
are positive. The resulting data cover 131 countries importing robots between 1996 and 2015,
and 105 countries exporting robots between 1996 and 2015.14 We also use the Comtrade data to
compute imports and exports of other intermediates related to industrial automation. Panel B of
Table 1 provides summary statistics for the Comtrade data.
       Finally, we use data on robotics-related patents granted by the USPTO to assignees based in
each country between 1990 and 2015. We focus on patents in the USPTO 901 class, which comprises
technologies related to industrial robots, and patents that reference the 901 class. The Appendix
describes these data and our construction of other proxies for robotics-related patents, including
measures that search for robotics-related words in patent abstracts, and measures based on citation
patterns. We exclude countries with no robotics-related patents and focus on 69 countries (31 of
them in the OECD) that patented in robotics-related classes. Panel C of Table 1 shows that the
average number of robotics-related patents received by a country in our sample is 718, while the
same number is about twice as large for the OECD and for rapidly-aging countries.
       We also use data on GDP per capita, population and average years of schooling obtained from
version 9.0 of the Penn World Tables (Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2015).


3.2      Data on robot integrators

For US labor markets we do not have data on the adoption or use of robots. Instead, we proxy
robotics-related activities in a commuting zone using a dichotomous measure of whether it houses
  14
    Industrial robots are counted under the HS6 code 847950. Because this category was introduced in 1996, it is
only possible to track international trade of industrial robots after this date. For the remaining types of equipment
used in our empirical analysis, we compute imports and exports going back to 1990.
  Several reasons explain why there is a large number of countries exporting robots. First, some exporting firms may
use ports located in different countries to send their robots (for example, German and Belgium robot producers can
export from Luxembourg). Second, that are likely some classification errors by custom authorities. Finally, some
countries may sell used inventory. All of these add measurement error to this variable, but should not bias our results.




                                                          16
robot integrators, obtained from Leigh and Kraft (2016).15 Integrators install, program and main-
tain robots, and tend to locate close to their customers.
    For commuting zones, we measure aging by the change in the ratio of older to middle-aged
workers between 1990 and 2015, obtained from the NBER Survey of Epidemiology and End Results
dataset (we do not have forecasts of aging at the commuting-zone level). We also use various
demographic and economic characteristics of commuting zones in 1990, obtained from the NHGIS
at the county level (Manson et al., 2017), and data on exposure to robots from Acemoglu and
Restrepo (2017b) to measure the local effects of robots.


3.3    Industry-level data

In addition to the country-level data, the IFR reports data on robot installations by year separately
for 19 industries in 50 of the countries in our sample, including 13 industries at the three-digit level
within manufacturing and six non-manufacturing industries at the two-digit level. As Table A1
in the Appendix shows, these data are not available in every year for every country-industry pair,
so in our analysis, we focus on an unbalanced panel of annual data rather than long differences.
Table A2 summarizes the industry-level data. For each industry, we report the average number of
robot installations per thousand workers, using two possible denominators. The first one uses data
the ILO data described above, while the second uses from the EUKLEMS dataset, which provides
the 1995 employment levels for all 19 industries used in our analysis, but only covers 21 of the
countries in our sample (Jägger, 2016).16 In the Appendix, we further use the UNIDO dataset for
an additional robustness check and describe these data there.
    From the EUKLEMS data, we also obtain information on value added per worker (in real
dollars) and the change in the share of labor in value added. These outcomes are available only
between 1995 and 2007, and cover all 19 industries included in the IFR data. The third and fourth
columns of Table A2 summarize these data.
    To explore whether aging has heterogeneous impacts on different industries, we construct
industry-level measures of reliance on middle-aged workers, and opportunities for automation. We
measure an industry’s reliance on middle-aged workers with the ratio of middle-aged to older work-
ers, computed from the 1990 US Census data. Heavy manufacturing industries, construction and
utilities have significantly greater reliance on middle-aged workers. We use two proxies for the
opportunities for automation (focusing in particular on robots). The first is the “replaceability”
index constructed by Graetz and Michaels (2015), which is derived from data on the share of hours
spent by workers in the United States on tasks that can be performed by industrial robots. The
replaceability index is strongly correlated with robot adoption and explains 22% of the total vari-
ation in the installation of robots across industries. The second measure is a dummy variable for
  15
     Commuting zones, defined in Tolbert and Sizer (1996), are groupings of counties approximating local labor
markets. We use 722 commuting zones covering the entire US continental territory except for Alaska and Hawaii.
  16
     We use employment levels in 1995 to normalize the number of robot installations because the data are missing
for many countries before then. We also focus on the growth in value added per worker and the labor share between
1995 and 2007 because post-2007 data disaggregated by industry are unavailable for many countries in our sample.


                                                       17
automobiles, electronics, metal machinery, and chemicals, plastics and pharmaceuticals, which are
are singled out by a recent report by the Boston Consulting Group (BCG, 2015) as having the
greatest technological opportunities for the use of robots, based on the type of tasks that workers
perform on the job. The data presented in Table 1 confirm that these are among the industries
experiencing the fastest growth in the adoption of robots.


         4     The Substitution between Robots and Workers
The key assumption in our model is that, relative to older workers, middle-aged workers specialize
in production tasks that can be automated using industrial robots. In this section, we provide
four different pieces of evidence consistent with this assumption. First, we review the engineering
literature relevant to this question, which emphasizes that one of our key automation technologies,
industrial robots, has been since the 1980s aimed at automating labor-intensive tasks in manufac-
turing, including machining, welding, painting, palletizing, assembly, material handling, and quality
control (Ayres et al., 1987, Groover et al. 1986). A survey by the Japanese Robotics Association
cited in Ayres et al. (1987) shows that industrial robots reduce costs when they substitute for
blue-collar workers in plastic forming processes, machining, die casting, inspection, arc welding,
and loading and packaging. These tasks are typically performed by middle-aged workers with the
requisite strength and physical dexterity.
   Our second strategy confirms the same notion by presenting descriptive statistics on the age
distribution of workers across different industries and occupations using data from the the 1990
US Census, the 2000 US Census, and the 2007 American Community Survey. Specifically, Panel
A of Figure 4 plots the ratio of workers employed in blue-collar jobs relative to workers employed
in white-collar and service jobs. Blue-collar jobs include production workers and machinists, and
represent about 13% of US employment. White-collar jobs include clerks, accountants, secretaries
and salespersons, and represent about 25% of US employment, while service jobs account for 15% of
US employment. The figure shows a sharp and large decline in this ratio starting around age 50 (in
the 2007 ACS) and age 55 (in the 1990 Census). This supports our presumption that middle-aged
workers are overrepresented in blue-collar jobs. Panel B of the figure, on the other hand, shows that
middle-aged workers are also overrepresented in industries that later became more robotized, and
consistent with robots replacing these middle-aged workers, their over-representation is declining
in later decades.
   Our third strategy is complementary to the second and shows that as an industry adopts
more robots, the employment and wage bill shares of production workers in that industry decline.
Namely, for each industry we measure the share of wages paid to production workers employed using
data from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. Following Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2017a), we measure the exposure to robots using the adoption of robots in the same (three-
digit) industries among comparable European countries between 1993 and 2007, which captures
the common technological developments driving the adoption of robots throughout the world.


                                                 18
Figure 5 shows that US industries undergoing greater penetration of robots between 1993 and 2007
experienced significant declines in the employment and wage bill shares of production workers during
the same period. This evidence thus suggests that, consistent with our theoretical framework, robots
are substituting for production workers, which from Figure 4 tend to be the middle-aged ones.
       Our final strategy is the most direct one for measuring substitution patterns as it explicitly
looks at the impact of automation on the wages and employment of workers of different ages. In
this strategy, we follow Acemoglu and Restrepo’s (2017a) approach of estimating the impact of
exposure to robots across US commuting zones. To conserve space, we refer the reader to that
paper, and here we simply use the measure of exposure to robots computed there.17 We then
estimate the following models for employment and wages by 10-year age group across commuting
zones:

                         Exposure to robots                                    Exposure to robots
         ∆Lz,a = βaL                            + ǫL                   W
                                                   z,a and∆ ln Wz,a = βz,a                              + ǫW
                                                                                                           z,a ,
                         from 1993 to 2007z                                    from 1993 to 2007z

where ∆Lz,a is the change in the employment rate of age group a in commuting zone z between 1990
and 2007, and ∆ ln Wz,a is the change in the average wage of workers in age group a in commuting
zone z between 1990 and 2007. Figure 6 presents the estimates of the coefficients βaL and βaW
(together with 95% confidence intervals based on heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors). We
report three specifications similar to those in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a), except that in
line with the focus here all regressions are unweighted (while given the focus there on aggregate
changes, the main specifications in Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017a, were weighted by population).
The first one we report is the baseline specification in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a) and controls
for Census region fixed effects, demographic differences across commuting zones, broad industry
shares, and the impact of trade with China and Mexico, routinization, and offshoring.18 The
second specification, in addition, removes the seven commuting zones with the highest exposure to
robots, to ensure that the results are not being driven by the most exposed commuting zones. The
last specification pools the data for all age groups and forces our covariates, except the impact of
exposure to robots, to have the same impact on all workers.
  17
       Briefly, this measure is

                            Exposure to robots   X 1970     
                                                               Ri,2007
                                                                              
                                                                                 Ri,1993
                                                                                         
                                               =  ℓzi    p30             − p30              ,
                            from 1993 to 2007z                 Li,1990           Li,1990
                                                  i∈I

where Ri,t /Li,t is the number of robots per thousand workers in industry i at time t, the sum runs over all the
industries in the IFR data, ℓ1970zi   stands for 
                                                 the 1970 share of commuting zone z employment in industry i, which
                                                    Ri,t
we compute from the 1970 Census, and p30 Li,1990            denotes the 30th percentile of robot usage among European
countries in industry i and year t.
   In that paper, we establish robustness to variations in the construction of this variable, and also report two-stage
least squares estimates combining this measure of exposure to robots with changes in robots in US industries.
   18
      Specifically, we control for log population, the share of working-age population (between 16 and 65 years); the
shares of population with college degree and with high school, the share of Blacks, Hispanics and Asians, and the
baseline shares of employment in manufacturing, durable manufacturing and construction, as well as the share of
female employment in manufacturing. The variables for exposure to China trade, Mexico trade, routine jobs and
offshoring are described in detail in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a).


                                                          19
       For both employment and wages we obtain negative effects concentrated on workers between the
ages of 35 and 54, and no negative effects on those older than 55.19 In Figure A1 in the Appendix,
we report similar results by five-year age bins, confirming these age thresholds.
       Overall, the results in this section support the assumption that, relative to older workers,
middle-aged workers tend to specialize in blue-collar jobs where they perform the tasks that can
be performed by industrial robots. As a result, it appears to be the middle-aged workers who
experience lower wages and employment when industrial robots are adopted.


                    5     Demographic Change and Automation
In this section, we present our main cross-country results, which show a robust negative association
between aging and the adoption of robots.


5.1      Main results

Table 2 starts with a flexible specification for the relationship between demographics and the
adoption of robots. Our focus throughout will be on long-differences specifications, where we
look at the relationship between various demographic change variables and the adoption of robots
between 1993 and 2014. Our first regression equation is

                         Rc
                     ∆      = βM ∆ ln Middle-agedc + βO ∆ ln Olderc + ΓXc,1990 + εc ,                           (18)
                         Lc

where ∆ R
        Lc is the (annualized) change in the stock of robots per thousand workers between 1993
         c


and 2014 in country c (where we keep the denominator fixed as employment in 1990 from the
ILO, which avoids potentially endogenous changes in employment impacting our left-hand side
variable). The right-hand side variables are the (expected) changes between 1990 and 2025 in the
log population of two age groups: middle-aged workers aged 21-55 and older workers above the
age of 56 (where the change between 2017 and 2025 is based on UN population forecasts described
in Section 3). The vector Xc,1990 includes additional baseline covariates, and εc is the error term.
Unless otherwise indicated, all of our regressions are unweighted and all standard errors are robust
against heteroskedasticity.
       Panel A of Table 2 presents our OLS estimates of equation (18). Columns 1-3 are for the full
sample of 52 countries. Column 1 controls only for dummies for East Asia and the Pacific, South
Asia, Middle East and North Africa, Africa, Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Latin America
and the Caribbean, and OECD countries to account for regional trends. Column 2 adds the 1993
values of log GDP per capita, log population, average schooling and the ratio of middle-aged and
older workers as covariates, which control for trends among countries with different initial levels of
  19
   In weighted regressions, the estimates for employment are very similar, but we do see some significant negative
wage effects for older groups as well. This might reflect the downward wage pressure exerted by displaced middle-aged
workers in some large commuting zones.



                                                         20
development and demographic characteristics. Column 3 also includes the stock of industrial robots
per thousand workers in 1993, which allows for the possibility that countries with more robots at
the beginning of the sample may adopt robots at differential rates. Columns 4-6 present the same
specifications for the OECD sample.
   In all six columns of Panel A, we find that a decline in middle-aged population and an increase
in the older population are associated with faster robot adoption, although some of the estimates
are not precise for the OECD sample. These findings support the key prediction of our model,
where incentives to automate do not depend on the total population but on the relative scarcity of
middle-aged workers.
   The quantitative magnitudes are large but plausible. For example, in column 1, the coefficient
estimate on population of the middle-aged group is -0.45 (s.e.=0.15). This estimate implies that
a 10 percent decline in the population of the middle-aged group (which is roughly the decline
expected for Germany) is associated with 0.045 additional robots per thousand workers per year,
or 0.9 additional robots per thousand workers over the whole sample period. Moreover, these
demographic shifts alone explain 30% of the variation in robot adoption across all countries and
42% of the variation in the OECD sample.
   Panel B shows that we obtain very similar results when we define older workers as those between
56 and 75 years of age. The estimates in this panel show that the positive coefficient on the change
in the older population is not driven by workers above 75, who tend to have a low labor market
attachment and should not affect the incentives for automation. Finally, in Panel C we split middle-
aged workers in two groups: between 21 and 35, and between 36 and 55. We again find a negative
estimate for the change in the population of those between 36 and 55, and a positive estimate for
the change in the population of those above 56.
   In line with the logic of our model, the results in Table 2 suggest that the adoption of robotics
technologies is associated with demographic changes that increase the share of older workers and
reduce the share of middle-aged workers—the aging of the population. This observation motivates a
more parsimonious specification, linking the adoption of robots to the ratio of older to middle-aged
workers, which we explore in Table 3 and focus on in the rest of the paper:

                                      Rc
                                  ∆      = βAgingc + ΓXc,1990 + εc ,                             (19)
                                      Lc

where Agingc is defined as the change between 1990 and 2025 in the ratio of older workers (above 56
years of age) to middle-aged workers (those between 21 and 55), and we refer to this change simply
as “aging”. Table A3 in the Appendix shows that alternative measures of aging (with different
cutoffs for older workers) produce similar results.
   Table 3 reports estimates of equation (19) for the same specifications as in Table 2. Panel
A focuses on OLS models. The estimates in Panel A confirm the positive effect of aging on the
adoption of robots. The results are now more precisely estimated and are significant at 5% in all
specifications. The quantitative effects are again substantial. The specification in column 1 has a R2


                                                  21
of 0.43 (and the partial R2 of the aging variable alone is close to 0.40 as noted in the Introduction).
In our preferred specification in column 3, the coefficient estimate on the aging variable is 0.5
(s.e.=0.19). This implies that a 20 percentage point increase in our aging variable, which is roughly
the difference between Germany and the United States (0.5 vs. 0.28, respectively), leads to an
increase of 0.1 robots per thousand workers per year or two additional robots per thousand workers
over our sample period, which is about 25% of the Germany-US difference in the adoption of robots.
    In line with our findings in Table 2, The results in Table A4 in the Appendix confirm that once
we control for our measure of aging there is no relationship between the change in population and
the adoption of robots—the patterns we are reporting are all about the relative size of middle-aged
and older cohorts.20
    Figure 7 depicts the relationship between demographic change and the number of robots per
thousand workers in the full sample of countries and in the OECD (from the models estimated in
columns 3 and 6 in Table 3). Even though South Korea is an outlier, we can also see that this
relationship is not driven by outliers (a point formally established in Table A5 in the Appendix,
where we present several strategies to remove outliers or their influence).
    Panel B presents instrumental-variables (IV) models. Our IV models are motivated by the
concern that changes in labor markets that influence the adoption of robots may also affect migra-
tion patterns, which would bias our OLS estimates. To address this concern, we instrument the
(expected) aging between 1990 and 2025 using the average birth rates over each five-year intervals
from 1950-1954 to 1980-1984. These birth rates satisfy the requisite exogeneity assumption since
past changes in birth rates are unlikely to be driven by contemporaneous wages or technologies,
and also explain a large portion of the variation in aging across countries (in column 1, the first
stage F -statistic is 25.2). Panel B shows that the IV estimates of the effect of demographic change
on the adoption of robots are slightly larger than their OLS counterparts.21
    One potential concern with our IV estimates is that our first-stage is borderline weak in the
OECD sample. We address this concern in two ways. First, we report the p-value of the Anderson-
Rubin test for the coefficient β being equal to zero. Second, Panel C reports estimates where we
use a single instrument computed as the percent decline in birth rates from 1960 to 1985. Using
this single instrument we estimate a very similar effect of aging on the adoption of robots, but now
the first-stage F -statistic is above 20 in all columns except in column 4 (for the OECD sample
without any covariates).


5.2    Placebo exercises, robustness and additional results

In this subsection we first show that past demographic changes have no predictive power for the
adoption of robotics technology, and then document the robustness of the results in Table 3 to a
   20
      These results and the similar ones in Table 2 are the basis of our claim in the Introduction that we do not find
a robust relationship between the level or change in population and automation (which contrasts with the results in
Abelianisky and Prettner, 2017).
   21
      In this and all subsequent tables, when we have more than one instrument, we perform and report the p-value
from Hanson’s overidentification test. This test does not reject the joint validity of our instruments.


                                                         22
range of variations.
   In Panel A of Table 4, we include the same aging variable on the right-hand side, but now
measured between 1950 and 1990. Past demographic changes should have no impact on the adoption
of robotics technology after 1990—unless countries that have adopted more robots since 1993 were
on different demographic trends for other reasons even before the 1990s. The results in Table 4
are reassuring in this respect, and show no correlation between our aging variable between 1950
and 1990 and the change in the number of robots since 1990. Panel B of Table 4 presents a
complementary exercise where we simultaneously include past aging and expected aging (between
1990 and 2025) as explanatory variables. The results show that only expected aging is a significant
determinant of the adoption of robots.
   Panel C of Table 4 further investigates the question of whether it is contemporaneous de-
mographic change or the expectation of future aging that is more strongly associated with the
adoption of robots. We simultaneously include aging between 1990 and 2015—the contempora-
neous demographic change—and expected aging between 2015 and 2025. The results are not as
precise as before, since contemporaneous and expected aging are highly correlated. Nevertheless,
both contemporaneous aging and expected aging are positively associated with the adoption of
robots. Indeed, in no specification can we reject the null hypothesis that contemporaneous and
expected aging have the same impact on robot adoption, as shown by the test for the equality of
the two coefficients reported in the panel. Expected aging plays a particularly important role in
the OECD sample, where it is significant at the 10% level in all models. These results support our
choice of focusing on (expected) aging between 1990 and 2025 in our baseline models. (Table A6 in
the Appendix shows that our main results are very similar if we use the contemporaneous variable
in our main specifications.)
   We have so far reported on long-differences specifications, focusing on the change in the stock of
robots between 1993 and 2014. This is the most transparent specification, especially in view of the
evidence that it is not just contemporaneous but future demographic changes that are impacting
the adoption of robots. However, long-difference specifications fail to exploit higher frequency
covariation between aging and the adoption of robots within subperiods. To exploit this additional
source of variation, Table 5 turns to stacked-differences models, where for each country we include
two observations on the left-hand side: the change in the stock of robots between 1993 and 2005 and
between 2005 and 2014. We then regress these changes on the aging variable between 1990 and 2005
and between 2005 and 2015, respectively. To ease the comparison with our previous estimates, we
re-scale the coefficients so that they are comparable to the estimates in Table 3. Panel A presents
our OLS estimates. Columns 1 and 4 give our most parsimonious model where we only control for
region and period dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include all the country level covariates as controls
(1993 values of log GDP per capita, local population, average schooling and ratio of older to middle-
aged workers). Panel B presents the corresponding IV estimates. The estimates confirm our main
results in Table 3. In columns 3 and 6, we go one step further relative to our earlier specifications
and also include linear country trends. These specifications thus only exploit the differential rate


                                                 23
at which demographic change proceeds and additional robots are adopted in the two subperiods
for each country. The estimates in these demanding specifications are significant and in fact very
similar to our baseline estimates, bolstering our confidence in the interpretation and robustness of
our results.
       Besides aging, our model suggests that other factors affecting wages, such as unionization, and
the (middle-age) wage level itself are important determinants of the adoption of robots. We explore
these issues in Table A7 in the Appendix, where in addition to estimating the impact of aging on
robot adoption, we control for the baseline union membership and the log of the average hourly
wage in 1993.22 Because the data on union membership are only available for a subset of countries,
our sample now consists of 46 countries, 30 of which are in the OECD. The results provide some
support for the idea that countries with greater unionization rates adopted more robots, presumably
because unions raise labor costs (though we lack instruments for unionization). Quantitatively, our
estimates in column 6 of Panel B imply that a 10 percentage point increase in union membership—
roughly the difference between Germany and the United States—is associated with 0.04 additional
robots per thousand workers per year, a magnitude that is about 40% of the quantitative effects
from aging reported above. The wage level, on the other hand, has a positive point estimate, but
does not seem to have a robust impact on the adoption of robots.23
       Finally, we explored models in logs rather than in the number of robots per thousand workers
as in our baseline specification. In Table A9, we present estimates using either ∆ ln(1 + Rc ) or
∆ ln Rc as the dependent variable. The former specification is motivated by the fact that the initial
stock of robots is equal to zero for several countries. In all cases, the results are very similar to our
baseline estimates.


5.3      Other automation technologies

We next show that there is a similar relationship between demographic change and other automation
technologies using imports data from Comtrade. We first confirm the results presented so far using
imports of industrial robots. Specifically, we estimate a variant of equation (19) with the log
of robot imports relative to other intermediate imports between 1996 and 2015 as the dependent
variable.24 Because these measures are imprecise for countries with small total imports, throughout
  22
      We use the average share of workers belonging to a union between 1990 and 1995 as our measure of unionization
(from Rama and Artecona, 2002). The data on wages are from the Penn World Tables, version 9.0 (see Feenstra,
Inklaar and Timmer, 2015). In addition, because wages partly reflect differences in labor productivity, in all these
models we control for the log of output per worker in 1993.
   23
      This might be because high wages reflect not just greater “wage push” but also a higher marginal product of
workers, or because our measure is the average wage rather than the wage of blue-collar or middle-aged workers,
which are the ones that should matter in our model.
   24
      There are several points to note here. First, since imports (and later exports and patents) are flow variables, our
dependent variable corresponds to the growth in the stock of these intermediates, which is similar to our baseline
specification with the growth of the stock of robots on the left-hand side in equation (19). Second, our normalization
ensures that our findings are not driven by an overall increase in imports in aging countries. Third, because data on
robot imports and exports are only available between 1996 and 2015, in these models we focus on aging between 1995
and 2025, and measure all of our controls in 1995 rather than in 1993. Finally, we choose the specification with logs as
the baseline because it turns out to be less sensitive to outliers and also focuses on the sample of countries importing



                                                           24
we focus on regressions weighted by total imports between 1996 and 2015.
    Panels A and B of Table 6 presents our OLS and IV estimates. The table has the same
structure as previous ones, with the exception that in columns 3 and 6 we control for the log of
intermediate imports. Moreover, because Comtrade covers more countries, our sample now includes
131 countries, 34 of which are in the OECD (recall that these models exclude Japan). We find that
aging countries tend to import more industrial robots relative to other intermediate goods. The
IV coefficient estimate in column 3, 2.234 (s.e.=0.675), implies that a 20 percentage point increase
in aging, once again corresponding to the difference between Germany and the US, leads to a 46%
increase in the imports of industrial robots relative to total intermediate imports and closes about
a third of the gap between the two countries (which is comparable to the quantitative magnitudes
for robot installations in our baseline estimates). Figure 8 provides regression plots for the full
sample (Panel A) and the OECD sample (Panel B), where the size of the markers indicate total
imports for each country.
    Figure 10 turns to imports of other type of equipment—again from the Comtrade data—and
reports estimates of the IV models in columns 3 and 6 of Table 6. We chose three sets of inter-
mediates. The first set includes intermediates related to the automation of blue-collar industrial
jobs: dedicated machinery (including robots), numerically controlled machines, automatic machine
tools, automatic welding machines, weaving and knitting machines, dedicated textile machinery,
automatic conveyors, and automatic regulating instruments. The second set comprises technolo-
gies used for similar industrial tasks but that do not involve automation. This set includes manual
machine tools, manual welding machines, machines that are not numerically controlled, other regu-
lating instruments, other conveyors, and other industrial machinery. Finally, we consider interme-
diates that are not used in the automation of blue-collar tasks and thus should not become more
profitable when the population ages. This set includes vending machines, laundry machines, agri-
cultural machinery (including tractors) and computers.25 The evidence in Figure 10 is consistent
with the idea that aging is associated with the adoption of a range of technologies for industrial
automation. In particular, for the full sample of countries, aging leads to a statistically significant
and sizable increase in the relative imports of all of our (industrial) automation technologies, except
automatic conveyors. For the OECD, the pattern is more mixed. Reassuringly from the viewpoint
of our theory, in neither sample do we find a relationship between aging and imports of technologies
unrelated to automation of blue-collar jobs, including computers.26
or exporting the relevant intermediates (and later patenting), which is thus more similar to our regressions focusing
on countries installing robots. In Table A10 and Figures A3 and A4 in the Appendix, we show the robustness of our
results to different specifications and to samples that include countries with zero imports, exports or patents.
   25
      Computers are of interest in and of themselves; they are also quite distinct from automation technologies, since
they are typically used to complement labor in existing tasks as well as automating a smaller subset of tasks (and
this non-automating role of computers is in line with the results in Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017a).
   26
      Figures A3 and A4 in the Appendix show that these results are robust when we use log(1 + x) or shares on the
left-and side, and when we exclude outliers.




                                                         25
                    6     Demographic Change and Innovation
While our theory links demographic change to both the adoption and development of new automa-
tion technologies, the evidence so far has focused on adoption. We next turn to two measures of
innovation and development of new automation technologies. The first is the export of the same
measures of intermediates related to automation technologies, starting with industrial robots. The
exporting of these technologies is a sign of innovation related to this area (e.g., the introduction of
new varieties of machinery or quality improvements leading to greater exports). Motivated by this
reasoning, we investigate whether countries undergoing more rapid demographic change increase
their exports of automation technologies.27 We start with a variant of equation (19) focusing on the
log of robot exports relative to other intermediate exports between 1996 and 2015 as the dependent
variable. Similar to our strategy with imports, we weight our regressions by total exports between
1996 and 2015.
    Panels C and D of Table 6 present OLS and IV estimates and have an identical structure to
Panels A and B, except that in columns 3 and 6 we control for the log of intermediate exports instead
of imports. Our sample now includes 105 countries, 35 of which are in the OECD.28 Consistent
with our theoretical expectations, the results indicate that demographic change is associated with
greater exports of industrial robots relative to other intermediate goods. The IV estimate in column
3 of 4.354 (s.e.=1.309) implies that a 20 percentage point increase in expected aging, once again
corresponding to the difference between Germany and the US, leads to an 88% increase in robotics
exports, which more than closes the gap between the two countries (which is about 63%). The two
panels of Figure 9 depict these relationships for the full sample and the OECD sample (marker size
now indicates total exports).
    Panel B of Figure 10 then turns to other types of machinery and focuses on the same IV models
for the full sample and the OECD as in Panel A. We now find a strong effect of aging on the
(relative) export of intermediates embodying industrial automation technologies. This relationship
is statistically significant for all of our measures (except for automatic conveyors) both in the full
sample and in the OECD sample. Reassuringly, we again do not see a similar relationship for other
technologies.29
    Our second strategy is to look at patents related to robotics as described in Section 3. We
estimate a variant of equation (19) with the log of robotics-related patents relative to other utility
patents granted between 1990 and 2015 as the dependent variable. (This normalization ensures that
our findings are not driven by an overall increase in patenting activity among countries undergoing
more rapid demographic change). As we did with imports and exports, we weight our regressions by
total patenting activity between 1990 and 2015. The weighting accounts for the sizable differences
   27
      Costinot, Donaldson, Kyle and Williams (2017) also look at exports as a measure of the development of new
technologies, but focus on pharmaceuticals.
   28
      Because we are looking at exporting activity, these models include Japan as well.
   29
      Figures A3 and A4 in the Appendix show that these results are robust when we use log(1 + x) or shares on the
left-and side, and when we exclude outliers.



                                                       26
across countries in their propensity to file for a patent in the United States. Panels A and B
of Table 7 present our OLS and IV estimates. Our sample now includes 69 countries active in
robotics-related patent classes, 31 of which are in the OECD. The results show a strong association
between demographic change and robotics-related patents (relative to other utility patents). The
IV estimate in column 3, for example, is 1.354 (s.e.=0.172) and implies that a 20 percentage point
increase in expected aging, once again corresponding to the difference between Germany and the
US, leads to a 27% increase in robotics-related patents relative to all utility patents, which is about
48% of the gap between the two countries. Figure 11 presents this relationship visually.
       We investigated the robustness of these results in number of dimensions. Some of those are
shown in Figure 12. Specifically, we use alternative definitions of automation patents and also
verify that there is no similar positive association when we look at patents related to comput-
ers, nanotechnology or pharmaceuticals. Our alternative measures of robotics-related and other
automation patents are: just the 901 USPTO class (as opposed to our baseline measure which
also includes all patents referring to the 901 class); patent classes that tend to cite the 901 class
frequently (using two definitions); patents with abstract containing words related to robots or to
industrial robots; patents with abstract containing words related to industrial machinery; and fi-
nally patents with abstract containing words related to numerical control. In all these cases we
find a positive association between demographic change and the number of patents in these classes
(relative to all utility patents). The remaining entries in the figure show that the relationship for
computers, nanotechnology and pharmaceuticals are either zero or negative. These results bol-
ster our interpretation that demographic change encourages the development of a specific class of
technologies related to industrial automation.30


       7    Demographics and Robots across US Commuting Zones
In this section, we explore the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots across US
commuting zones. As explained above, we proxy for robotics-related activity relying on Leigh and
Kraft’s (2016) data on the location of robot integrators. Panel A of Table 8 reports estimates of
the model

                                  Integratorsz = βAgingz + ΓXz,1990 + υz

across 722 US commuting zones. Here z indexes a commuting zone, Integratorsz is a dummy
variable for whether a commuting zone has any robot integrators. Agingz now designates the
change in the ratio of workers above 56 to those between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2015 in
commuting zone z, and Xz,1990 is a vector of additional commuting-zone characteristics measured
in 1990. As in our cross-country models for robots, we focus on unweighted regressions and the
  30
    The construction of the various patent classes is further described in the Appendix, where we also show that our
main results for patents are robust when we use other functional forms or when we take into account the presence of
outliers.


                                                        27
standard errors are robust against heteroskedasticity and spatial correlation at the state level.
   Because people can migrate across commuting zones more easily than across countries, the
endogeneity of local age composition is a more important issue in this case than in our cross-
country analysis. In Panel B we instrument aging using the average birth rates of the commuting
zone over five-year intervals from 1950-1954 to 1980-1984, while in Panel C we present an alternative
IV strategy using the decline in birth rates from 1950 to 1985 as a single instrument (similar to our
single instrument models in the cross-country analysis).
   Column 1 controls only for regional dummies (Midwest, Northeast, South, and West). Column
2 includes baseline characteristics of commuting zones measured in 1990—a point in time in which
the US had few industrial robots and integrators (see Ayres and Miller, 1981). These characteristics
include the log of the average income, the log of the population, the initial ratio of older to middle-
aged workers, and the share of workers with different levels of education. Column 3 includes the
exposure to robots measure already used above to capture the opportunities for the use of robots in
each commuting zone based on its industrial composition. This column also controls for the shares
of employment in manufacturing, agriculture, mining, construction, and finance and real estate in
1990. Finally, column 4 includes additional covariates to which we did not have access to in our
cross-country analysis, including the racial composition of commuting zones, the share of male and
female employment (all measured in 1990) and controls for exposure to Chinese imports, Mexican
imports, offshoring and routine jobs (see Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017a).
   For all specifications, the qualitative pattern of the estimates are similar across the three pan-
els, though the OLS estimates are considerably smaller than their IV counterparts, presumably
reflecting the endogeneity of current age composition in the local labor market. For both of our IV
specifications, we find that robot integrators tend to locate in commuting zones that are aging more
rapidly as well as those with the greatest exposure to robots (as shown by Acemoglu and Restrepo,
2017a). A 10 percentage point increase in our aging variable—which is approximately the standard
deviation among US commuting zones in this period—is associated with a 8.8 percentage points
increase in the probability of having an integrator (compared to an average probability of 22%).
   These relationships are shown visually in Figures 13 and 14. The first presents a map of com-
muting zones that house robot integrators next to the predicted aging patterns across commuting
zones. The strong association between these two variables is clearly visible from these maps. The
second figure presents binned scatter plots of the relationship between aging or predicted aging and
the location of integrators.
   Columns 6 and 7 explore whether the impact of aging concentrates in commuting zones with
a high share of manufacturing employment. Our theoretical mechanism should only operate when
there is significant manufacturing activity in an area. Consistent with this expectation, we find
that integrators locate in commuting zones undergoing rapid aging but only when these are above
the median in the distribution of manufacturing employment (column 6); aging does not appear
to be related to the locational choices of integrators in commuting zones with little manufacturing



                                                  28
employment (column 7).31
       Overall, even though the presence of integrators in an area does not fully capture the extent of
industrial automation or the use and development of robotics technologies, the evidence is broadly
supportive of the positive impact of aging on the adoption of robots.


          8    Demographics and Robots: Industry-Level Results
Our theoretical analysis in Section 2 highlighted that the response of robotics technology to de-
mographic change—an increase in the ratio of older to middle-aged workers—should be more pro-
nounced in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and also in industries in which these
middle-aged workers engage in tasks that can be more productively automated. We now investigate
these predictions using the industry-level data from IFR.
       Table 9 estimates regression models similar to those reported so far, except that we now use
annual data varying by country and industry and also include interactions with industry charac-
teristics:

          IRi,c,t
                   =βAgingc + βR Agingc × Reliance on Middle-Aged Workersi                                        (20)
         Li,c,1990
                    + βP Agingc × Opportunities for Automationi + Γi,t Xc,1990 + αi + δt + εi,c,t ,

where the left-hand side variable, in contrast to equation (19), denotes the (annual) installation of
new robots per thousand workers (with the denominator still corresponding to employment in 1990).
Agingc is once again defined as the change in the ratio of the population above 56 to those between
21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025. We also allow the covariates in Xc,1990 to have time-varying
coefficients and include industry and year effects, αi and δt , in this case. Reliance on Middle-Aged
Workersi and Opportunities for Automationi were defined in Section 3 and capture the relevant
dimensions of industry heterogeneity according to our theory. Our sample for this regression covers
50 countries and runs between 1993 and 2014, but is unbalanced since, as indicated in Table
A1, data are missing for several country×industry×year combinations.32 Standard errors are now
robust against heteroscedasticity, and cross-industry and temporal correlation at the country level.
       To construct the denominator of our left-hand side variable, we use several approaches. First,
in Panels A and B we use the ILO country data to normalize robot installations by Li,c,1990 =
Lc,1990 /19 (recall that the IFR reports data for 19 industries). This normalization allows us to use
all 50 countries for which there are industry-level robots data. Second, in Panels C and D we use
  31
     Table A12 in the Appendix shows that our commuting zone-level results are robust across a range of specifications,
for example, when we exclude outliers, weight the data by population, or use the log of the employment of integrators
as the dependent variable.
  32
     In this and subsequent industry-level regressions, we weight country-industry pairs using the baseline share of
employment in each industry in that country. This weighting scheme ensures that all countries receive the same
weight—as in our unweighted country specifications—while industry weights reflect their relative importance in each
country (this is the same weighting scheme used by Graetz and Michaels, 2015 and Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen,
2014).



                                                          29
EUKLEMS data, which cover all the industries in our sample, but only for 22 countries. Finally,
Table A13 in the Appendix uses the UNIDO data on employment by country-industry pair, which
covers manufacturing industries for 44 countries.33
    Column 1 in all panels presents estimates of equation (20) without the interaction terms.
Though not reported, our covariates, Xc,1990 , include region dummies, the log of GDP per capita,
log population, average years of schooling and the ratio of older to middle-aged workers in 1990.
    The remaining columns include the interaction of aging with reliance on middle-aged workers
and opportunities for automation. In columns 2-4, the Opportunity for Automationi is proxied
using Graetz and Michaels’s replaceability index, while in columns 5-7, it is proxied by a dummy
for the industries identified by BCG (2015). The estimates in columns 2 and 5 show positive and
statistically significant interactions with both variables in all panels. The estimates in column 2
of Panel A, for example, indicate that a 10 percentage point increase in aging leads to an increase
of 0.15 (= 1.66 × 0.9 × 0.1) annual robot installations per thousand workers in an industry at the
75th percentile of reliance on middle-aged workers compared to an industry at the 25th percentile.
For instance, in electronics, which is at the 75th percentile of reliance on middle-aged workers, a 10
percentage point increase in aging is predicted to increase robot installations by 0.25 per thousand
workers per year, while in basic metals, which is at the 25th percentile, the same change is predicted
to lead to only 0.1 more robots per thousand workers. Similarly, a 10 percentage point increase in
aging is associated with an increase of 0.155 (= 0.27 × 5.738 × 0.1) annual robot installations per
thousand workers in an industry at the 75th percentile of the replaceability index compared to an
industry in the 25th percentile. For example, automobile manufacturing is approximately at the
75th percentile of the replaceability index, and a 10 percentage point increase in aging increases
robot installations by 0.21 per thousand workers per year in this industry, while the same change is
predicted to increase installation of robots only by about 0.05 per thousand workers in construction
or utilities, which are at the 25th percentile.
    In columns 3 and 6, we control for a measure of the baseline extent of robot use in each
country-industry pair, which accounts for any unobserved industry characteristics that may be
correlated with initial investments and subsequent trends in robotics and/or for mean-reversion (or
other) dynamics.34 In columns 4 and 7 we control for a full set of country fixed effects (and we
no longer estimate the main effect of aging). In these models the interaction between aging and
industry characteristics is identified solely from within-country variation. Reassuringly, the size of
the interaction coefficients does not change much in either case.
    We turn to the IV specifications in Panels B and D. As in our cross-country analysis, we
  33
     Table A8 in the Appendix shows that if we estimate an analogue of equation (20) using yearly data on robot
installation for countries, the results are very similar to our baseline cross-country estimates in Table 3. The slight
differences are due to the depreciation of the stock of robots (if robots did not depreciate, the two models would yield
the exact same results since total installations would add up to the change in the stock of robots).
  34
     Because we do not observe the stock of robots for all country-industry pairs in 1993, we follow Graetz and
Michales (2015) and impute these stocks when they are missing in 1993. To do so, we deflate the first observation of
the stock of robots in a country-industry pair back in time using the growth rate of the stock of total robots in the
country during the same period.



                                                          30
instrument demographic change using past birth rates, and we also include interactions of these
birth rates with our measures of reliance on middle-aged workers and opportunities for automation
to generate corresponding first-stages for the interaction terms. The IV estimates are quantitatively
similar to the OLS ones.35
       Overall, the cross-industry patterns provide support for the theoretical predictions of our frame-
work, and indicate that the response of investment in robots to aging is stronger in industries that
rely more on middle-aged workers and that have greater opportunities for automation.


                      9     Productivity and the Labor Share
We finally turn to the relationship between aging and changes in productivity (real value added
per worker) and the labor share. As highlighted in Section 2, the relationship between aging and
industry productivity is in general ambiguous. On the one hand, demographic change might reduce
the number of high-productivity middle-aged workers relative to lower-productivity older workers.
On the other hand, demographic change might increase productivity because of the technology
adoption it induces. Nevertheless, our model also makes some unambiguous predictions: because
of the induced increase in automation, industries with the greatest opportunities for automation
should increase their value added per worker relative to other industries that cannot rely on au-
tomation to substitute for middle-aged workers. For the same reason, we also expect a differential
negative impact on the labor share in industries with the greatest opportunities for automation.
       Panels A and B of Table 10 estimate a version of equation (20) with the change in log (real)
added per worker in industry i in country c between 1995 and 2007 as the left-hand side variable
(instead of annual robot installations) and the same interactions on the right-hand side. Because
this productivity measure from EUKLEMS data is only available from 1995 onwards, we adjust our
aging variable to be between 1995 and 2025. We allow the baseline covariates in Xc,1995 to affect
industries differently, and we continue to include industry effects, αi , and to use the same weighting
scheme as in the previous section. The standard errors are again robust against heteroscedasticity
and correlation at the country level.36
       The structure of Table 10 is similar to that of Table 9. Panel A presents OLS estimates for
productivity and Panel B reports IV estimates. Column 1 in Panel A shows that aging reduces the
average growth of value added per worker. A 10 percentage point increase in aging is associated
with a 14.5% decline in value added per worker (s.e.=5.6%) in Panel A. These results differ from
the findings in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017b), where we showed that there was no negative effect
of aging on growth in GDP per capita. The negative estimates in column 1 here are driven by
the smaller samples in the EUKLEMS, and are not robust to using other measures of economic
activity. For instance, as reported in Table A18 in the Appendix, if we estimate the analogue of
  35
     We also confirmed that past demographic changes have neither main effects nor interaction effects (with reliance
on middle-aged workers or opportunities for automation) and also verified that these results are robust under different
specifications and to excluding outliers. These results are presented in Tables A14, A15, and A16 in the Appendix.
  36
     In the Appendix we also present analogous results from the OECD STAN database.


                                                          31
this equation at the country level for a larger sample, there is no significant negative relationship.
    Of greater interest given the theoretical predictions highlighted in Section 2 is the interaction
between aging and opportunities for automation. Here, we find a positive interaction, indicating
that in the presence of aging, industries with greater potential for automation are experiencing
relative productivity gains. The magnitudes are sizable. For example, the IV estimate in column
2 of Panel B shows that a 10 percentage points increase in aging causes an increase of 18% (=
0.4 × 4.6 × 0.1) in the growth of value added per worker in an industry at the 95th percentile of the
replaceability index compared to an industry at the 5th percentile. In fact, our estimates imply
that aging increases productivity in the former industry while it reduces it in the latter.37
    Panels C and D of Table 10 present regressions for the labor share. Column 1 shows that, on
average, industries located in countries undergoing more rapid demographic change experienced
a decline in their labor share.38 More importantly for our focus here, we find that these effects
are more pronounced in industries that have greater opportunities for automation. We also find a
positive interaction between aging and reliance on middle-aged workers, which is consistent with
production tasks being complements (ζ < 1 in our model). The extent of heterogeneous effects on
the labor share across industries is again quantitatively significant.
    Overall, consistent with our theoretical predictions, the evidence suggests that aging increases
relative productivity and reduces the labor share in industries that have the greatest opportunities
for automation—and has ambiguous effects in the aggregate.


                                             10      Conclusion
The populations of most developed and many developing countries are aging rapidly.                               Many
economists see these demographic changes as major “headwinds” potentially slowing down or even
depressing economic growth in the decades to come. However, a reasoning based on directed tech-
nological change models—which highlight the effects of changing scarcity of different types of labor
on the adoption and development of technologies substituting for these factors—suggests that these
demographic changes should be associated with major technological responses.
    We have documented that this is indeed the case; countries and US labor markets undergo-
ing more major demographic change have invested significantly more in new robotic and other
automation technologies. We have argued that this is because ongoing demographic changes are
increasing the scarcity of middle-aged workers and industrial automation is most substitutable with
middle-aged workers. The effects of demographic change on investment in robots are robust and
quantitatively sizable. For example, differential aging alone accounts for about 40% of the cross-
  37
     We also find some negative estimates of the interaction between aging and reliance on middle-aged workers, but as
emphasized in Section 2, there are no tight predictions in this case, because both the direct effect (which is negative)
and the technology response effect (which can be positive) tend to be greater for industries that rely more heavily on
middle-aged workers.
  38
     As was the case with productivity, these results do not extend beyond the sample considered here. Table A18
in the Appendix shows that, if we estimate the analogue of equation (20) at the country level for the larger sample,
there is no relationship between aging and the labor share.


                                                          32
country variation in investment in robotics. We have also shown using data on intermediate exports
and patents that demographic change not only encourages the adoption of automation technologies
but also their development.
   Our directed technological change model further predicts that the effects of demographic change
should be more pronounced in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers (because the
scarcity of middle-aged workers will be felt more acutely in these industries) and in those that
present greater technological opportunities for automation. Using the industry dimension of our
data, we provide extensive support for these predictions as well.
   The technology responses to aging mean that the productivity implications of demographic
changes are more complex than previously recognized. In industries most amenable to automa-
tion, aging can trigger significantly more adoption of new robots and as a result, lead to greater
productivity—even if the direct effect of aging might be negative. Using industry-level productivity
data, we find that the main effect of aging on productivity is ambiguous, but as in our theoretical
predictions, in the presence of demographic change, industries with the greatest opportunities for
automation are experiencing more rapid growth of productivity and greater declines in labor share
relative to other industries.
   Several questions raised in this paper call for more research. First, it is important to study the
effects of aging on technology adoption and productivity using more disaggregated industry-level
or firm-level data, to which we do not have access in this paper. Second, it is necessary to further
investigate whether the effects of demographic change on technology adoption are being mediated
through wages and whether other factors affecting wages, such as differences in labor market in-
stitutions, also have similar effects on technology. Third, it would be interesting to investigate
technology responses to changes in the gender composition of the workforce as well (though our
data on automation technologies are too late to capture the most major changes in the developed
world). Finally, motivated by industrial automation, our focus has been on the substitution of
machines for middle-aged workers in production tasks (and mostly in manufacturing). Though it is
well-known that with the advent of artificial intelligence, a broader set of tasks can be automated,
there is currently little research on incentives for the automation of nonproduction tasks and their
productivity implications.


                                         References
     Abeliansky, Ana and Klaus Prettner (2017) “Automation and Demographic Change,”
CEGE wp 310.
    Acemoglu, Daron (1998) “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Tech-
nical Change and Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4): 1055-1089.
    Acemoglu, Daron (2002) “Directed Technical Change,” Review of Economic Studies, 69(4):
781–810.
    Acemoglu, Daron (2007) “Equilibrium Bias of Technology,” Econometrica, 75(5): 1371–
1410.


                                                33
    Acemoglu, Daron (2010) “When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation?” Journal of
Political Economy, 118(6): 1037–1078.
    Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor (2011) “Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications
for employment and earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4: 1043–1171.
    Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn (2004) “Market size in innovation: theory and evi-
dence from the pharmaceutical industry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 1049–1090.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2016) “The Race Between Machine and Man:
Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment” NBER Working Paper
No. 22252.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2017a) “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US
Labor Markets” NBER Working Paper No. 23285.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2017b) “Secular Stagnation? The Effect of
Aging on Economic Growth in the Age of Automation” NBER Working Paper No. 23077.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018) “Artificial Intelligence, Automation and
Work” NBER Working Paper No. 24196.
    Attanasio, Orazio, Sagiri Kitao, and Giovanni L. Violante (2007) “Global Demographic
Trends and Social Security Reform,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1): 144–198.
    Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane (2003) “The Skill Content of
Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4): 1279–1333.
    Autor, David H. and David Dorn (2013) “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1553–97.
    Autor, David (2015) “Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of
Workplace Automation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(3): 3-30.
    Ayres, Robert U., Brautzsch, H.-U. and Mori, S. (1987) “Computer Integrated Man-
ufacturing and Employment: Methodological Problems of Estimating the Employment Effects of
CIM Application on the Macroeconomic Level,” IIASA Working Paper WP-87-019.
    Ayres, Robert and Steve Miller (1981) “The Impacts of Industrial Robots,” Department
of Engineering and Public Policy and The Robotics Institute Carnegie-Mellon University.
    Baldwin, Richard and Coen Teulings (2014) Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures,
CEPR Press.
    Boston Consulting Group (2015) “The Robotics Revolution: The Next Great Leap in
Manufacturing.”
    Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee (2014) The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress,
and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies, W. W. Norton & Company.
    Clemens, Michael A., Ethan G. Lewis and Hannah M. Postel (2017) “Immigration
Restrictions as Active Labor Market Policy: Evidence from the Mexican Bracero Exclusion,” NBER
Working Paper No. 23125.
    Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, Margaret Kyle and Heidi Williams (2016) “The
More We Die, The More We Sell? A Simple Test of the Home-Market Effect,” NBER Working
Paper No. 22538.
    Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer (2015) “The Next Gen-
eration of the Penn World Table” American Economic Review, 105(10): 3150–82.




                                             34
     Finkelstein, Amy (2004) “Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy: Evidence from the
Vaccine Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2): 527–564.
     Ford, Martin (2015) The Rise of the Robots, Basic Books, New York.
     Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning (2007) “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polar-
ization of Work in Britain,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 118-133.
     Gordon, Robert (2016) The Rise and Fall of American Growth, Princeton University Press,
Princeton New Jersey.
     Graetz, Georg and Guy Michaels (2015) “Robots at Work,” CEP Paper No 1335.
     Gregory, Terry, Anna Salomons, and Ulrich Zierahn (2016) “Racing With or Against
the Machine? Evidence from Europe,” ZEW - Paper No. 16-053.
     Groover, Mikell, Mitchell Weiss, Roger N. Nagel, and Nicholas G. Odrey (1986)
Industrial Robotics: Technology, Programming and Applications, Mcgraw-Hill Inc.
     Hanlon, Walker W. (2015) “Necessity Is the Mother of Invention: Input Supplies and
Directed Technical Change,” Econometrica, 83: 67–100.
     International Federation of Robotics (2014) Wold Robotics: Industrial Robots.
     Jägger, Kirsten (2016) “EU KLEMS Growth and Productivity Accounts 2016 release -
Description of Methodology and General Notes.”
     Kotlikoff, Larry J., Kent A. Smetters, and Jan Walliser (2002) “Finding a Way out of
America?s Demographic Dilemma,” NBER Working Paper No. 8258.
     Krueger, Dirk, and Alexander Ludwig (2007) “On the Consequences of Demographic
Change for Rates of Returns to Capital, and the Distribution of Wealth and Welfare,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 54(1): 49–87.
     Leigh, Nancey Green and Benjamin Kraft (2016) “Local Economic Development and
the Geography of the Robotics Industry,” Mimeo, Georgia Tech.
     Lewis, Ethan (2011) “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2): 1029–1069.
     Ludwig, Alexander, Thomas Schelkle, and Edgar Vogel (2012) “Demographic Change,
Human Capital and Welfare,” Review of Economic Dynamics 15(1): 94–107.
     Manuelli, Rodolfo E., and Ananth Seshadri (2014) “Frictionless Technology Diffusion:
The Case of Tractors,” American Economic Review 104(4): 1368–91.
     Manson, Steven, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, and Steven Ruggles (2017)
“IPUMS National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 12.0 [Database].” Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota.
     Michaels, Guy, Ashwini Natraj and John Van Reenen (2014) “Has ICT Polarized
Skill Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries over Twenty-Five Years,”Review of Economics
and Statistics, 96(1): 60–77.
     Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch (1990) “Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles” Journal of
Labor Economics, H(2), 202-229.
     Poterba, James M (2001) “Demographic Structure and Asset Returns,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 83(4): 565–584.
     Tolbert, Charles M., and Molly Sizer (1996) “US Commuting Zones and Labor Market
Areas: A 1990 Update.” Economic Research Service Staff Paper 9614.
     Zeira, Joseph (1998) “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 113(4): 1091–1117.


                                              35
                                   Main Figures and Tables:




                         Panel A                                                   Panel B
                                      E        E
Figure 1: Equilibrium wages W             and V . The downward-slopping red curve is the isocost C(W, V, 1) = 1
(condition (12)). The equilibrium is given by the point of tangency between the isocost and a line with slope − 1−φ
                                                                                                                  φ
                                                                                                                    ,
and at this point ∂C/∂W
                  ∂C/∂V
                         =  1−φ
                             φ
                                (condition  (13)). Panel B shows that automation  rotates the isocost curve clockwise
(displacement effect) and shifts it outwards (productivity effect).




                         Panel A                                                   Panel B
Figure 2: Equilibrium middle-aged wage with endogenous technology. Panel A: unique equilibrium. Panel B:
multiple equilibria. Aging shifts the mapping W E up, and this increases the equilibrium wage in the least and the
greatest equilibrium.




                                                          36
                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                        1
  Ratio of older to middle−aged workers




                                                                                                                                                     Robots per thousand industry workers
                                                                                                                                                                                15
                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                     10
          .4         .6




                                                                                                                                                            5
                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                    1970   1975   1980    1985      1990   1995   2000   2005    2010     2015   2020      2025                                                      1993   1995   1997    1999      2001   2003   2005   2007    2009     2011   2013      2015


                                                                  All countries              OECD countries                United States                                                                           All countries              OECD countries                United States
                                                                  Germany                    South Korea                                                                                                           Germany                    South Korea



                                                                                      Panel A                                                                                                                                          Panel B
Figure 3: Panel A presents trends in aging—the ratio of older (56 years of age or older) to middle-aged (between
21 and 55 years of age) workers—using data and forecasts from the UN. Panel B presents trends in robot adoption.
Robot adoption is measured by the number of robots per thousand industry workers in 1990, using robot data from
the IFR and employment figures from the ILO.
   Ratio of blue to white collar and service jobs
                                               .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                                                                                                                                                        Share employed in robotizable industries
                                                                                                                                                                                    .08
                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                          .06
                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                .04
              .2




                                                                                                                                                      .02
   .1




                                                     20    25     30     35    40     45    50 55        60     65   70     75    80       85                                                         20    25     30     35    40     45    50 55        60     65   70     75    80       85
                                                                                              Age                                                                                                                                              Age

                                                                              Census for 1990                 Census for 2000                                                                                                  Census for 1990                 Census for 2000
                                                                              ACS for 2007                    Average                                                                                                          ACS for 2007                    Average



                                                                                      Panel A                                                                                                                                          Panel B
Figure 4: For each age group, Panel A plots the ratio of the number of employees in blue-collar production jobs to
the number of employees in white-collar and service jobs. For each age group, Panel B plots the share of employees
working in industries with the greatest opportunities for automation (car manufacturing, electronics, metal machinery,
and chemicals, plastics, and pharmaceuticals). Both figures present data from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses, the 2007
American Community Survey, and an average of these series.




                                                                                                                                                37
                                                                                                                                                 Change in the share of wages paid to production workers
                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                        PAPER AND PRINTING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAPER AND PRINTING


     Change in the share of production workers   MISCELLANEOUS                                                                                                                                             MISCELLANEOUS
                                     .05




                                                                                                                                                                                        .05
                                                                                 ELECTRONICS
                                                        TEXTILES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TEXTILES
                        0




                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                           GLASS AND CERAMICS                                                                                                                                        GLASS AND CERAMICS

                                                                                               PLASTIC AND CHEMICALS                                                                                                                          PLASTIC AND CHEMICALS
          −.05




                                                                                                                                                              −.05
                                                                                FURNITURE                                                                                                                                        FURNITURE
                                                                                                                            CARS                                                                                                                                      CARS
                           −.1




                                                                                                                                                  −.1
                                                    0                             10             20              30            40                                                                             0                  10              20             30       40
                                                                                       Exposure to robots                                                                                                                              Exposure to robots


                                                                                       Panel A                                                                                                                                        Panel B
Figure 5: The figure presents the correlation across industries between the exposure to robots and the change
between 1993 and 2007 in the share of production workers (Panel A) and the share of wages paid to production
workers (Panel B) across three-digit US industries. Data from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database.
Marker size indicates total employment in each industry.



                                                                                                                               Employment rates
                                                                                            16−25              26−35               36−45                                            46−55                                    56−65             66−75
                                                                           1      0
                                                                    Point estimate
                                                                   −1      −2




                                                                                                       Baseline estimates             Removing highly exposed areas                                                                   Pooled model



                                                                                                                                     Log of wages
                                                                                            16−25              26−35               36−45                                            46−55                                    56−65             66−75
                                                                           4
                                                                           2
                                                                   Point estimate
                                                                          0−2
                                                                           −4




                                                                                                       Baseline estimates             Removing highly exposed areas                                                                   Pooled model




Figure 6: The figure presents estimates of the impact of one additional robot per thousand workers on the
employment and wages of different age groups across US commuting zones. The three specifications and the data
used are described in the main text and in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a).




                                                                                                                                           38
                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SOUTH KOREA
                                                                                                                                 SOUTH KOREA
  Increase in robots between 1993 and 2014




                                                                                                                                                  Increase in robots between 1993 and 2014
                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                 SINGAPORE
                                                                                                                               GERMANY                                                                                                                                           GERMANY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DENMARK
                        .4




                                                                                                       DENMARK




                                                                                                                                                                       .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SWEDEN
                                                                                              SWEDEN
                                                                                                  BELGIUM                                                                                                                              BELGIUM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ITALY
            .2




                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                 MOLDOVA, REPUBLIC OF                            CHINA,HONG KONG S.A.R.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ESTONIA
                                                                                                               CHINA P.REP.                                                                                                                       NEW ZEALAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TURKEY
                                                               PAKISTAN                                                                                                                                        ISRAEL
                              0




                                                                                                    POLAND                                                                                                                                POLAND
                                                               EGYPT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UNITED KINGDOM




                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                       CHILE                                                                                                                                CHILE

                                                         0                              .2                     .4                      .6                                                                 .1           .2                 .3              .4               .5
                                                                                       Aging between 1990 and 2025                                                                                                              Aging between 1990 and 2025


                                                                                              Panel A                                                                                                                                Panel B
Figure 7: Relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 between
1990 and 2025) and the increase in the number of industrial robots per thousand workers between 1993 and 2014.
The plots partial out the covariates included in the regression models in columns 2 and 5 of Table 3.
                                                    −6




                                                                                                                                                                                                     −7
    Relative imports of industrial robots 1996−2015




                                                                                                                                                     Relative imports of industrial robots 1996−2015



                                                                                 CONGO SOUTH AFRICA
                                                                                        IRANLUXEMBOURG ROMANIA                GERMANY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SWITZERLAND           GERMANY
                                                                                                                                 SOUTH KOREA
                                            −8




                                                                                                  TURKEY                         SINGAPORE                                                                      LUXEMBOURG
                                                                                                                                                                                          −8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SOUTH KOREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TURKEY                                             SLOVENIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISRAEL
                                −10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NETHERLANDS
                                                                       GABON
                                                                                                                                                                            −9
                     −12




                                                                       LESOTHO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CHILE   NEW ZEALAND
                                                                                                                                                              −10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GREECE
           −14




                                                                                               MYANMAR                                                                                                                               LATVIA

                                                                                     BELIZE
  −16




                                                                          MALI
                                                                                                                                                  −11




                                                                                     MAURITANIA

                                                         −.2                     0                  .2                   .4            .6                                                                 .1               .2               .3                  .4                .5
                                                                                       Aging between 1995 and 2025                                                                                                              Aging between 1995 and 2025


                                                                                              Panel A                                                                                                                                Panel B
Figure 8: Relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 between
1990 and 2025) and the log of imports of industrial robots between 1996 and 2015 (relative to total imports of
intermediates). Panel A is for the full sample and Panel B is for the OECD sample. The plots partial out the
covariates included in the regression models in columns 2 and 5 of Table 6. Marker size indicates total imports.




                                                                                                                                             39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                LUXEMBOURG




                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                    Relative exports of industrial robots 1996−2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                 −7
     Relative exports of industrial robots 1996−2015
                                                                            NIGERIA                                                                                                                                                      ICELAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SWEDEN                                         JAPAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SOUTH KOREA

                                       −5                                                  ALGERIA
                                                                             CONGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISRAEL




                                                                                                                                                                                    −8
                                                                                            VIET NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GERMANY
                                                                                                                       SINGAPORE
                                                                                                                        JAPAN

                                                                                                                         CHINA,HONG KONG S.A.R.
                     −10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NETHERLANDS
                                                                    GABON




                                                                                                                                                                  −9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MEXICO
                                                                                                         ALBANIA
     −15




                                                                                      BANGLADESH




                                                                                                                                                  −10
                                                                      MALI                                                                                                                                                             POLAND
                                                                         MALAWI                                                                                                                                                 IRELAND   GREECE

                                                         −.2                0                .2               .4             .6                                                                       .1                 .2               .3              .4               .5
                                                                                Aging between 1995 and 2025                                                                                                                   Aging between 1995 and 2025


                                                                                      Panel A                                                                                                                                     Panel B
Figure 9: Relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 between
1990 and 2025) and the log of exports of industrial robots between 1996 and 2015 (relative to total exports of
intermediates). Panel A is for the full sample and Panel B is for the OECD sample. The plots partial out the
covariates included in the regression models in columns 2 and 5 of Table 6. Marker size indicates total exports.




                                                                                                              A. Share of imports                                                                                                 B. Share of exports

                          Dedicated machinery (inc. robots)
                                           Numerically controlled machines
                                                           Automatic welding machines
                                                         Weaving and knitting machines
                           Other textile dedicated machinery
                                                                Automatic machine tools
                                                                    Automatic conveyors
                                      Automatic regulating instruments
                                                                   Manual machine tools
                                                               Manual welding machines
                                                                 Tools for industrial work
   Not−numerically controlled machines
                                                           Other regulating instruments
                                                                        Other conveyors
                                                               Other industrial machinery
                                                                      Vending machines
                                                                      Laundry machines
                                                                  Agricultural machinery
                                                                                 Computers

                                                                                                −2                 0                 2                                                                     4            −5                0                    5                10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Full sample                               OECD sample



Figure 10: Estimates of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged
21-55 between 1990 and 2025) and the log of imports (Panel A) and exports (Panel B) of intermediate goods between
1990 and 2015. These outcomes are normalized by the total intermediate exports and imports, respectively, during
this period. The figure presents separate estimates for the full sample of countries and for the OECD sample.




                                                                                                                                     40
                      −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ESTONIA
                                                        MOZAMBIQUE




                                                                                                                                                                   −3.5
                                                                                                                           Relative automation patents from 1996−2015
  Relative automation patents 1990−2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                ICELAND
                                                                                                  MALTA                                                                              NORWAY                               ITALY
                                  −2




                                                                                                                                                          −4
                                                                                            LITHUANIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SOUTHJAPAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KOREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GERMANY
                          −3




                                                GABON




                                                                                                                                             −4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                ISRAEL
                                                                                                                                                                                MEXICO
                −4




                                                    CAMEROON                                                    JAPAN
                                                                                                             SOUTH KOREA
                                                                                                             CHINA,HONG KONG S.A.R.

                                                                     INDIA




                                                                                                                                   −5
                                                                                                                                                                                              CZECH REPUBLIC
      −5




                                                                                      BELGIUM     BARBADOS                                                                                    BELGIUM
                                                                             TURKEY                                                                                                 TURKEY
                                                                                                PORTUGAL




                                                                                                                                                  −5.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PORTUGAL
                      −6




                                          −.2            0                .2                     .4              .6                                                       .1             .2      .3             .4         .5            .6
                                                             Aging between 1990 and 2025                                                                                                      Aging from 1990 to 2025


                                                                 Panel A                                                                                                                         Panel B
Figure 11: Relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 between
1990 and 2025) and the log of automation patents granted to a country between 1990 and 2016 (relative to total
patents at the USPTO). Panel A is for the full sample and Panel B is for the OECD sample. The plots partial out
the covariates included in the regression models in columns 2 and 5 of Table 7. Marker size indicates total patents.




                                                                                Classes related to 901
                                                                                      901 USPTO class
                                                    Classes citing 901 class (25% threshold)
                                                    Classes citing 901 class (10% threshold)
                                                                               Words related to robots
                                                              Words related to industrial robots
                                                   Words related to robots and manipulators
                                                             Words related to numerical control
                                                                     Classes related to computers
                                                                       Words related to computers
                                                                        Classes related to software
                                                                             Words related to software
                                                             Classes related to nanotechnology
                                                              Words related to nanotechnology
                                                             Classes related to pharmaceuticals
                                                              Words related to pharmaceuticals

                                                                                                                           −3                                                  −2        −1     0         1          2
                                                                                                                                                                          Full sample                   OECD sample



Figure 12: Estimates of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers
aged 21-55 between 1990 and 2025) and the log of patents in the indicated category between 1990 and 2015. These
outcomes are normalized by the total patents granted by the USPTO during this period. The figure presents separate
estimates for the full sample of countries with patent data and for OECD countries.




                                                                                                                      41
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.213 − 0.316
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.198 − 0.213
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.187 − 0.198
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.174 − 0.187
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.157 − 0.174
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.021 − 0.157


                                                          Panel A                                                                                              Panel B
Figure 13: The maps present the location of commuting zones that house robot integrators (Panel A) and predicted
aging across commuting zones based on birthrates from 1950 to 1985 (Panel B).
                        .35




                                                                                                                         .35
  Dummy for location of integrators (binned)




                                                                                                    Dummy for location of integrators (binned)
                                      .3




                                                                                                                                      .3
                          .25




                                                                                                                        .25
               .2




                                                                                                            .2
     .15




                                                                                                 .15
                        .1




                                               0   .1              .2             .3   .4                                                        .1   .15                .2               .25            .3
                                                        Aging from 1990 to 2025                                                                          Predicted aging from 1990 to 2025


                                                          Panel A                                                                                              Panel B
Figure 14: Binned plot of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged
21-55 between 1990 and 2015) and predicted aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55
between 1990 and 2015 instrumented using birthrates from 1950 to 1985) and the location of robot integrators in the
US (from Leigh and Kraft, 2016). The plots partial out the covariates included in the regression models in column 4
in Table 8.




                                                                                            42
                               Table 1: Summary statistics for countries

                                                                                   Rapidly-        Slowly-
                                                     All
                                                                    OECD            aging           aging
                                                  countries
                                                                                  countries       countries
 Panel A: IFR data.
 Robots per thousand workers in 2014                3.79             5.71            5.76            1.81
                                                   (4.60)           (4.83)          (5.29)          (2.64)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                0.72             1.14            1.09            0.34
                                                   (1.13)           (1.22)          (1.24)          (0.87)
 Annualized increase between 1993 and 2014          0.15             0.22            0.22            0.07
                                                   (0.18)           (0.19)          (0.21)          (0.09)
 Ratio of older to middle-aged workers              0.38             0.45            0.41            0.34
 in 1990                                           (0.13)           (0.09)          (0.12)          (0.14)
 Change in older to middle-aged workers             0.27             0.31            0.37            0.16
 between 1990 and 2025                             (0.13)           (0.11)          (0.09)          (0.07)
 Change in older to middle-aged workers             0.13             0.16            0.19            0.08
 between 1990 and 2015                             (0.08)           (0.06)          (0.05)          (0.08)
                                                   N = 52           N = 30          N = 26          N = 26
 Panel B: Comtrade data.
 Robot imports per thousand workers                  $37K           $112K            $70K             $4K
 between 1996 and 2015 (thousand dollars)           ($89K)         ($118K)         ($118K)          ($11K)
 Robot imports per million dollars of total          $272            $268            $279            $219
 intermediate imports between 1996 and 2015         ($145)          ($138)          ($143)          (%158)
                                                    N=131           N=34            N=65             N=66

 Robot exports per thousand workers                  $42K           $110K            $69K             $16K
 between 1996 and 2015 (thousand dollars)          ($115K)         ($168K)         ($127K)           ($95K)
 Robot exports per million dollars of total          $292            $375            $314              $89
 intermediate exports between 1996 and 2015         ($590)          ($314)          ($307)          ($1,613)
                                                    N=105           N=35            N=52              N=53
 Panel C. USPTO patents sample.
 Robot-related patents granted between                718            1,578           1,406             49
 1990 and 2016 by the USPTO                         (3,365)         (4,928)         (4,728)          (148)
 Robot-related patents granted by USPTO               13.4            13.5            13.5            12.8
 for every other thousand patents                    (3.3)           (3.0)           (3.0)           (8.1)
                                                     N=69            N=31            N=34            N=35

Notes: The table presents summary statistics for the main variables used in our cross-country analysis. The data
are presented separately for the full sample, the OECD sample, and countries above and below the median aging
between 1990 and 2025 in each sample. Section 3 in the main text describes the sources and data in detail.




                                                      43
Table 2: OLS estimates of the impact of population change in different age groups on the adoption
of industrial robots.

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                       Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)
                                                  Full sample                             OECD sample
                                          (1)         (2)             (3)                (4)            (5)         (6)
                                                    Panel A. Population in two age groups between 1990-2025
 Change in the log of population       -0.451∗∗∗    -0.510∗         -0.500∗∗        -0.756∗∗∗       -1.202∗∗     -1.066∗∗
 aged 21-55 years                       (0.148)     (0.286)          (0.234)         (0.213)         (0.447)      (0.446)
 Change in the log of population        0.366∗      0.368∗            0.286          0.605∗∗          0.478        0.423
 ≥ 56 years                             (0.190)     (0.203)          (0.173)         (0.237)         (0.328)      (0.345)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                                0.076∗∗∗                                     0.066∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.011)                                      (0.023)
 Observations                             52          52                52              30              30           30
 R-squared                               0.47        0.59              0.71            0.42            0.63         0.71
                                                    Panel B. Population in two age groups between 1990-2025
 Change in the log of population       -0.489∗∗∗   -0.469∗∗∗        -0.357∗∗          -0.821∗∗∗      -0.839∗∗∗   -0.652∗∗∗
 aged 21-55 years                       (0.164)     (0.162)          (0.156)           (0.230)        (0.210)     (0.210)
 Change in the log of population        0.377∗     0.495∗∗∗          0.230∗            0.643∗∗       0.904∗∗∗      0.576∗
 aged 56-75 years                       (0.195)     (0.164)          (0.131)           (0.243)        (0.264)     (0.282)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                                0.078∗∗∗                                      0.068∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.011)                                      (0.017)
 Observations                             52          52                52                30             30          30
 R-squared                               0.47        0.52              0.67              0.44           0.55        0.66
                                                   Panel C. Population in three age   groups between 1990-2025
 Change in the log of population         0.010       0.007           -0.150             -0.160          -0.243    -0.355
 aged 21-35 years                       (0.150)     (0.152)         (0.161)            (0.213)         (0.213)   (0.230)
 Change in the log of population       -0.618∗∗∗   -0.582∗∗∗         -0.193           -0.753∗∗∗       -0.632∗∗    -0.265
 aged 36-55 years                       (0.195)     (0.210)         (0.223)            (0.247)         (0.243)   (0.294)
 Change in the log of population        0.511∗∗    0.646∗∗∗         0.265∗∗           0.773∗∗∗        1.119∗∗∗   0.767∗∗∗
 aged 56-75 years                       (0.197)     (0.142)         (0.126)            (0.262)         (0.281)   (0.259)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                                0.076∗∗∗                                     0.068∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.014)                                      (0.021)
 Observations                             52          52               52                30              30         30
 R-squared                               0.52        0.57             0.67              0.47            0.60       0.69
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                           X                X                                 X          X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                         X                                            X

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the relationship between changes in population and the adoption of
robots. In all panels, the dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers
between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The explanatory variables include the expected change in the log of population
in different age groups between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN population statistics). The exact age groups used in the
analysis vary across the panels. We present results for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use
the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1993 values of log GDP
per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in
1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the 1993 value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted, and the
standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with
∗∗
   are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                            44
            Table 3: Estimates of the impact of aging on the adoption of industrial robots.

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                       Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)
                                                  Full sample                             OECD sample
                                         (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)        (6)
                                                                    Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025           0.769∗∗∗     0.712∗∗∗       0.559∗∗         1.117∗∗∗      0.983∗∗∗   0.777∗∗∗
                                       (0.252)      (0.237)        (0.211)          (0.366)      (0.298)    (0.275)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                       0.032          -0.015                        0.037      -0.024
                                                    (0.030)        (0.023)                       (0.052)    (0.055)
 log of population in 1993                          0.031∗∗∗        0.015∗                       0.039∗∗∗    0.021∗
                                                    (0.010)        (0.009)                       (0.012)    (0.012)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                               0.076∗∗∗                                 0.071∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.011)                                  (0.022)
 Observations                             52           52             52               30           30         30
 R-squared                               0.47         0.59           0.70             0.38         0.54       0.63
                                                                    Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025           0.874∗∗∗     0.767∗∗∗       0.692∗∗∗         1.576∗∗∗     1.018∗∗∗   0.956∗∗∗
                                       (0.263)      (0.241)         (0.217)          (0.473)     (0.316)    (0.298)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                       0.028           -0.022                       0.036      -0.021
                                                    (0.028)         (0.022)                      (0.047)    (0.051)
 log of population in 1993                          0.031∗∗∗        0.015∗                       0.039∗∗∗    0.021∗
                                                    (0.009)         (0.008)                      (0.011)    (0.011)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                               0.072∗∗∗                                 0.063∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.013)                                 (0.024)
 Observations                             52           52              52               30          30         30
 First-stage F stat.                     25.2         17.8            17.0              7.7        7.1         8.6
 Overid p− value                         0.67         0.66            0.10             0.75        0.34       0.10
 Anderson-Rubin Wald test p− value       0.02         0.03            0.00             0.03        0.03       0.00
                                                                  Panel C. Single-IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025           1.011∗∗∗     0.831∗∗        0.613∗∗          1.622∗∗∗     1.265∗∗∗   1.088∗∗
                                       (0.361)      (0.329)        (0.310)          (0.555)      (0.402)    (0.427)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                       0.023          -0.018                        0.031      -0.018
                                                    (0.031)        (0.022)                       (0.051)    (0.055)
 log of population in 1993                          0.030∗∗∗       0.015∗∗                       0.035∗∗∗   0.021∗
                                                    (0.009)        (0.008)                       (0.012)    (0.012)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                               0.074∗∗∗                                 0.058∗∗
                                                                   (0.013)                                  (0.028)
 Observations                             52           52             52               30           30         30
 First-stage F stat.                     32.4         27.9           24.1             14.6         29.9       23.8
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                            X              X                             X          X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                        X                                        X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots. In all
panels, the dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers between 1993 and
2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between
21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B
presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950
and 1985. Panel C presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the decline in birth rates
between 1960 and 1980. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic. When using multiple instruments,
we also report the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test, and the p−value of Anderson and Rubin’s test for the
coefficient on aging being zero. We present results for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use
the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1993 values of log GDP
per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in
1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the 1993 value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted, and the
standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with
∗∗
   are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                             45
Table 4: OLS estimates of the impact of past and expected aging on the adoption of industrial
robots.

                                                               Dependent variable:
                                    Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)
                                               Full sample                             OECD sample
                                      (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)        (6)
                                                                       Panel A. Placebo test
 Aging between 1950 and 1990         -0.098         0.226              0.537            -0.357        0.095      0.325
                                    (0.378)        (0.411)            (0.351)          (0.587)       (0.456)    (0.355)
 Observations                          52             52                 52               30            30         30
 R-squared                            0.25           0.42               0.62             0.02          0.26       0.48
                                                                  Panel B. Past vs. expected aging
 Aging between 1990 and 2025        0.801∗∗∗      0.717∗∗∗          0.524∗∗         1.105∗∗∗         0.988∗∗∗   0.777∗∗
                                    (0.263)       (0.229)           (0.199)         (0.348)          (0.306)    (0.277)
 Aging between 1950 and 1990         -0.304        -0.052            0.271           -0.243           0.192      0.330
                                    (0.377)       (0.329)           (0.259)         (0.436)          (0.315)    (0.301)
 Observations                          52            52                52              30               30         30
 R-squared                            0.49          0.59              0.70            0.38             0.54       0.63
                                                              Panel C. Current vs. expected aging
 Aging between 1990 and 2015        0.694∗∗        0.524∗              0.427          0.861∗∗        0.688∗      0.528
                                    (0.268)        (0.288)            (0.260)         (0.366)        (0.347)    (0.339)
 Aging between 2015 and 2025        0.855∗         0.935∗              0.719          1.398∗∗        1.320∗∗    1.066∗
                                    (0.442)        (0.520)            (0.517)         (0.527)        (0.564)    (0.573)
 Test for equality                    0.75           0.54               0.67            0.31           0.38       0.48
 Observations                          52             52                 52              30             30         30
 R-squared                            0.47           0.59               0.70            0.38           0.55       0.63
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                          X                   X                              X         X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                           X                                        X

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the relationship between past and expected aging and the adoption of
robots. In all panels, the dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers
between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable varies across panels: Panel A presents a placebo test
using the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1950 and 1990 (from the UN
Population Statistics). Panel B adds the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and
55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Finally, Panel C separately estimates coefficients
for aging between 1990 and 2015 (current aging) and between 2015 and 2025 (expected aging). We present results
for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include
region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years
of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the 1993
value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted, and the standard errors are robust against
heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level,
and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                             46
Table 5: Stacked-differences estimates of the impact of aging on the adoption of industrial robots.

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                       Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)
                                                  Full sample                           OECD sample
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                    Panel A. OLS estimates
 Contemporary aging                     0.843∗∗∗      0.611∗∗∗     0.448∗∗        0.983∗∗    0.776∗∗∗      0.583∗
                                        (0.291)       (0.218)      (0.206)        (0.440)    (0.273)       (0.323)
 Observations                             104           104          104             60         60            60
 R-squared                                0.28          0.48         0.13           0.15       0.39          0.13
                                                                    Panel B. IV estimates
 Contemporary aging                     1.157∗∗∗      0.924∗∗∗     0.797∗         1.752∗∗    1.105∗∗∗      1.122∗
                                        (0.401)       (0.311)      (0.473)        (0.773)    (0.418)       (0.647)
 Observations                             104           104          104             60         60            60
 First-stage F stat.                      10.4           6.7         4.1             6.6        4.6          4.2
 Overid p− value                          0.50          0.16         0.49           0.64       0.38          0.47
 Anderson-Rubin Wald test p− value        0.02          0.00         0.14           0.00       0.00          0.00
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                              X            X                         X            X
 Initial robot density in 1993                           X            X                         X            X
 Country trends                                                       X                                      X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV stacked-differences estimates of the relationship between aging and the
adoption of robots for the two periods 1993-2005 and 2005-2014. In all panels, the dependent variable is the change
in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (from the IFR) for two periods: between 1993 and 2005 and
between 2005 and 2014. The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between
21 and 55 for both periods as well (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B
presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950
and 1985. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic, the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification
test, and the p−value of Anderson and Rubin’s test for the coefficient on aging being zero. We present results for
two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include region
dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of
schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990, and the 1993 value of robots per thousand
workers. Columns 3 and 6 include country fixed effects. All regressions are unweighted, and the standard errors are
robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1%
level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                          47
      Table 6: Estimates of the impact of aging on imports and exports of industrial robots.

                                                   Full sample                                   OECD sample
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)          (5)            (6)
                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                log of imports of industrial robots relative to intermediates
                                                                     Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1995 and 2025         2.055∗∗          2.452∗∗∗        2.181∗∗∗         2.218∗      2.627∗∗∗        2.587∗∗∗
                                     (0.994)          (0.754)         (0.754)          (1.262)     (0.887)         (0.898)
 Log of the GDP per capita in 1995                     -0.172          -0.422                       -0.354          -0.461
                                                      (0.151)         (0.272)                      (0.295)         (0.344)
 Log of intermediate imports                                           0.256                                        0.164
                                                                      (0.216)                                      (0.317)
 Observations                         131               131             131               34          34              34
 R-squared                            0.29              0.50            0.52             0.13        0.62            0.62
                                                                       Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1995 and 2025          1.646           2.693∗∗∗      2.346∗∗∗          1.590         2.176∗∗        2.035∗∗
                                     (1.015)          (0.792)        (0.774)        (1.295)         (0.865)        (0.863)
 Log of the GDP per capita in 1995                     -0.185         -0.418                         -0.334         -0.449
                                                      (0.139)        (0.262)                        (0.276)        (0.322)
 Log of intermediate imports                                          0.243                                         0.181
                                                                     (0.216)                                       (0.269)
 Observations                          131               131           131              34            34              34
 Instruments F-stat                   19.77             19.49         12.99           20.82         13.64           12.75
 Overid p-value                       0.19               0.56          0.35            0.59          0.17            0.10
                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                log of exports of industrial robots relative to    intermediates
                                                                     Panel C. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1995 and 2025         5.213∗∗∗         3.511∗∗∗        3.916∗∗∗        5.891∗∗∗     4.148∗∗∗        4.609∗∗∗
                                     (1.391)          (1.029)         (1.229)          (1.639)     (1.154)         (1.276)
 Log of the GDP per capita in 1995                     0.462∗         0.565∗∗                       0.980∗          1.002∗
                                                      (0.252)         (0.261)                      (0.484)         (0.492)
 Log of intermediate exports                                           -0.152                                       -0.222
                                                                      (0.215)                                      (0.262)
 Observations                         105               105             105               35          35              35
 R-squared                            0.66              0.77            0.78             0.45        0.72            0.73
                                                                       Panel D. IV estimates
 Aging between 1995 and 2025         5.712∗∗∗         3.827∗∗∗        4.389∗∗∗        7.267∗∗∗     4.934∗∗∗        5.607∗∗∗
                                     (1.518)          (1.122)         (1.428)         (1.668)      (1.100)         (1.200)
 Log of the GDP per capita in 1995                     0.438∗         0.576∗∗                      0.975∗∗         1.010∗∗
                                                      (0.229)         (0.248)                      (0.455)         (0.457)
 Log of intermediate exports                                           -0.205                                       -0.347
                                                                      (0.215)                                      (0.249)
 Observations                          105              105              105              35          35              35
 Instruments F-stat                   20.88            19.72            12.89           15.71       15.59            9.98
 Overid p-value                       0.11              0.08             0.06            0.29        0.33            0.33
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1995                              X               X                            X               X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and imports and exports of
industrial robots. In panels A and B, the dependent variable is the log of imports of industrial robots relative to
all intermediates between 1996 and 2015 (from Comtrade). In panels C and D, the dependent variable is the log
of exports of industrial robots relative to all intermediates between 1996 and 2015 (from Comtrade). The aging
variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1995 and 2025
(from the UN Population Statistics). Panels A and C present OLS estimates. Panels B and D present IV estimates
where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For our
IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. We present
results for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include
region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1995 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years
of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55. Columns 3 and 6 add the log of intermediate
imports (Panels A and B) or exports (Panels C and D) as an additional covariate. All regressions are weighted by
total intermediate imports (Panels A and B) or exports (Panels C and D), and the standard errors are robust against
heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level,
and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.


                                                                 48
                Table 7: Estimates of the impact of aging on patents related to robotics.

                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                log of robotics-related patents relative to utility patents
                                                    Full sample                           OECD sample
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)
                                                                    Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025          1.151∗∗∗        1.173∗∗∗      1.396∗∗∗       1.165∗∗∗     1.208∗∗∗       1.364∗∗∗
                                      (0.239)         (0.118)        (0.188)        (0.232)     (0.122)        (0.200)
 Log of the GDP per capita in 1990                     -0.075         0.133                      -0.099         0.040
                                                      (0.099)        (0.174)                    (0.200)        (0.259)
 Log of patents at USPTO                                            -0.121∗∗                                   -0.103∗
                                                                     (0.052)                                   (0.056)
 Observations                            69              69             69             31          31             31
 R-squared                              0.53            0.76           0.80           0.50        0.79           0.82
                                                                     Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025          1.145∗∗∗        1.137∗∗∗      1.347∗∗∗       1.166∗∗∗     1.161∗∗∗       1.288∗∗∗
                                      (0.215)         (0.102)        (0.175)       (0.219)      (0.132)        (0.201)
 Log of the GDP per capita in 1990                     -0.081         0.117                      -0.120         0.001
                                                      (0.094)        (0.158)                    (0.193)        (0.240)
 Log of patents at USPTO                                            -0.115∗∗                                   -0.095∗
                                                                     (0.047)                                   (0.049)
 Observations                            69              69             69            31           31             31
 Instruments F-stat                    106.30          41.12          24.06         180.45       53.85          62.78
 Overid p-value                         0.64            0.23           0.11          0.44         0.26           0.15
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1990                              X             X                           X              X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and robotics-related patents
assigned to companies and inventors from different countries by the USPTO. In both panels, the dependent variable
is the log of robotics-related patents relative to all utility patents granted between 1990 and 2015 (from Patents
View). The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55
between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV
estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985.
For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. We
present results for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use the OECD sample. Columns 1
and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1995 values of log GDP per capita, log of population,
average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55. Columns 3 and 6 add the log
of utility patents received by each country as an additional covariate. All regressions are weighted by total utility
patents granted to each country, and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with
∗∗∗
    are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                               49
     Table 8: Estimates of the impact of aging on the location of robot integrators in the US.

                                                               Dependent variable:
                                                      Dummy for presence of robot integrator
                                                                                          Manuf.
                                                  All commuting zones                                       Other areas
                                                                                           areas
                                      (1)           (2)               (3)              (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                    Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2015         0.058        0.335∗∗∗          0.259∗∗         0.350∗∗∗     0.702∗∗∗     0.169∗
                                    (0.168)       (0.103)           (0.101)          (0.099)     (0.221)      (0.091)
 Exposure to robots                                                 0.048∗∗          0.049∗∗      0.045        0.016
                                                                    (0.020)          (0.020)     (0.028)      (0.021)
 Observations                        722            722               722              722         361          361
 R-squared                           0.00           0.44              0.47             0.48        0.51         0.49
                                                                     Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2015        1.338∗∗       0.642∗∗∗          0.530∗∗          0.879∗∗∗    1.636∗∗∗      0.229
                                    (0.581)       (0.224)           (0.218)          (0.240)     (0.547)      (0.235)
 Exposure to robots                                                 0.042∗∗          0.042∗∗      0.030        0.015
                                                                    (0.021)          (0.020)     (0.029)      (0.019)
 Observations                        722            722               722              722         361          361
 First-stage F stat.                  4.2           21.5              20.0             22.9         9.8          8.4
 Overid p− value                     0.00           0.52              0.19             0.65        0.54         0.33
                                                                  Panel C. Single-IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2015        2.574∗∗∗      0.916∗∗∗          0.784∗∗         1.302∗∗∗     2.279∗∗∗      0.359
                                    (0.823)       (0.286)           (0.309)         (0.372)      (0.759)      (0.440)
 Exposure to robots                                                 0.037∗           0.037∗       0.019        0.013
                                                                    (0.021)         (0.020)      (0.029)      (0.021)
 Observations                        722            722               722             722          361          361
 First-stage F stat.                 16.4           58.8              61.9            50.9         29.1         22.6
 Covariates included:
 Regional dummies                      X             X                X                X            X           X
 Baseline covariates                                 X                X                X            X           X
 Industry composition                                                 X                X            X           X
 Additional covariates                                                                 X            X           X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the location of robot integrators
across US commuting zones. In all panels, the dependent variable is a dummy for the presence of robot integrators in
each US commuting zone (from Leigh and Kraft, 2016). The aging variable is the change in the ratio of workers above
56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2015 (from the NBER-SEER). Panel A presents OLS estimates.
Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts
between 1950 and 1985. Panel C presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the decline in
birth rates between 1950 and 1980. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic. When using multiple
instruments, we also report the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. We present results for three samples:
columns 1-4 use the full sample; column 5 focuses on commuting zones with share of employment in manufacturing
above the median; and column 6 focuses on commuting zones with share of employment in manufacturing below the
median. Column 1 includes Census region dummies. Column 2 includes the 1990 values for the log of average income,
the log of the population, the initial ratio of older to middle-aged workers, and the share of workers with different
levels of education in each commuting zone. Column 3 includes the exposure to robots measure from Acemoglu and
Restrepo (2017a) and also controls for the shares of employment in manufacturing, agriculture, mining, construction,
and finance and real estate in 1990. Finally, column 4 includes additional demographic characteristics measured
in 1990, including the racial composition of commuting zones and the share of male and female employment, and
controls for other shocks affecting US markets, including offshoring, trade with China and the decline of routine jobs.
All regressions are unweighted, and in parenthesis we report standard errors that are robust against heteroscedasticity
and correlation in the error terms within states. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are
significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                             50
    Table 9: Estimates of the impact of aging on robot installations by country-industry pairs.

                                                                                 Potential for the use of robots
                                                                Replaceability index                                 BCG measure
                                          (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)               (5)          (6)         (7)
                                                   Dependent variable: Installation of robots in country-industry pairs
                                                       normalizing by average employment in an industry from ILO
                                                                          Panel A. OLS estimates.
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            1.560∗∗∗        3.743∗∗∗      2.577∗∗∗                            6.734∗∗∗     4.850∗∗∗
                                        (0.439)         (1.033)       (0.843)                             (1.851)      (1.537)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                        0.900∗∗∗      0.634∗∗∗          0.635∗∗∗          0.264∗∗∗     0.182∗∗     0.183∗∗
                                                        (0.252)       (0.215)           (0.211)           (0.090)      (0.086)     (0.085)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                   5.740∗∗∗      4.052∗∗∗          4.056∗∗∗          6.046∗∗∗     4.440∗∗∗    4.458∗∗∗
                                                        (1.752)       (1.465)           (1.451)           (1.681)      (1.356)     (1.340)
 Observations                           10,602           10,602        10,602            10,602            10,602       10,602      10,602
 Countries in sample                      50               50            50                50                50           50          50
                                                                                 Panel B. IV estimates.
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            1.430∗∗∗   3.635∗∗∗       2.842∗∗∗                      6.585∗∗∗ 5.246∗∗∗
                                        (0.477)     (1.192)       (0.959)                        (2.175) (1.768)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                   0.952∗∗∗       0.676∗∗∗       0.674∗∗∗       0.327∗∗∗ 0.193∗∗                   0.194∗∗
                                                    (0.312)       (0.244)         (0.240)        (0.112) (0.094)                   (0.093)
 Aging × opportunities for automation              5.347∗∗∗       4.927∗∗∗       4.891∗∗∗       5.902∗∗∗ 4.835∗∗∗                  4.823∗∗∗
                                                    (1.935)       (1.617)         (1.599)        (1.986) (1.594)                   (1.575)
 Observations                           10,602      10,602         10,602          10,602         10602   10,602                    10,602
 Countries in sample                      50           50            50              50             50      50                        50
 Instruments F-stat                      19.1           .            6.1             7.7             .      7.4                       8.4
 Overid p-value                          0.86         0.22          0.46            0.49           0.17    0.15                      0.07
                                               Dependent variable: Installation of robots in country-industry pairs
                                                          normalizing by industry employment from KLEMS
                                                                          Panel C. OLS estimates.
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            0.786∗∗∗        3.789∗∗∗      2.013∗∗                             5.179∗∗∗     3.455∗∗∗
                                        (0.184)         (1.002)       (0.762)                             (1.257)      (1.003)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                        0.398∗∗∗      0.442∗∗∗          0.403∗∗∗           0.116∗      0.171∗∗      0.139∗
                                                        (0.129)       (0.123)           (0.126)           (0.065)      (0.071)     (0.073)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                   8.320∗∗∗       3.027             3.354∗           4.665∗∗∗     3.018∗∗∗    3.070∗∗∗
                                                        (2.415)       (1.793)           (1.759)           (1.159)      (0.900)     (0.885)
 Observations                            5,833           5,833         5,833             5,833             5,833        5,833       5,833
 Countries in sample                       21              21            21                21                21           21          21
                                                                                 Panel D. IV estimates.
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            0.849∗∗∗        4.051∗∗∗      2.446∗∗∗                            5.817∗∗∗     4.148∗∗∗
                                        (0.195)         (1.077)       (0.847)                             (1.413)      (1.230)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                        0.466∗∗∗      0.380∗∗            0.337∗           0.182∗∗∗      0.108       0.072
                                                        (0.134)       (0.179)           (0.181)           (0.063)      (0.107)     (0.109)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                   8.661∗∗∗      4.458∗∗           4.810∗∗∗          5.180∗∗∗     3.752∗∗∗    3.814∗∗∗
                                                        (2.659)       (1.787)           (1.748)           (1.346)      (1.088)     (1.065)
 Observations                            5,833           5,833         5,833             5,833             5,833        5,833       5,833
 Countries in sample                       21              21            21                21                21           21          21
 Instruments F-stat                       32.5            60.6         116.7              23.4              57.1         89.2        19.1
 Overid p-value                           0.06            0.29          0.38              0.17              0.36         0.30        0.18
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                X               X             X                 X                 X            X           X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                           X                 X                              X           X
 Country fixed effects                                                                     X                                          X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots for industry-
country cells. In all panels, the dependent variable is robot installations per thousand workers in each industry-country cell for
all available years between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The explanatory variables include aging (defined as the change in the
ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025); the interaction between aging and industry
reliance on middle-aged workers (proxied using 1990 US Census data on the age distribution of workers in each industry); and
the interaction between aging and two measures of opportunities for automation: the replaceability index from Graetz and
Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of opportunities for the use of robots from the BCG in columns 5-7. Panels
A and B use data on average employment by industry from the ILO to normalize robot installations; whereas Panels C and
D use data on industry employment from KLEMS to normalize robot installations. Panels A and C present OLS estimates.
Panels B and D present IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between
1950 and 1985. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test.
All columns include region dummies, the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and
the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the initial robot density in 1993 for each
industry-country cell as a control. All these covariates are allowed to affect industries differently. Columns 4 and 7 add a full
set of country dummies. All regressions weigh industries by their share of employment in a country, and the standard errors
are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level,
with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.


                                                                    51
Table 10: Estimates of the impact of aging on the value added of country-industry pairs per year.

                                                                                   Potential for the use of robots
                                                                  Replaceability index                                  BCG measure
                                           (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)               (5)           (6)         (7)
                                            Dependent variable: Change in value-added per worker between 1995 and 2007
                                                                       Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1995 and 2025            -1.447∗∗           0.121          0.387                               0.264          0.564
                                         (0.552)          (1.182)        (1.038)                            (1.122)        (1.019)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                           -0.246         -0.304            -0.263           -0.238         -0.297     -0.263
                                                          (0.236)        (0.218)           (0.221)          (0.231)        (0.215)    (0.226)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                     2.932∗∗        3.166∗∗          3.094∗∗∗          1.119∗∗        1.229∗∗    1.232∗∗
                                                          (1.232)        (1.180)           (0.937)          (0.502)        (0.488)    (0.464)
 Observations                             399               399            399               399               399            399       399
 Countries in sample                      21                 21             21                21                21             21        21
                                                                                    Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1995 and 2025            -1.707∗∗∗          1.318       1.634∗                         1.138    1.534
                                         (0.595)          (1.156)     (0.982)                        (1.224)  (1.059)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                         -0.589∗∗    -0.669∗∗∗       -0.596∗∗       -0.538∗∗ -0.622∗∗   -0.568∗
                                                          (0.261)     (0.241)         (0.300)        (0.263)  (0.246)   (0.318)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                    4.609∗∗∗     4.916∗∗∗       4.330∗∗∗       1.450∗∗∗ 1.617∗∗∗   1.523∗∗∗
                                                          (1.193)     (1.295)         (0.916)        (0.430)  (0.419)   (0.378)
 Observations                             399               399         399             399            399      399       399
 Countries in sample                       21                21          21              21             21       21        21
 Instruments F-stat                       9.49             42.97       10.69            5.58          61.30    20.47      5.65
 Overid p-value                           0.14              0.47        0.56            0.37           0.32     0.38      0.38
                                                    Dependent variable: Change in the labor share between 1995 and 2007
                                                                              Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1995 and 2025            -0.335∗∗∗        -2.528∗∗∗      -2.586∗∗∗                           -2.928∗∗∗     -2.997∗∗
                                         (0.104)          (0.855)        (0.893)                              (1.025)      (1.065)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                          0.651∗∗        0.664∗∗           0.630∗∗            0.671∗∗      0.685∗∗     0.659∗∗
                                                          (0.245)        (0.251)           (0.260)            (0.254)      (0.260)     (0.273)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                     -1.057∗        -1.109∗            -0.923           -0.713∗∗     -0.739∗∗    -0.681∗∗
                                                          (0.576)        (0.599)           (0.563)            (0.293)      (0.304)     (0.305)
 Observations                             399               399            399               399                399          399         399
 Countries in sample                      21                 21             21                21                 21           21          21
                                                                                    Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1995 and 2025            -0.323∗∗∗        -3.293∗∗∗      -3.207∗∗∗                           -4.026∗∗∗     -3.982∗∗∗
                                         (0.121)          (0.864)        (0.868)                             (1.144)       (1.151)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                          0.998∗∗∗       0.993∗∗∗         1.038∗∗∗           1.035∗∗∗      1.034∗∗∗    1.103∗∗∗
                                                          (0.289)        (0.292)          (0.344)            (0.308)       (0.311)     (0.365)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                      -0.540         -0.449           -0.395           -0.857∗∗∗     -0.859∗∗∗   -0.922∗∗∗
                                                          (0.534)        (0.631)          (0.547)            (0.253)       (0.276)     (0.345)
 Observations                             399               399            399              399                399           399         399
 Countries in sample                       21                21             21               21                 21            21          21
 Instruments F-stat                       9.49             42.97          10.69             5.58              61.30         20.47        5.65
 Overid p-value                           0.31              0.74           0.74             0.64               0.44          0.51        0.35
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1995                X                X              X                 X                 X             X           X
 Initial value added in 1995                                               X                 X                               X           X
 Country fixed effects                                                                       X                                           X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and value added and the labor share for
industry-country cells. In Panels A and B, the dependent variable is the change in value added per worker between 1995
and 2007 for each industry-country cell (from the KLEMS data). In Panels C and D, the dependent variable is the change
in the labor share between 1995 and 2007 for each industry-country cell (from the KLEMS data). The explanatory variables
include aging (defined as the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1995 and 2025);
the interaction between aging and industry reliance on middle-aged workers (proxied using 1990 US Census data on the age
distribution of workers in each industry); and the interaction between aging and two measures of opportunities for automation:
the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of opportunities for the use of robots
from the BCG in columns 5-7. Panels A and C present OLS estimates. Panels B and D present IV estimates where the aging
variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For our IV estimates, we report the
first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. All columns include region dummies, the 1995 values
of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55.
All these covariates are allowed to affect industries differently. Columns 3 and 6 add the log of value added per worker in 1995
for each industry-country cell as a control. Columns 4 and 7 add a full set of country dummies. All regressions weigh industries
by their share of employment in a country, and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within
countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are
significant at the 10% level.



                                                                      52
                                     Appendix: Omitted Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1
1. Existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium with exogenous technology.
   Recall that C(W, V, P ) is the cost of producing one unit of aggregate output. The Cobb-Douglas
production function for Y (i) in equation (2) implies that

PY (i) = (1 − η)η η × (α(i)η)−α(i)η ((1 − α(i)η))−(1−α(i))η (1 − η)−(1−η) PX (i)α(i)η V (1−α(i))η PY (i)1−η .

Solving for PY (i) yields the formula for PY (i) given in the main text. Equation (1) then implies

                        Z     1                     1−σ
                                                       1           Z       1                                                  1−σ
                                                                                                                                 1

                                              1−σ                                  1−σ        α(i)(1−σ)       (1−α(i))(1−σ)
        C(W, V, P ) =              PY (i)                      =                λ(i)     PX (i)           V                           ,
                           0                                            0

where PX (i) is given in equation (7) in the main text.
   The demand for middle-aged workers can then be computed as
                                                    Z
                                      d       1
                                    L =                       L(i)W di
                                              W         i∈I
                                                    Z
                                              1
                                          =                   PX (i)X(i)sL (i)di
                                              W         i∈I
                                                    Z
                                              1
                                          =                   PY (i)Y g (i)ηα(i)sL (i)di
                                              W         i∈I
                                                    Z
                                              1                  Y g (i)
                                          =                   PY (i)Y (i)ηα(i)sL (i)di
                                              W   i∈I            Y (i)
                                                Z
                                              Y                     1
                                          =           PY (i)1−σ           ηα(i)sL (i)di
                                              W   i∈I           η(2  − η)
                                                        Z
                                                 Y
                                          =                  PY (i)1−σ α(i)sL (i)di
                                            (2 − η)W i∈I
                                              Y
                                          =        CW (W, V, P ).
                                            2−η

This derivation uses the fact that ηα(i) is the share of production inputs in the gross production of
                                   Y g (i)                  1
Y (i), and that the ratio of       Y (i)     equals      η(2−η) .   The last line arrives at a result similar to Shepherd’s
lemma, but now, the 2 − η in the denominator accounts for the intermediate goods, q(θ(i)), and
the cost of producing these goods.




                                                                        A-1
   Likewise, the demand for older workers can be computed as
                                         Z
                                      1
                                Sd =         S(i)V di
                                      V i∈I
                                         Z
                                      1
                                    =        PY (i)Y g (i)η(1 − α(i))di
                                      V i∈I
                                         Z
                                      1                  Y g (i)
                                    =        PY (i)Y (i)         η(1 − α(i))di
                                      V i∈I               Y (i)
                                         Z
                                      Y                     1
                                    =        PY (i)1−σ             η(1 − α(i))di
                                      V i∈I             η(2 − η)
                                                Z
                                          Y
                                    =               PY (i)1−σ (1 − α(i))di
                                      (2 − η)V i∈I
                                        Y
                                    =       CV (W, V, P ).
                                      2−η

   From these equations, conditions (12) and (13) can be written as

                                          1 =C(W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ), P ),                            (A1)
                                    1 − φ CW (W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ), P )
                                         =                                 ,                           (A2)
                                      φ    CV (W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ), P )

where CW and CV denote the partial derivatives of the cost function.
   We now show that, for any φ ∈ (0, 1) there is a unique pair {W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ)} that solves
(A1) and (A2). Consider the isocost C(W, V, P ) = 1. The market equilibrium occurs at a point
                                             φ
where the tangent to this curve has slope − 1−φ as shown in Figure 1.
                                                                 V
   Along this isocost, CW (W, V, P )/CV (W, V, P ) = 0 as        W   → 0. To prove this, note that
                                              R
                              CW (W, V, P ) V α(i)sL (i)λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ di
                           0≤              = R
                              CV (W, V, P ) W (1 − α(i))λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ di
                                                      R
                                              V α       λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ di
                                            ≤         R
                                              W 1 − α λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ di
                                              V α
                                            =        .                                                (A3)
                                              W 1−α

                V          CW (W,V,P )
Therefore, as   W   → 0,   CV (W,V,P )   → 0.
                                                                               V
   Likewise, along the isocost, CW (W, V, P )/CV (W, V, P ) = ∞ as             W   → ∞. To prove this, note
that
                                                           R
                       CW (W, V, P )   V α                   λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ di
                                     ≥        [min sL (i)] R
                       CV (W, V, P )   W 1 − α i∈I           λ(i)1−σ PY (i)1−σ di
                                       V α
                                     =        [min sL (i)].                                           (A4)
                                       W 1 − α i∈I
        V
Since   W   → ∞, W → 0 (otherwise, we would have V → ∞ and W > 0, which would not satisfy
C(W, V, P ) = 1). Because W → 0, θ A (i) = 0 for all tasks, which implies that sL (i) = 1 for all i.


                                                       A-2
              V                              CW (W,V,P )
Therefore, as W → ∞, we must have            CV (W,V,P )      → ∞.
                                                               V
    Because CW (W, V, P )/CV (W, V, P ) = 0 as                 W    → 0 and CW (W, V, P )/CV (W, V, P ) = ∞ as
V
W  → ∞, the intermediate value theorem implies that there exists W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ) along the
isocost that satisfies equation (A2). This establishes existence.
    To prove uniqueness, note that since C(W, V, P ) is a cost function, it is jointly concave in W, V,
and P , which implies that the isocost curve C(W, V, P ) = 1 is convex. That is, along the curve
C(W, V, P ) = 1, CW /CV is decreasing in W and is increasing in V . Thus, there is a unique pair
W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ) along the isocost that satisfies equation (A2).
    Finally, aggregate output per worker is given by

                                                                            φ
                                 y E (φ, Θ) = (2 − η)                                        ,
                                                        CV   (W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ), P )

while machinery per worker is given by

                                                   CP (W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ), P )
                                   mE (φ, Θ) = φ                                   ;
                                                   CV (W E (φ, Θ), V E (φ, Θ), P )

and the threshold θ A (i) can be computed from equation (6).
2. Comparative statics with respect to φ.
    Because the isocost curve C(W, V, P ) = 1 is convex, an increase in φ raises W E (φ, Θ) and
reduces V E (φ, Θ). To complete the proof, we derive the formula for yφE (φ, Θ) given in the main
text. The national income accounting identity implies

                          1
                             y E (φ, Θ) = φV E (φ, Θ) + (1 − φ)W E (φ, Θ) + mE (φ, Θ)P,                              (A5)
                         2−η
             1
where the 2−η   accounts for the cost of intermediate goods. Differentiating this expression with
respect to φ, we obtain

       1
         y E (φ, Θ) = V E (φ, Θ) − W E (φ, Θ) + mE             E                  E
                                                 φ (φ, Θ)P + φVφ (φ, Θ) + (1 − φ)Wφ (φ, Θ).
      2−η φ

                                                                                                 CW       1−φ
Next differentiating C(W, V, P ) = 1 with respect to φ, and recalling that                       CV   =    φ ,   we obtain
φVφE (φ, Θ) + (1 − φ)WφE (φ, Θ)       = 0. Substituting this into the previous expression, we obtain (14).

Proof of Proposition 2
                                                                                         W E (φ,Θ)
Part 1: Suppose that φ ≤ φ′ and take an i ∈ I + (φ, Θ), so that                             A(i)     > P . Proposition 1
                                                             W E (φ′ ,Θ)
implies that W E (φ, Θ) ≤ W E (φ′ , Θ), and thus               A(i)        > P and   i′ ∈ I + (φ′ , A), which implies that
I + (φ, Θ)   ⊆   I + (φ′ , A).
Part 2: Let W E (φ, Θ0 ) denote the middle-aged wage that would result if θ(i) = 0 and there were
no automation technologies. Proposition 1 implies that W E (φ, Θ0 ) is increasing in φ.
    In addition, we have that W E (φ, Θ0 ) → 0 when φ → 0, and W E (φ, A) → ∞ when φ → 1. To



                                                              A-3
prove the first claim, we use the inequality in equations (A3) and (A4) derived above, which implies

                             V E (φ, Θ0 ) α         1−φ   V E (φ, Θ0 ) α
                                                . ≤     ≤                    .
                             W E (φ, Θ0 ) 1 − α      φ    W E (φ, Θ0 ) 1 − α

   When φ → 0, the right-hand side of the above inequality must converge to ∞. This requires
that either W E (φ, Θ0 ) → 0 or V E (φ, Θ0 ) → ∞. Suppose it is the latter. Then C(W, V, P ) = 1
implies W E (φ, Θ0 ) → 0. Thus in either case we have W E (φ, Θ0 ) → 0 as desired.
   On the other hand, when φ → 1, the left-hand side of the above inequality must converge to 0.
This requires that either W E (φ, Θ0 ) → ∞ or V E (φ, Θ0 ) → 0. Supposed again that it is the latter.
Then C(W, V, P ) = 1 once again implies W E (φ, Θ0 ) → ∞, and thus in either case the desired
conclusion is established.
                                                                         E (φ,Θ )
   We can therefore define φe as the maximum level of φ such that W A(i)       0
                                                                                  ≤ P for almost all
              e                                                      A
i. For φ ≤ φ, we have that the unique equilibrium is given by θ (i) = 0 for almost all i and
                                         e the set I + (φ, A) has measure zero.
W E (φ, Θ0 ) = W E (φ, Θ). Thus, for φ ≤ φ,
           e we have W E (φ, Θ) > W E (φ,
   For φ > φ,                          e Θ) = W E (φ,
                                                   e Θ0 ). Thus, the equilibrium must involve
a positive measure of industries that are adopting automation technologies. 

Proof of Proposition 3
We start by providing a formula for d ln W following a change in technology. We then state and
prove a lemma on the conditions under which automation reduces the middle-aged wage, and then
we provide a proof of the proposition.
   Let χ(i) denote the share of expenditure going to industry i, χL (i) the share of payments to
middle-aged workers going to those in industry i, and χS (i) the share of payments to older workers
going to those in industry i.
   We have
                                              (
                                     A            dθ(i)   if i ∈ I + (φ, Θ)
                                   dθ (i) =
                                                   0         otherwise.

   Following an increase in dθ(i) > 0, we have

                                                               sL (i)
                             d ln PX (i) = sL (i)d ln W −                π(i)dθ A (i).
                                                             1 − θ A (i)

   Using this expression, and taking log-derivatives of the equilibrium conditions, we obtain:

   • From the ideal price condition, (12):

                                           ΛπW d ln W + ΛπV d ln V = Π                           (A6)




                                                       A-4
  where
                                      Z
                            ΛπV   =           χ(i)(1 − α(i))di > 0,
                                      Zi∈I
                           ΛπW =              χ(i)α(i)sL (i)di > 0,
                                        i∈I
                                      Z
                                                                     dθ A (i)
                               Π=             χ(i)α(i)sL (i)π(i)               di ≥ 0.
                                        i∈I                        1 − θ A (i)

  Here, Π ≥ 0 denotes the productivity gains from automation.

• From the demand for middle-aged workers, (9):

                               ΛL                    L           L
                                W d ln W = d ln Y − ΛV d ln V + T − ∆,                           (A7)

  where
                                    Z                                   Z
              ΛL
               W  =ζ + (1 − ζ)        χL (i)sL (i)di + (σ − 1)          χL (i)α(i)sL (i)di,
                                  i∈I                              i∈I
                           Z
               ΛL
                V =(σ − 1)        χL (i)(1 − α(i))di,
                             i∈I
                           Z
                L                                        dθ A (i)
               T =(σ − 1)         χL (i)α(i)sL (i)π(i)              di,
                             i∈I                       1 − θ A (i)
                   Z                                  Z
                                 dθ A (i)                                        dθ A (i)
                ∆=       χL (i)             − (1 − ζ)       χ L (i)s L (i)π(i)             di.
                     i∈I        1 − θ A (i)             i∈I                    1 − θ A (i)

  Here, ∆ > 0 denotes the displacement effect from automation, which tends to reduce the
  demand for middle-aged workers, while T L captures how sectoral shifts affect the demand for
  middle-aged workers.

• From the demand for older workers, (11):

                                  ΛSV d ln V = d ln Y − ΛSW d ln W + T S ,                       (A8)

  where
                                                  Z
                         ΛSV =1 + (σ − 1)       χS (i)(1 − α(i))di,
                                            i∈I
                                      Z
                         ΛSW =(σ − 1)       χS (i)α(i)sL (i)di,
                                        i∈I
                                      Z
                           S                                       dθ A (i)
                         T =(σ − 1)         χS (i)α(i)sL (i)π(i)             di.
                                        i∈I                      1 − θ A (i)

  Here, T S captures how sectoral shifts affect the demand for middle-aged workers.




                                                      A-5
       Using equations (A6), (A7) and (A8), we can solve for d ln W as:

                                            1                S                              
         d ln W =                                            (ΛV − ΛL       π   L   S     π
                                                                    V )Π + ΛV (T − T ) − ΛV ∆ ,                (A9)
                    ΛπV   (ΛL
                            W   −   ΛSW )      π   S    L
                                            + ΛW (ΛV − ΛV )

where the denominator, ΛπV (ΛL    S      π   S    L
                             W − ΛW ) + ΛW (ΛV − ΛV ), is always positive.
                                                                          39


Lemma A2 Suppose that for almost all industries

                                                                    1
                                            π(i) < π =                             σ    .
                                                         (σ − 1)α + 1 − ζ +       1−α α

Then dθ(i) > 0 for a positive measure subset of industries in I + (φ, Θ) leads to a lower W and a
larger V .

Proof. Equation (A9) implies that a sufficient condition to ensure that d ln W < 0 is
                        
                χL (i) > (σ − 1)(χL (i) − χS (i))α(i)sL (i) + (1 − ζ)χL (i)sL (i)
                                       R                                        !
                          1 + (σ − 1) i∈I (χL (i) − χS (i))α(i)di
                        +          R                              χ(i)α(i)sL (i) π(i)∀i ∈ I
                                     i∈Iχ(i) (1 − α(i))di


       In addition, we also have
                                                          Z
                                      σ > 1 + (σ − 1)               (χL (i) − χS (i))α(i)di,
                                                              i∈I

and
                                                1              1
                                                   >R                      .
                                               1−α    i∈I χ(i)(1 − α(i))di

A sufficient condition to ensure that d ln W < 0 is
                                                                                                      
                                                                                      σ
          χL (i) > (σ − 1)χL (i)α(i)sL (i) + (1 − ζ)χL (i)sL (i) +                       χ(i)α(i)sL (i) π(i)
                                                                                     1−α

for all i ∈ I. This inequality is equivalent to:
                                                                                               
                                                                             σ χ(i)α(i)sL (i)
                     1>        (σ − 1)α(i)sL (i) + (1 − ζ)sL (i) +                                  π(i).
                                                                            1−α    χL (i)
  39
    The fact that ΛπV (ΛL      S      π   S    L
                         W − ΛW ) + ΛW (ΛV − ΛV ) > 0 is equivalent to C(W, V, P ) being strictly quasi-concave in
{V, W }. In particular, ΛV (ΛW − ΛW ) + ΛW (ΛV − ΛL
                         π   L    S      π   S
                                                  V ) > 0 if and only if

                                             CW W CV2 + CV V CW
                                                              2
                                                                − 2CW V CV CW < 0,

which corresponds to the determinant of the bordered Hessian of C(W, V, P ) with respect to V and W ,
                                                                   
                                                  0    CW       CV
                                         H =  CW CW W CW V  ,
                                                 CV   CW V     CV V

being positive. Since C(W, V, P ) is strictly concave in its first two arguments, we always have ΛπV (ΛL    S
                                                                                                       W − ΛW ) +
ΛπW (ΛS
      V − Λ L
            V ) > 0.


                                                                A-6
   Finally, because sL (i) ≤ 1 and
                                                  Z
                               χ(i)α(i)sL (i)
                                              =          χ(i)α(i)sL (i)di < α,
                                   χL (i)          i∈I

we obtain that a sufficient condition to ensure that d ln W < 0 is given by:
                                                                  
                                                               σ
                           1 > (σ − 1)α + (1 − ζ) +               α π(i) ∀i ∈ I,
                                                              1−α

which is equivalent to

                                        1
                                                       σ      = π > π(i) ∀i ∈ I.
                             (σ − 1)α + 1 − ζ +       1−α α

    In addition, equation (A6) implies that automation must increase the price of at least one type
of labor. Thus, when π(i) < π for almost all i, d ln V > 0 and d ln V /W increases.

   Proof of Proposition 3:
   The definition of φe implies that for φ < φ,
                                             e we have θ A (i) = 0. Therefore, changes in automation
technologies do not lead to their adoption (and there is no impact on equilibrium wages). Con-
                   e new automation technologies will be adopted by all industries in I + (φ, Θ).
versely, when φ > φ,
This completes the proof of the first part of the proposition.
    Because W E (φ, Θ) is increasing in φ, cost savings from automation for industry i ∈ I + (φ, Θ),
π(i), are also increasing in φ. Therefore, there exists a threshold φ(Θ) > φe such that π(i) < π for
almost all industries.
                                          e φ(Θ)), we have π(i) < π for almost all industries.
   This definition implies that, for φ ∈ (φ,
Lemma A2 then implies that automation reduces middle-aged wages and increases older worker
wages. 

Proof of Lemma 1
We first prove that the optimal technology choice θiR (W ) is unique and lies in [0, 1).
  We start by showing that every critical point of π M (i) is a local maximum. Suppose that we
have an interior critical point, θ0 > 0. Then it satisfies the first-order condition

                          ∂π M (i)                    sL (i)         1
                                   = 0 → (σ − 1)α(i)         π(i) =      h(θ0 ).
                           ∂θ(i)                     1 − θ0         ρ(i)

The second derivative of π M (i) is

                          ∂ 2 π M (i)    1 h(θ0 )                        1 ′
                                      =             (ζ − 1)sL (i)π(i) −      h (θ0 ).
                         ∂θ(i)∂θ(i)     ρ(i) 1 − θ0                     ρ(i)

                                                                                 h′ (θ)        1
Because (ζ − 1)sL (i)π(i) < 1, this expression is negative provided that         h(θ)     ≥   1−θ .   This condition



                                                       A-7
is satisfied in view of the properties of the H function in the text. In particular,

                                           h′ (θ)  H ′′ (θ)           1
                                                  = ′       + h(θ) ≥     .
                                           h(θ)    H (θ)             1−θ

Thus, every critical point is a local maximum.
   Now, suppose that π M (i) has two local maxima, θ0 and θ1 > θ0 . The intermediate value
theorem then implies that π M (i) has a local minimum in (θ0 , θ1 ), which contradicts the fact that
any critical point of π M (i) is a maximum. This contradiction establishes that π M (i) is single
peaked, and therefore has a unique global maximum. Moreover, our boundary conditions on H(x)
implies that θiR (W ) ∈ [0, 1). Thus, equation (17) is a necessary and sufficient condition for the
global maximum.
Part 1: The cross-partial derivative of π M (i) with respect to θ(i) and W is

             ∂ 2 π M (i)                   1    ∂sL (i)                        1            π(i)
                         = (σ − 1)α(i)      A
                                                        π(i) + (σ − 1)α(i)      A
                                                                                     sL (i)      .
              ∂W ∂θ                    1 − θ (i) ∂W                        1 − θ (i)        ∂W

When ζ ≤ 1, the equations for sL (i) (equation (8)) and π(i) (equation (5)) in the main text imply
that ∂s∂W
        L (i)
              ≥ 0 and ∂π(i)
                       ∂W ≥ 0.
   When ζ > 1, we can group terms differently and rewrite this derivative as
                                                                         "                  #       !
    ∂ 2 π M (i)   1                         1                              P 1−ζ   (W/A)1−ζ
                =           (σ − 1)α(i)             sL (i) + (σ − 1)α(i)         −            sL (i) ≥ 0.
     ∂W ∂θ        W                     1 − θ A (i)                        PX1−ζ     PX1−ζ

                   ∂ 2 π M (i)
   Therefore,       ∂W ∂θ        ≥ 0 in all cases (and this is an equality only when π(i) = 0). This implies
that   π M (i)   exhibits increasing differences in W and θ(i). Increasing differences ensure that the
function   θiR (W )   is nondecreasing in W (see Topkis, 1981).
                                                 ∂π M (i)
Part 2: Suppose that θ(i) > 0. Then               ∂θ(i)     = 0, and equation (17) holds with equality. Because
h(θ(i)) > 0 (recall that H is convex), we must have π(i) > 0. 

Proof of Proposition 4
To prove the existence of an equilibrium we analyze the properties of the function W E (φ, ΘR (W ))
when W = 0 and W → ∞.
   When W → 0, we have π(i) = 0. Part 2 of Lemma 1 implies θiR (W ) = 0. Thus, W E (φ, Θ =
{0}i∈I ) > 0.
   When W → ∞, θiR (W ) converges to a finite limit (recall that θiR (W ) is increasing in W , and
bounded above by 1). Thus, W E (φ, ΘR (W )) converges to a finite limit as well.
   These observations imply that the curve W E (φ, ΘR (W )) starts above the 45 degree line and
ends below it. Thus, there exists at least one solution to W = W E (φ, ΘR (W )), establishing the
existence of an equilibrium. If there are multiple intersections, the ones with the smallest and the
largest wage give the least and the greatest equilibria in view of the results in Lemma 1.
   Finally, the result that given the equilibrium middle-aged wage W ∗ , the set of equilibrium


                                                             A-8
technology choices Θ∗ is uniquely defined is an immediate consequence of the fact that by definition
Θ∗ = ΘR (W ∗ ) and ΘR (W ) is uniquely defined from Lemma 1. 
   Recall that in the main text, we mentioned that a sufficient condition to ensure that the equi-
librium is unique is φ < φ(Θ = {0}i∈I ). We now provide a formal statement and proof of this
result.

Proposition A1                  e the mapping W E (φ, ΘR (W )) is constant at W E (φ, Θ = {0}i∈I ).
                      1. If φ < φ,
      In this case, the unique equilibrium involves Θ = {0}i∈I .

   2. If φe < φ < φ(Θ = {0}i∈I ), the mapping W E (φ, ΘR (W )) is nonincreasing in W , and the
      equilibrium is unique.

                              e The definition of φe implies that for almost all industries we
Proof. First suppose that φ < φ.
will have π(i) = 0. Thus, independently of ΘR (W ), we will have that θ A (i) = 0 for almost all
industries, and

                               W E (φ, ΘR (W )) = W E (φ, Θ = {0}i∈I ),

which does not depend on W . This implies that there is a unique equilibrium given by a wage
W = W E (φ, Θ = {0}i∈I ). At this wage, π(i) = 0 for almost all industries. Part 2 of Lemma 1 then
implies that there will be zero introduction and adoption of automation technologies.
   Now suppose that φe < φ < φ(Θ = {0}i∈I ). The definition of φ(Θ = {0}i∈I ) implies that
when Θ = {0}i∈I , we have that π(i) < π for almost all industries. Lemma A2 then implies that
W E (φ, Θ) is nonincreasing in Θ around Θ = {0}i∈I , which in turn implies that W E (φ, ΘR (W )) is
nonincreasing in W around W = 0.
   Suppose to obtain a contradiction that W E (φ, ΘR (W )) is increasing in W at some point. Let
W0 > 0 be the first point where W E (φ, ΘR (W )) starts increasing. Because W E (φ, ΘR (W )) is
nonincreasing in [0, W0 ), we have

                     W E (φ, ΘR (W0 )) ≤ W E (φ, ΘR (0)) = W E (φ, Θ = {0}i∈I ).

This inequality then implies that at W0 we have π(i) ≤ π for almost all i. Lemma A2 then implies
that W E (φ, ΘR (W )) is nonincreasing in W around W0 , yielding a contradiction and establishing
that W E (φ, ΘR (W )) must be nonincreasing throughout.

Proof of Proposition 5
Both parts of this proposition follow from Topkis’s monotonicity theorem (Topkis, 1998).
   In particular, Proposition 1 shows that an increase in φ shifts the map W E (φ, ΘR (W )) up (as
shown in Panel A of Figure 2, which raises W ∗ in the least and the greatest equilibrium). Lemma
A2 then shows that θi∗ = θiR (W ∗ ) increases for i ∈ I + (φ, Θ∗ ), and the formula for π(i) in equation
(5) shows that the set i ∈ I + (φ, Θ∗ ) expands. 



                                                  A-9
Proof of Proposition 6
Recall that W ∗ is increasing in φ. Because θi∗ = θiR (W ∗ ), it is sufficient to show that θiR (W ∗ )
exhibits increasing differences in W ∗ and α(i), and in W ∗ and ρ(i).
       From Lemma 1, θiR (W ∗ ) satisfies the necessary and sufficient first-order condition in equation
(17). Suppose first that the first-order condition in equation (17) is slack, and θiR (W ∗ ) = 0. Then
            dθiR (W ∗ )
clearly,     d ln W ∗     = 0.
       Suppose now that the first-order condition in equation (17) holds with equality. The implicit
function theorem then implies that θiR (W ∗ ) is continuous and differentiable, and the derivative of
θiR (W ∗ ) with respect to ln W ∗ is

                                       dθiR (W ∗ )   (σ − 1)α(i)ρ(i) sL (i)(1−s   L (i))
                                                                          θi∗ (1−θi∗ )
                                                   =                    (1−sL (i)−θi∗ )
                                                                                         .
                                        d ln W ∗      h′∗ (i)) + h(θi∗ ) θ∗ (1−θ  ∗)
                                                                             i     i


       This expression shows that the (semi-)elasticity of θi∗ with respect to middle-aged wages is
                                 
                                 (σ − 1)α(i)ρ(i)sL (i)(1 − sL (i))
                                 
                            ′∗ (i))θ ∗ (1 − θ ∗ ) + h(θ ∗ )(1 − s (i) − θ ∗ )
                                                                              d ln W ∗ > 0        if θi∗ > 0
           Γ(α(i)ρ(i)) =   h        i        i         i         L       i                                     .
                         
                                                            0                                 otherwise.

       The desired result then follows by observing that aging only impacts automation decisions
through the change in middle-age wages, W ∗ , and that the (semi-)elasticity of θiR (W ) with respect
to W , Γ(α(i)ρ(i)), is nondecreasing in α(i)ρ(i).40 

Proof of Proposition 7
We have Y ∗ (i) = PY∗ (i)−σ Y ∗ . Taking a log-derivative of this expression we obtain

                            d ln Y ∗ (i) d ln Y ∗               d ln W ∗               d ln V ∗
                                        =         − σα(i)sL (i)          − σ(1 − α(i))
                                dφ          dφ                     dφ                     dφ
                                                   sL (i)                 d ln W ∗
                                          + σα(i)         π(i)Γ(α(i)ρ(i))          .
                                                  1 − θi∗                    dφ

                sL (i)                                ∗
The term σα(i) 1−θ(i)  π(i)Γ(α(i)ρ(i)) d lndφW captures the productivity benefits to industry i arising
from the endogenous response of automation. Because of the term Γ(α(i)ρ(i)), theses productivity
benefits are larger for industries with a larger ρ(i), which implies that aging raises output in
industries with a greater ρ(i) relative industries with lower ρ(i). .

Extensions
Endogenous development of labor-augmenting technologies: We now sketch a version of
our model in which monopolists also invest in labor-augmenting technologies A(i). The main
  40
    Note that the denominator in our formula for Γ(α(i)ρ(i)) is a transformed version of the negative of the second-
order condition for θiR (W ∗ ), and is thus positive.



                                                             A-10
difference is that now, the monopolist problem is given by:
                                                                                         1−ζ !
                        M                      A         1−ζ           A            W
             max π (i) =(1 − σ)α(i) ln θ (i)P                  + (1 − θ (i))
            θ(i),A(i)                                                              A(i)
                                  1                      1
                             +        ln(1 − H(θ(i))) +      ln(1 − G(A(i))) for all i ∈ I,
                                 ρ(i)                   υ(i)

where G is a cost function satisfying the same restrictions as H.
    The first-order condition for A(i) is given by:

                                              1
                                 g(A(i)) =        (σ − 1)υ(i)α(i)sL (i).
                                             A(i)

This first-order condition shows that the effect of aging on A(i) is ambiguous when ζ < 1. On the
one hand, aging raises W and hence the labor share sL (i). But on the other hand, aging fosters
automation, reducing sL (i).
   Instead, when ζ ≥ 1, one can show that the maximization problem in equation (15) exhibits
increasing differences in W, θ(i), and −A(i). This implies that aging will reduce the development
of labor-augmenting technologies but will increase the development of automation technologies.


    Multiple countries: We now sketch a version of our model that incorporates multiple coun-
tries.
   Suppose that there are two countries: U —the US—and J—Japan (or Germany). We use
superscripts to distinguish variables related to these two countries, with φU and φJ denoting aging
in country U and in country J, respectively.
    Relative to the previous model, the only difference is that we now assume that country U
can “import” part of the automation technologies from the more advanced country J, and as a
result, in the tasks it is importing technologies, automation becomes much easier for the technology
monopolists in country U . We capture this by positing:

                                           ρU (i) =ρ(i; θ J (i))
                                           ρJ (i) =ρ(i),

where ρ(i; θ J (i)) is increasing in θ J (i). This captures in a simple way the idea that advances
in automation technologies in country J, that is, increases in θ J (i), generate opportunities for
automation in country U and for imports and exports of technologies.
   It is straightforward to establish that an equilibrium with endogenous technology exists in this
global economy. In particular, Proposition 4 establishes that an equilibrium exists for country J,
                                                     ∗
and taking as given the equilibrium value of ΘJ , another application of this proposition charac-
terizes the equilibrium in country U . Let us also define the greatest (least) equilibrium in this
case as the equilibrium with the highest (lowest) level of automation in each country (these are
also the equilibria with the largest (smallest) values of the middle-aged wage in country J, but not


                                                   A-11
necessarily in country U as we will see next).
   The following proposition summarizes the results from this extension:

                                         U
Proposition A2 Assume that φJ > φeJ and φ (Θ = {0}i∈I ) > φU > φeU . Then there exist
well-defined greatest and least equilibria. In the least or the greatest equilibrium, an increase in φJ :

                                           ∗                                             ∗
  1. increases the middle-aged wage W J , increases automation technologies {θ J (i)}i∈I + (φJ ,ΘJ ∗ ) ,
                                                                                   ∗
      and expands the set of industries that adopt automation I + (φJ , ΘJ ) in country J;
                                               ∗
  2. increases automation technologies θ U (i) in a positive subset of industries and reduces the
                             ∗
      middle-aged wage W U in country U .

Proof. The existence of greatest and least equilibria follow from applying Proposition 4 in the
main text. In particular, from this proposition we can characterize the equilibrium with endogenous
technology in country J in isolation, which leads to the existence of a least and greatest equilibrium
for this country. Then applying Proposition A1 to country U we can see immediately that the
least equilibrium in country J will lead to a unique equilibrium with the lowest possible level of
automation in country U , and likewise for the greatest equilibrium.
   The comparative statics for country J follows from applying Proposition 5 in the main text.
   The comparative statics for country U follows from observing that aging in J results in an
                  ∗
increase in ρ(i; θ J ) for all i. The first-order condition for a monopolist in country U is now:

                                                    ∗               sU
                                                                     L (i)
                        h(θiR (W )) ≥ (σ − 1)ρ(i; θ J (i))α(i)                π U (i),
                                                                 1 − θiR (W )
                                                        ∗
with equality if θiR (W ) > 0. As a result, when θ J (i) increases, the optimal choice of technology
                                                                                                 U
in country U , θiR (W ), shifts up for any given wage level. Because we have assumed that φ (Θ =
{0}i∈I ) > φU > φeU , country U is in the region in which automation reduces W . This implies
that for U , the mapping W E (φU , ΘR (W )) shifts down, bringing down the equilibrium wage, but
increasing automation in a positive measure of industries.

Additional References:
Donald M. Topkis (1998) Supermodularity and Complementarity, Princeton University Press.


                             Appendix: Data Description
This Appendix describes in detail some of the sources of data used in our analysis.

Comtrade data
As explained in the text, we complement the IFR data with estimates of robot imports and exports
from the bilateral trade statistics obtained from Comtrade.



                                                   A-12
   We focus on trade in intermediate goods, defined as products whose two-digit HS code is given
by 82 (Tools), 84 (Mechanical machinery and appliances), 85 (Electrical machinery and equipment),
87 (Tractors and work trucks), and 90 (Instruments and apparatus). We partitioned all interme-
diates into the categories reported in Figures 10, A3, and A4. We defined the categories using
the HS-2012 classification, and mapped them to the HS-1992 classification using the crosswalks
available at https://unstats.un.org/unsd/trade/classifications/. The 1992 classification allows us
to track our categories consistently over time and compute the total value of imports and exports
of intermediates between 1990 and 2016 in constant 2007 dollars.
   The categories used in the paper are defined as follows:

   • Industrial robots: This category includes industrial robots. It is defined by the six-digit HS
     code 847950. This category was introduced to the HS-1996 classification, and so we only
     compute data on imports of robots between 1996 and 2016.

   • Dedicated machinery (including robots): This category includes machinery and mechanical
     appliances with individual functions. It is defined by the six-digit HS code 847989. This
     category was introduced in the HS-1992 classification. It is a superset of industrial robots
     and in addition to industrial robots, it contains dedicated (automatic) machinery. It can be
     tracked consistently over time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Numerically controlled machines: For a wide class of metal-working machines (lathes, milling
     machines), the HS classification distinguishes “numerically controlled” vintages from “other
     than numerically controlled” vintages. Based on this distinction we create two separate
     categories: numerically controlled machines and not-numerically controlled machines. Both
     can be tracked consistently over time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Machine tools: For a wide class of machine tools (six-digit HS codes 845600 to 846899, 845700
     to 845799, and 851500 to 851599), the HS classification distinguishes those that are for “work-
     ing with hands” from the rest. Based on this distinction we create two separate categories:
     automatic machine tools and manual machine tools. Both can be tracked consistently over
     time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Tools for industrial work: This category includes tools (not machines or machine tools) used
     in industrial applications. It is defined by the six-digit HS codes between 820200 and 821299.
     This category can be tracked consistently over time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Welding machines: For welding machines (six-digit HS codes 851521 to 851590), the HS
     classification distinguishes those that are automatic from those that are not. Based on this
     distinction we create two separate categories: automatic welding machines and manual weld-
     ing machines. Both can be tracked consistently over time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Weaving and knitting machines: This category includes weaving and knitting machines used
     in the textile industry. It is defined by the six-digit HS codes 844600-844699 (weaving ma-
     chines) and 844700-844799 (knitting machines). We grouped the remaining dedicated machin-

                                               A-13
     ery used in textiles (six-digit HS codes 844400-845399) into Other textile dedicated machinery.
     Both can be tracked consistently over time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Conveyors: For conveyors (six-digit HS codes 842511-842839), the HS classification distin-
     guishes those that are “continuous action” and therefore automatic from other machinery
     that transfer or move materials with human operation (like work trucks). Based on this dis-
     tinction we create two separate categories: automatic conveyors and other conveyors. Both
     can be tracked consistently over time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Regulating instruments: For regulating instruments (six-digit HS codes 902500-903299), the
     HS classification distinguishes those that are “automatic” from the rest. Based on this distinc-
     tion we create two separate categories: automatic regulating instruments and other regulating
     instruments. Both can be tracked consistently over time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Other industrial machinery: This is defined as a residual category that includes all industrial
     machinery that were not otherwise classified as related (or unrelated) to industrial automa-
     tion.

   • Vending machines: This category includes vending machines and their parts. It is defined by
     the six-digit HS codes 847621-847690. This category can be tracked consistently over time
     between 1990 and 2016.

   • Laundry machines: This category includes laundry machines and their parts. It is defined by
     the six-digit HS codes 845100-845199. This category can be tracked consistently over time
     between 1990 and 2016.

   • Agricultural machinery: This category includes agricultural machinery (six-digit HS codes
     843200-843799) and tractors (six-digit HS codes 843200-843799). This category can be tracked
     consistently over time between 1990 and 2016.

   • Computers: This category includes computers and their parts. It is defined by the six-digit
     HS codes 847100-847199. This category can be tracked consistently over time between 1990
     and 2016.

   As a final check on the Comtrade data on robot imports and exports, we explore the relationship
between robot imports and robot use from the IFR. This measure of the change in the value of
imports of industrial robots is highly correlated with our IFR measure of the change in the stock
of robots per thousand workers, both in levels and in logs, as shown in Figure A6. In the level
specification, the bivariate regression coefficient is 48,722 (standard error=11,873). This coefficient
is reasonable in view of the fact that the cost of a typical robot ranges between $50,000 and $100,000
(This excludes the costs of installation and programming, which often add about $300,000 to the
cost of a robot, but since these services are typically provided by local integrators, they do not
show up in import statistics).



                                                 A-14
USPTO patent data
Finally, we use data on robotics-related patents granted by the USPTO between 1990 and 2015,
and allocate them across countries according to the last recorded location of the assignee of the
patent. The assignee of the patent is the company, foundation, partnership, holding company or
individual that owns the patent. The latter could be an “independent inventor”, meaning that
the assignee is the same person as the inventor of the patent. In a small fraction of cases (about
3% of our sample), patents have multiple assignees, and we allocate them proportionately to the
countries of all of the assignees.
   We use several measures of robotics-related patents. First, we use patents in the USPTO class
901, which includes inventions related to industrial robots. This category is labeled as 901 USPTO
class in our figures. We then construct a category containing patents in classes referenced by the
901 class. These classes contain technologies that are related to robotics, even if the patent itself is
not for a different type of robot. This category is labeled as Classes related to 901 in our figures,
and it is the category we use in our baseline estimates for patents.
   We also used patent citations to define classes related to industrial robots. We created two
categories, one including all classes with at least 25% of their citations referencing class 901, and
another one including all classes with at least 10% of their citations referencing class 901.
   In another approach, we used the words in the abstracts of patents to define robotics-related
patents. In a first category, labeled words related to robots, we count patents including the words
“robot.” In the category words related to industrial robots, we count patents including the words
“robot” and “industrial.” The category words related to robots and manipulators expands the pre-
vious one by also including patents with the the words “robot arm” and “robot machine” or “robot
manipulator.” Finally, the category words related to numerical control includes patents whose ab-
stracts include the words “numeric” and “control.” When computing these categories, we exclude
patents related to prosthetic arms, which tend to share several of the same keywords.
   We also counted patents related to computers, software, nanotechnology, and pharmaceuticals.
For computers, we have classes related to computers, which includes the USPTO classes 708, 709,
710, 711, 712, 713, 718 and 719, and words related to computers, which includes patents whose
abstract includes the word “computer.” For software, we have classes related to software, which
includes the USPTO classes 717, and words related to software, which includes patents whose asb-
tract includes the words “software.” For nanotechnology, we have classes related to nanotechnology,
which includes the USPTO class 977, and words related to nanotechnology, which includes patents
whose abstract includes the words “nano” and “technology.” For pharmaceuticals, we have classes
related to pharmaceuticals, which includes the USPTO classes 514 and 424, and words related to
pharmaceuticals, which includes patents whose asbtract includes the words “pharma.”




                                                 A-15
                                           Appendix Figures and Tables


                                                                  Employment rates
                         16−20   21−25     26−30     31−35    36−40    41−45   46−50    51−55   56−60   61−65   66−70      71−75
              1      0
      Point estimate
      −1      −2




                                         Baseline estimates           Removing highly exposed areas         Pooled model



                                                                      Log of wages
                         16−20   21−25     26−30     31−35    36−40    41−45   46−50    51−55   56−60   61−65   66−70      71−75
              6
              4
      Point estimate
       0      −2
              −4 2




                                         Baseline estimates           Removing highly exposed areas         Pooled model



Figure A1: The figure presents estimates of the impact of one additional robot per thousand
workers on the employment and wages of people in different age groups. These estimates are
computed by exploiting differences in the exposure to robots across US commuting zones. The
three specifications and the data used are described in the main text and in Acemolgu and Restrepo
(2017a).




                                                                        A-16
                                                                                                                                       SOUTH KOREA




            Percent increase in robots between 1993 and 2014
                                                        2.5
                                                                                        DENMARK
                                                                                  CZECH REPUBLIC
                                                                                                   SPAIN
                                                                                                                                     GERMANY
                                                                                                                                       SINGAPORE
                                            2

                                                                                      UNITED STATES
                                                                   HUNGARY
                                                                                                                       SLOVENIA
                             1.5




                                                               NORWAY
               1




                                                                           UNITED KINGDOM
                                                                                     POLAND

                                                                      .2                .3              .4                      .5                 .6
                                                                                        Aging between 1990 and 2025


                                                                              INDIA
            Percent increase in robots between 1993 and 2014




                                                                                                                                         SOUTH KOREA
                                                         6




                                                                                                                                         SINGAPORE
                                                                       ARGENTINA                                        THAILAND
                                                                                               BRAZIL
                                                                                      TURKEY


                                                                                                                                          CHINA,HONG KONG S.A.R.
                                           4




                                                                                                                 CHINA P.REP.
                                                                                                        UNITED STATES
                                                                                       NORWAY
                                                                                            UNITED KINGDOM
                                                                   EGYPT
                                                                                         UKRAINE
                                                                                         VENEZUELA
                           2




                                                                                                         CHILE




                                                                   PAKISTAN
            0




                                                               0                         .2                     .4                                 .6
                                                                                        Aging between 1990 and 2025


Figure A2: Residual plots of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above
56 to workers aged 21-55 between 1990 and 2025) and the increase in the number of industrial
robots per thousand workers between 1993 and 2014. The plots partial out the covariates included
in the regression models in columns 2 and 5 of Table A9.




                                                                                                   A-17
                                                                                   A. Imports                                     B. Exports

                                           Industrial robots
                         Dedicated machinery (inc. robots)
                          Numerically controlled machines
                                  Automatic machine tools
                              Automatic welding machines
                           Weaving and knitting machines
                         Other textile dedicated machinery
                                       Automatic conveyors
                          Automatic regulating instruments
                                      Manual machine tools
                                 Manual welding machines
                                   Tools for industrial work
                      Not−numerically controlled machines
                              Other regulating instruments
A-18




                                           Other conveyors
                                Other industrial machinery
                                         Vending machines
                                         Laundry machines
                                     Agricultural machinery
                                                 Computers

                                                                      −2           0            2            4         −5            0           5           10

                                                                                                        Baseline                          log of one plus share

                                                                                                        Share                             Exclude outliers



       Figure A3: Estimates of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 between 1990 and 2025) and exports
       (left panel) and imports (right panel) of different intermediate goods between 1990 and 2015. These outcomes are normalized by the total intermediate exports
       and imports, respectively, during this period. The figure presents several estimates, including our baseline, a specification using the log of one plus the imports (or
       exports) of industrial robots per million dollars of intermediate goods imported (exported), a specification using the share of robot imports (or exports), and a version
       of our baseline specification where we exclude outliers manually (observations with a standardized residual outside the ±1.96 range).
                                                                                   A. Imports                                     B. Exports

                                           Industrial robots
                         Dedicated machinery (inc. robots)
                          Numerically controlled machines
                                  Automatic machine tools
                              Automatic welding machines
                           Weaving and knitting machines
                         Other textile dedicated machinery
                                       Automatic conveyors
                          Automatic regulating instruments
                                      Manual machine tools
                                 Manual welding machines
                                   Tools for industrial work
                      Not−numerically controlled machines
                              Other regulating instruments
A-19




                                           Other conveyors
                                Other industrial machinery
                                         Vending machines
                                         Laundry machines
                                     Agricultural machinery
                                                 Computers

                                                                         −2           0          2           4          −5           0            5          10

                                                                                                        Baseline                          log of one plus share

                                                                                                        Share                             Exclude outliers



       Figure A4: OECD estimates of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 between 1990 and 2025) and exports
       (left panel) and imports (right panel) of different intermediate goods between 1990 and 2015. These outcomes are normalized by the total intermediate exports
       and imports, respectively, during this period. The figure presents several estimates, including our baseline, a specification using the log of one plus the imports (or
       exports) of industrial robots per million dollars of intermediate goods imported (exported), a specification using the share of robot imports (or exports), and a version
       of our baseline specification where we exclude outliers manually (observations with a standardized residual outside the ±1.96 range).
                                                       A. Full sample           B. OECD sample

                       Classes related to 901
                            901 USPTO class
     Classes citing 901 class (25% threshold)
     Classes citing 901 class (10% threshold)
                      Words related to robots
             Words related to industrial robots
     Words related to robots and manipulators
           Words related to numerical control
                Classes related to computers
                  Words related to computers
                   Classes related to software
                    Words related to software
           Classes related to nanotechnology
            Words related to nanotechnology
           Classes related to pharmaceuticals
            Words related to pharmaceuticals


                                                  −4     −2     0       2      −4   −2        0        2

                                                                    Baseline             log of one plus share

                                                                    Share                Exclude outliers




Figure A5: Estimates of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above 56 to
workers aged 21-55 between 1990 and 2025) and the log of patents with different characteristics be-
tween 1990 and 2015. These outcomes are normalized by the total patents granted by the USPTO
during this period. The figure presents several estimates, including our baseline, a specification
using the log of one plus the imports (or exports) of industrial robots per million dollars of inter-
mediate goods imported (exported), a specification using the share of robot imports (or exports),
and a version of our baseline specification where we exclude outliers manually (observations with
a standardized residual outside the ±1.96 range).




                                                         A-20
                                                     2000000
           Value of robot imports per thousand workers
                                                                                                                                        SINGAPORE



                                          1500000
                                                                                                                    BELGIUM


                             1000000




                                                                                             SWITZERLAND
                                                                          NORWAY                                                  SWEDEN
                                                                                                                                        DENMARK
                500000




                                                                                                                        SPAIN
                                                                                                                   ITALY

                                                                                                                              UNITED STATES
                                                                                               THAILAND
                                                                MOLDOVA, REPUBLIC OF
                                                                PAKISTAN
                                     0




                                                                0             2                4               6                 8
                                                                            Increase in robots per thousand workers (IFR)


                                                                                                                         SINGAPORE
                                                                                                                        BELGIUM
                                                      14
           Value of robot imports per thousand workers




                                                                                                                    SWITZERLAND
                                                                                                                NORWAY
                                                                                                                        DENMARK
                                                                                                                          GERMANY
                                           12




                                                                                                                                SOUTH KOREA

                                                                                                                      THAILAND

                                                                                          VENEZUELA
                              10




                                                                                                        INDIA
                                                                                                      MACAU
                   8




                                                                                         MOLDOVA, REPUBLIC OF

                                                                        PAKISTAN
                                     6




                                                               −10                   −5                       0                        5
                                                                            Increase in robots per thousand workers (IFR)


Figure A6: Scatter plots of the relationship between imports of robots per thousand workers (in
2007 dollars, from Comtrade) and the increase in the number of industrial robots per thousand
workers between 1993 and 2014, both in levels and in logs.




                                                                                             A-21
   Table A1: Set of countries in our sample and availability of robot installations by industry.

                    OECD sample                                              Other countries
 Country name                    Industry data since        Country name                    Industry data since
 Australia                              2006                Argentina                              2004
 Austria                                2003                Brazil                                 2004
 Belgium                                2004                Bulgaria                               2006
 Chile                                  2006                China                                  2006
 Czech Republic                         2004                Colombia                               2007
 Denmark                                1996                Egypt                                  2005
 Estonia                                2004                Hong Kong                              2006
 Finland                                1993                India                                  2006
 France                                 1993                Indonesia                              2006
 Germany                                1993                Malaysia                               2006
 Greece                                 2006                Moldova                                2010
 Hungary                                2004                Morocco                                2005
 Iceland                                2006                Peru                                   2006
 Ireland                                2006                Philippines                            2006
 Israel                                 2005                Romania                                2004
 Italy                                  1993                Singapore                              2005
 Netherlands                            2004                Thailand                               2005
 New Zealand                            2006                Ukraine                                2004
 Norway                                 1993                Venezuela                              2007
 Poland                                 2004                Vietnam                                2005
 Portugal                               2004
 Rep. of Korea                          2001                      Countries with no industry data
 Slovakia                                2004               Pakistan                                  .
 Slovenia                                2005               Macau                                     .
 Spain                                   1993
 Sweden                                  1993
 Switzerland                             2004
 Turkey                                  2005
 United Kingdom                          1993
 United States                           2004
Notes: The table presents a list of the countries in our sample as well as the years for which industry-level data are
available from the IFR.




                                                        A-22
                                                                Table A2: Summary statistics for industries

                                                    Robot installations per thousand
                                                                workers
                                                   Normalized    Normalized    Normalized
                                                                                                 Percent       Change in     Reliance on      Share of        Share of
                                                      using         using         using
                                                                                               increase in    labor share    middle-aged     replaceable       KLEMS
                                                     average       KLEMS         UNIDO
                                                                                              value added        (p.p.)        workers          tasks        employment
                                                   employment    employment    employment

        Prone to the use of robots
        Automotive                                    2.94          7.69           5.52           46.0%           -5.93           7.78           0.35            1.2%
        Chemicals, plastics, and pharmaceuticals      1.27          1.32           1.25           38.4%           -3.86           8.15           0.30            2.1%
        Electronics                                   1.07          0.76           0.74           54.0%           -6.84           8.10           0.33            2.4%
        Metal machinery                               0.43          0.44           0.46           48.3%           -4.19           6.79           0.34            1.9%

        Other industries
        Metal products                                0.84          1.14           0.92           44.1%            -7.25          6.44           0.37            1.8%
        Basic metals                                  0.15          0.49           0.32           51.6%            -9.77          6.13           0.37            0.7%
        Food and beverages                            0.54          0.46           0.33           33.0%            -1.24          7.80           0.30            2.2%
        Wood and furniture                            0.11          0.39           0.10           37.6%            -0.82          7.78           0.35            0.6%
A-23




        Other vehicles                                0.06          0.31           0.17           58.8%           -13.64          6.48           0.35            0.6%
        Glass and non-metals                          0.09          0.26           0.14           49.1%            -5.48          6.94           0.34            0.8%
        Textiles                                      0.03          0.08           0.03           32.9%             0.39          5.88           0.31            2.2%
        Paper and printing                            0.04          0.06           0.03           33.1%            -0.96          7.10           0.21            1.7%
        Miscellaneous manufacturing                   0.15          0.37                          34.5%            -0.71          6.34           0.39            1.1%
        Research and education                        0.09          0.04                          30.3%             0.82          5.94           0.01            6.1%
        Mining                                        0.01          0.09                          56.3%           -10.58          8.52           0.14            0.6%
        Agriculture                                   0.02          0.02                          19.9%            11.80          3.85           0.01            5.7%
        Construction                                  0.03          0.01                          38.7%            -4.46          8.08           0.08            7.1%
        Utilities                                     0.00          0.01                          53.3%            -5.14          8.04           0.07            0.8%
        Services                                      0.01          0.00                          36.7%            -0.16          6.91           0.03           60.5%

        Summary statistics
        Average                                       0.42          0.20           0.81           36.7%           -0.55           6.82           0.09
        Unweighted Average                            0.42          0.73           0.83           41.9%           -3.40           7.00           0.24
        Countries covered                              50            21             44              21             21             US             US
       Notes: The table presents summary statistics for each of the 19 industries covered in the IFR data. The bottom rows present summary statistics for each variable.
       We follow the Boston Consulting Group in labeling the automotive, chemicals, plastics, pharmaceuticals, electronics, and metal machinery industries as being prone
       for the use of industrial robots (Boston Consulting Group, 2015). We compute the reliance on middle-aged workers using the 1990 US Census. The measure is
       defined as the share of middle-aged (21 to 55 years) to older (56 years or more) workers employed in each industry. The share of replaceable tasks comes from Graetz
       and Michaels (2015). Section 3 in the main text describes the sources of the data.
Table A3: Estimates of the impact of aging on the adoption of industrial robots using different
definitions of middle-aged and older workers.

                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                        Change in the stock of industrial robots
                                                            per thousand workers (annualized)
                                                    OLS estimates                       IV estimates
                                           All countries             OECD               All countries            OECD
                                                (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)
                                                        Panel A. Middle-aged from 21-50; Older from 51 onwards
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                  0.497∗∗                0.777∗∗∗             0.567∗∗∗             0.944∗∗∗
                                              (0.193)                (0.269)              (0.194)              (0.277)
 Observations                                    52                     30                   52                   30
 First-stage F stat.                                                                        18.1                 11.3
 Overid p− value                                                                            0.79                 0.50
                                                        Panel B. Middle-aged from 21-60; Older from 61 onwards
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                 0.911∗∗∗                1.237∗∗∗             1.023∗∗∗               1.245∗∗∗
                                             (0.323)                 (0.414)               (0.333)               (0.425)
 Observations                                   52                      30                    52                    30
 First-stage F stat.                                                                         19.8                   8.1
 Overid p− value                                                                             0.62                  0.36
                                                           Panel C. Middle-aged from 21-55; Older from 56-65
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                 1.975∗∗∗                2.860∗∗∗             1.854∗∗                2.812∗∗∗
                                             (0.721)                 (0.823)               (0.748)               (0.968)
 Observations                                   52                      30                    52                    30
 First-stage F stat.                                                                         29.1                  21.7
 Overid p− value                                                                             0.24                  0.26
                                                           Panel D. Middle-aged from 21-55; Older from 56-75
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                 1.024∗∗∗                1.527∗∗∗             1.130∗∗∗             1.680∗∗∗
                                             (0.349)                 (0.445)              (0.349)              (0.482)
 Observations                                   52                      30                   52                   30
 First-stage F stat.                                                                        21.3                 12.5
 Overid p− value                                                                            0.41                 0.39
                                                        Panel E. Middle-aged from 35-55; Older from 56 onwards
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                 1.975∗∗∗                2.860∗∗∗             1.854∗∗                2.812∗∗∗
                                             (0.721)                 (0.823)              (0.748)                (0.968)
 Observations                                   52                      30                   52                     30
 First-stage F stat.                                                                        29.1                   21.7
 Overid p− value                                                                            0.24                   0.26
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                     X                       X                    X                      X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots using
different measures of aging. In all panels, the dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial robots per
thousand workers between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable varies by panel. In panel A, it is is
the expected change in the ratio of workers above 51 to workers aged 21-50 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN
Population Statistics). In panel B, it is is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 61 to workers aged 21-60
between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). In panel C, it is is the expected change in the ratio of
workers aged 56-65 to workers aged 21-55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). In panel D, it
is is the expected change in the ratio of workers aged 56-75 to workers aged 21-55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the
UN Population Statistics). In panel E, it is is the expected change in the ratio of workers aged 56-65 to workers aged
35-55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Columns 1-2 present OLS estimates. Columns 3-4
present IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950
and 1985. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification
test. We present results for two samples: columns 1 and 3 use the full sample; columns 2 and 4 use the OECD sample.
All models control for region dummies and the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of
schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. All regressions are unweighted, and the
standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with
∗∗
    are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                            A-24
Table A4: Estimates of the impact of aging on the adoption of industrial robots controlling for
the change in overall population.

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                       Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)
                                                  Full sample                           OECD sample
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)
                                                                    Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025             0.810∗∗∗     0.745∗∗∗      0.452∗∗         1.181∗∗      0.775∗∗∗   0.587∗∗
                                         (0.271)      (0.239)       (0.201)         (0.431)      (0.265)    (0.279)
 Change in population                     0.141        0.063         -0.190          0.143        -0.392     -0.361
 between 1990 and 2015                   (0.172)      (0.291)       (0.261)         (0.245)      (0.442)    (0.449)
 Observations                               52           52            52              30           30         30
 R-squared                                 0.48         0.59          0.70            0.38         0.55       0.64
                                                                      Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025             0.899∗∗∗     0.851∗∗       0.705∗∗        1.573∗∗∗      0.771∗     0.890∗∗
                                         (0.297)      (0.331)       (0.290)        (0.522)       (0.424)    (0.420)
 Change in population                     0.168        0.158         0.036          0.278         -0.395     -0.104
 between 1990 and 2015                   (0.170)      (0.346)       (0.288)        (0.289)       (0.502)    (0.471)
 Observations                               52           52            52             30            30         30
 First-stage F stat.                       19.1          7.1          6.7             4.1           5.1        6.0
 Overid p− value                           0.28         0.60          0.10           0.56          0.31       0.12
 Anderson-Rubin Wald test p− value         0.01         0.06          0.00           0.04          0.05       0.00
                                                                  Panel C. Single-IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025             1.009∗∗∗     0.921∗∗        0.579        1.549∗∗∗       1.327∗∗    1.156∗
                                         (0.349)      (0.427)       (0.412)       (0.477)        (0.644)    (0.646)
 Change in population                     0.201        0.220         -0.077        0.269          0.111      0.123
 between 1990 and 2015                   (0.173)      (0.358)       (0.334)       (0.270)        (0.607)    (0.548)
 Observations                               52           52            52            30             30         30
 First-stage F stat.                       38.0         26.4          24.3          26.6           11.2       10.0
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                              X            X                             X         X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                        X                                       X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots. In all
panels, the dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers between 1993 and
2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55
between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). In addition, all specifications control for the change in
the log of population between 1990 and 2015. Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where
the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Panel C presents
IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the decline in birth rates between 1960 and 1980. For our
IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic. When using multiple instruments, we also report the p−value of
Hansen’s overidentification test, and the p−value of Anderson and Rubin’s test for the coefficient on aging being zero.
We present results for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use the OECD sample. Columns 1
and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population,
average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 3 and 6 add
the 1993 value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted, and the standard errors are robust
against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5%
level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                         A-25
Table A5: Estimates of the impact of aging on the adoption of industrial robots controlling for
the influence of outliers.

                                                   All Countries                           OECD sample
                                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                                   Panel A. Removing Korea
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                    0.457∗∗         0.311∗∗∗         0.590∗∗          0.419∗∗∗
                                                (0.172)         (0.104)          (0.210)          (0.135)
 Observations                                      51              51               29               29
                                                      Panel B. Removing outliers based on residuals
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                    0.502∗∗∗          0.336∗∗∗        0.679∗∗∗                0.432∗∗∗
                                                (0.166)           (0.098)          (0.194)                (0.118)
 Observations                                      50                49               28                     27
                                                            Panel C. Quantile (median) regression
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                    0.544∗∗             0.295∗∗        0.684∗∗∗                 0.427
                                                (0.214)             (0.127)         (0.240)                (0.268)
 Observations                                      52                  52              30                     30
                                                                  Panel D. Huber M-regression
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                    0.498∗∗∗           0.369∗∗∗        0.796∗∗∗                0.511∗∗
                                                (0.170)            (0.129)          (0.267)                (0.238)
 Observations                                      52                 52               30                     30
                                                                  Panel E. Robust regression
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                    0.312∗∗          0.297∗∗         0.578∗∗           0.402∗
                                                (0.139)          (0.113)          (0.237)         (0.208)
 Observations                                      52               52               29              29
                                                      Panel F. Reweighting by employment in industry
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                    0.931∗∗∗           0.683∗∗∗            1.508∗∗∗           1.301∗∗∗
                                                (0.231)            (0.202)             (0.176)            (0.315)
 Observations                                      52                 52                  30                 30
 Country covariates in 1993                        X                  X                   X                  X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                        X                                      X
Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots
controlling for the influence of outliers. In all panels, the dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial
robots per thousand workers between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable is the expected change in the
ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A
presents OLS estimates excluding South Korea from the sample. Panel B presents estimates weighted by employment
in industry. Panel C presents quantile (median) regressions. Panel D presents a Huber-M estimator. Panel E presents
a robust regression. We present results for two samples: columns 1-2 use the full sample; columns 2-3 use the OECD
sample. Columns 1 and 3 include region dummies, the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average
years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 2 and 4 add the 1993
value of robots per thousand workers. The standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients
with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10%
level.




                                                           A-26
Table A6: Estimates of the impact of aging between 1990 and 2015 on the adoption of industrial
robots.

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                       Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)
                                                  Full sample                           OECD sample
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)
                                                                   Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2015            1.162∗∗∗     1.005∗∗∗     0.780∗∗         1.463∗∗       1.295∗∗    0.964∗∗
                                        (0.393)      (0.351)      (0.298)         (0.616)       (0.478)    (0.417)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                        0.053∗       -0.002                        0.076      -0.006
                                                     (0.030)      (0.024)                       (0.057)    (0.054)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                              0.081∗∗∗                                 0.083∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.011)                                  (0.021)
 Observations                              52           52           52              30           30          30
 R-squared                                0.43         0.54         0.67            0.24         0.44        0.56
                                                                    Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2015            1.409∗∗∗     1.192∗∗∗     1.087∗∗∗        2.574∗∗∗      1.305∗∗∗   1.086∗∗∗
                                        (0.393)      (0.363)       (0.304)        (0.941)       (0.450)    (0.387)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                        0.046∗        -0.010                       0.076      -0.001
                                                     (0.027)       (0.023)                      (0.050)    (0.048)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                              0.077∗∗∗                                 0.081∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.013)                                 (0.021)
 Observations                              52           52            52             30           30          30
 First-stage F stat.                      16.8         10.4          10.3            3.2          3.9         4.3
 Overid p− value                          0.45         0.73          0.12           0.68         0.45        0.17
 Anderson-Rubin Wald test p− value        0.02         0.03          0.00           0.03         0.03        0.00
                                                                 Panel C. Single-IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2015            2.435∗∗∗      2.067∗∗      1.561∗         5.110∗∗       3.101∗∗∗   2.756∗∗
                                        (0.943)       (0.895)     (0.842)         (2.391)       (1.156)    (1.277)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                         0.015       -0.021                        0.103      0.056
                                                      (0.042)     (0.032)                       (0.079)    (0.092)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                              0.069∗∗∗                                  0.046
                                                                  (0.019)                                  (0.047)
 Observations                              52           52           52             30            30          30
 First-stage F stat.                      13.4         12.4         10.2            3.6          12.8        7.8
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                             X            X                             X          X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                       X                                        X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots. In all
panels, the dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers between 1993 and
2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between
21 and 55 between 1990 and 2015 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B
presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950
and 1985. Panel C presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the decline in birth rates
between 1960 and 1980. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic. When using multiple instruments,
we also report the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test, and the p−value of Anderson and Rubin’s test for the
coefficient on aging being zero. We present results for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use
the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1993 values of log GDP
per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in
1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the 1993 value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted, and the
standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with
∗∗
   are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                         A-27
Table A7: Estimates of the impact of aging, unions, and the wage level on the adoption of
industrial robots.

                                                               Dependent variable:
                                    Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)
                                               Full sample                           OECD sample
                                        (1)           (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)
                                                                     Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025         0.955∗∗∗       0.980∗∗∗        0.783∗∗∗       1.167∗∗∗       1.067∗∗∗   0.891∗∗
                                     (0.275)        (0.275)         (0.259)         (0.304)       (0.338)    (0.336)
 Baseline union density              0.243∗∗        0.260∗∗          0.179         0.435∗∗∗       0.431∗∗∗   0.348∗∗
                                     (0.094)        (0.101)         (0.111)         (0.125)       (0.126)    (0.138)
 log of hourly wages in 1993                         0.129           0.071                         0.186      0.152
                                                    (0.104)         (0.102)                       (0.182)    (0.194)
 Observations                           46             46              46              30            30         30
 R-squared                             0.63           0.65            0.71            0.67          0.68       0.71
                                                                      Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025         0.922∗∗∗       0.980∗∗∗        0.913∗∗∗        1.232∗∗∗      1.231∗∗∗   1.188∗∗∗
                                     (0.279)        (0.263)          (0.227)        (0.296)       (0.329)    (0.333)
 Baseline union density              0.237∗∗∗       0.260∗∗∗        0.207∗∗         0.446∗∗∗      0.455∗∗∗   0.407∗∗∗
                                     (0.073)        (0.081)          (0.091)        (0.109)       (0.112)    (0.119)
 log of hourly wages in 1993                         0.129            0.083                        0.142      0.094
                                                    (0.087)          (0.087)                      (0.153)    (0.166)
 Observations                           46             46               46             30            30         30
 First-stage F stat.                   11.6           11.0             10.9            5.0           5.7        6.5
 Overid p− value                       0.13           0.15             0.05           0.59          0.55       0.40
                                                                   Panel C. Single-IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025         1.146∗∗        1.187∗∗∗        1.003∗∗        1.645∗∗∗       1.635∗∗∗   1.543∗∗∗
                                     (0.447)        (0.439)         (0.459)        (0.425)        (0.453)    (0.501)
 Baseline union density              0.278∗∗∗       0.299∗∗∗        0.227∗         0.514∗∗∗       0.515∗∗∗   0.479∗∗∗
                                     (0.103)        (0.109)         (0.121)        (0.145)        (0.144)    (0.144)
 log of hourly wages in 1993                         0.141           0.091                         0.034      0.026
                                                    (0.097)         (0.097)                       (0.209)    (0.206)
 Observations                           46             46              46             30             30         30
 First-stage F stat.                   15.0           15.0            13.6           16.1           13.4       13.1
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993             X              X               X              X              X          X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                         X                                        X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots. In all
panels, the dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers between 1993 and
2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between
21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). In addition, we also estimate the impact of
the baseline unionization rate (from Rama and Artecona, 2002) and wage level (from the Penn World Tables) in a
country. Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented
using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Panel C presents IV estimates where the aging
variable is instrumented using the decline in birth rates between 1960 and 1980. For our IV estimates, we report the
first-stage F −statistic. When using multiple instruments, we also report the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification
test. We present results for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full sample; columns 4-6 use the OECD sample.
Columns 1 and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of
population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 3
and 6 add the 1993 value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted, and the standard errors
are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant
at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                            A-28
                Table A8: Estimates of the impact of aging on robot installations per year.

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                             Installations of industrial robots per thousand workers per year
                                                     Full sample                          OECD sample
                                            (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                     Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025              1.275∗∗∗      1.067∗∗∗      0.640∗∗        1.785∗∗∗     1.519∗∗∗     0.949∗∗∗
                                          (0.405)       (0.385)       (0.244)         (0.482)     (0.427)      (0.312)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                                  0.317∗∗∗                                 0.253∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.072)                                  (0.091)
 Observations                              1,144         1,144         1,144            660        660           660
 Countries                                   52            52            52              30         30            30
 R-squared                                  0.40         0.53           0.73            0.20       0.55          0.71
                                                                       Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025              1.540∗∗∗      1.050∗∗∗     0.795∗∗∗        2.619∗∗∗     1.472∗∗∗     1.169∗∗∗
                                          (0.435)       (0.375)      (0.251)         (0.533)      (0.459)      (0.345)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                                 0.312∗∗∗                                  0.244∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.064)                                   (0.082)
 Observations                              1,144         1,144        1,144            660         660           660
 Countries                                   52            52           52              30          30            30
 First-stage F stat.                        29.0         20.8          19.9            10.0         9.4          11.6
 Overid p− value                            0.60         0.86          0.12            0.89        0.75          0.10
 Anderson-Rubin Wald test p− value          0.01         0.02          0.00            0.01        0.08          0.00
                                                                   Panel C. Single-IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025              1.775∗∗∗      1.294∗∗        0.671∗        2.840∗∗∗     1.865∗∗∗     1.314∗∗∗
                                          (0.541)       (0.531)       (0.366)        (0.721)      (0.509)      (0.489)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993                                  0.316∗∗∗                                 0.238∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.064)                                  (0.083)
 Observations                              1,144         1,144         1,144           660         660           660
 Countries                                   52            52            52             30          30            30
 First-stage F stat.                        32.5         28.0           24.3           15.1        30.1          24.0
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                                X             X                           X            X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                           X                                        X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and yearly installations of industrial
robots. The dependent variable is installations of industrial robots per thousand workers for each country-year pair
between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56
to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS
estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth
cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Panel C presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the
decline in birth rates between 1960 and 1980. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic. When using
multiple instruments, we also report the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test, and the p−value of Anderson
and Rubin’s test for the coefficient on aging being zero. We present results for two samples: columns 1-3 use the full
sample; columns 4-6 use the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include the
1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56
to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the 1993 value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions
are unweighted and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The
coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant
at the 10% level.




                                                          A-29
    Table A9: Estimates of the impact of aging on the percent increase in robots by country.

                                                 Increase in the log of               Increase in the log of
                                                        Robots                              1+ Robots
                                                      (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                                      Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                        2.170∗∗           1.929∗∗           3.268∗∗            3.382∗∗
                                                    (0.910)           (0.782)           (1.428)            (1.466)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993               -0.619∗∗∗         -0.527∗∗∗         -1.103∗∗∗          -1.091∗∗∗
                                                    (0.119)           (0.148)           (0.135)            (0.136)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                                         -0.337                               0.322
                                                                      (0.229)                              (0.335)
 Observations                                         23                 23                52                 52
 R-squared                                           0.70               0.75              0.85               0.87
                                                                        Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                        2.422∗            2.554∗∗           3.728∗             4.479∗∗
                                                    (1.296)           (1.050)          (2.125)             (2.214)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993               -0.628∗∗∗         -0.557∗∗∗        -1.110∗∗∗           -1.099∗∗∗
                                                    (0.112)           (0.117)          (0.131)             (0.122)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                                         -0.318                               0.261
                                                                      (0.196)                              (0.319)
 Observations                                         23                 23               52                  52
 First-stage F stat.                                  6.4                3.6             23.4                14.7
 Overid p− value                                     0.03               0.09             0.14                0.03
                                                                    Panel C. Single-IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025                         2.280            4.451∗∗          6.806∗∗∗            5.676∗∗
                                                    (1.563)           (2.025)           (2.565)            (2.585)
 Robots per thousand workers in 1993               -0.623∗∗∗         -0.648∗∗∗         -0.993∗∗∗          -1.190∗∗∗
                                                    (0.114)           (0.148)           (0.122)            (0.151)
 log of GDP per capita in 1993                                         -0.261                               0.682
                                                                      (0.248)                              (0.474)
 Observations                                         23                 23                53                 52
 First-stage F stat.                                 16.8                9.7              28.2               44.9
 Country covariates in 1993                                              X                                    X
Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots. The
dependent variable varies by column. In columns 1-2, it is the change in the log of the stock of industrial robots
between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). In columns 1-2, it is the change in the log of one plus the stock of industrial
robots between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers
above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents
OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year
birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Panel C presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using
the decline in birth rates between 1960 and 1980. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic. When
using multiple instruments, we also report the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. Columns 2 and 4 include
region dummies, the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of
workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990, and the 1993 value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions
are unweighted, and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant
at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                            A-30
                                     Table A10: Robustness analysis of the impact of aging on imports and exports of robots.

                                                  Baseline                 log of one plus share                 Share of robots                 Exclude outliers
                                            OLS                IV            OLS               IV               OLS               IV            OLS               IV
                                            (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)           (7)               (8)
                                                                                   Panel A. Imports of robots for the full sample
        Aging between 1995 and 2025       2.181∗∗∗         2.346∗∗∗         2.172∗∗∗         2.312∗∗∗          5.172∗∗∗         5.225∗∗∗       2.212∗∗∗        2.259∗∗∗
                                          (0.754)          (0.774)          (0.747)          (0.764)            (1.680)          (1.439)       (0.748)         (0.762)
        Observations                        131              131              136              136                136              136           119             119
        R-squared                           0.52             0.52             0.53             0.53               0.52             0.52          0.54            0.54
        Instruments F-stat                                   13.0                              13.1                                13.1                          12.7
        Overid p-value                                       0.35                              0.35                                0.46                          0.49
                                                                                  Panel B. Imports of robots for the OECD sample
        Aging between 1995 and 2025       2.587∗∗∗           2.035∗∗        2.574∗∗∗         2.024∗∗            1.969∗∗          1.470∗∗       2.603∗∗∗         2.132∗∗
                                          (0.898)            (0.863)        (0.894)          (0.859)            (0.762)          (0.663)       (0.877)          (0.831)
        Observations                         34                 34             34               34                 34               34            31               31
        R-squared                           0.62               0.62           0.62             0.62               0.56             0.55          0.68             0.67
        Instruments F-stat                                     12.8                            12.8                                12.8                           12.6
        Overid p-value                                         0.10                            0.10                                0.12                           0.12
                                                                                   Panel C. Exports of robots for the full sample
        Aging between 1995 and 2025       3.916∗∗∗         4.389∗∗∗         3.833∗∗∗         4.317∗∗∗           2.266∗            1.811        3.939∗∗∗        4.419∗∗∗
                                          (1.229)          (1.428)          (1.194)          (1.392)            (1.188)          (1.163)       (1.239)         (1.432)
A-31




        Observations                        105              105              138              138                138              138            96              96
        R-squared                           0.78             0.78             0.78             0.78               0.15             0.15          0.78            0.78
        Instruments F-stat                                   12.9                              13.9                                13.9                          12.5
        Overid p-value                                       0.06                              0.07                                0.23                          0.06
                                                                                  Panel D. Exports of robots for the OECD sample
        Aging between 1995 and 2025       4.609∗∗∗         5.607∗∗∗         4.563∗∗∗         5.544∗∗∗           4.563∗           5.285∗∗       4.697∗∗∗        5.673∗∗∗
                                          (1.276)          (1.200)          (1.268)          (1.192)            (2.476)          (2.486)       (1.278)         (1.181)
        Observations                         35               35               35               35                 35               35            33              33
        R-squared                           0.73             0.72             0.73             0.72               0.47             0.47          0.74            0.73
        Instruments F-stat                                   10.0                              10.0                                10.0                           9.5
        Overid p-value                                       0.33                              0.32                                0.39                          0.33
        Country covariates in 1995           X                X                X                X                  X                X             X               X

       Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and imports and exports of industrial robots. Columns 1 and 2 present our
       baseline estimates. Columns 3 and 4 present results using the log of one plus robot imports (or exports) per million dollars imported (exported). Columns 5 and
       6 present results using the share of robot imports (or exports) per million dollars imported (exported), and normalizes the estimates relative to the mean of this
       variable. Finally, columns 7 and 8 return to our baseline estimates, but exclude outliers—countries with a standardized residual above 1.96 or below -1.96. The aging
       variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1995 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). The
       sample used varies by panel: Panels A and C present estimates for the full set of countries. Panels B and D present estimates for the OECD. In even columns, the
       aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the
       p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. All columns include region dummies, the 1995 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling
       and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55, and the log of intermediate imports (Panels A and B) or exports (Panels C and D). All regressions are
       weighted by total intermediate imports (Panels A and B) or exports (Panels C and D), and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients
       with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.
                                        Table A11: Robustness analysis of the impact of aging on robotics-related patents.

                                                  Baseline                   log of one plus share                 Share of robots                 Exclude outliers
                                            OLS               IV               OLS               IV               OLS               IV             OLS               IV
                                            (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)            (7)               (8)
                                                                                 Panel A. Robotics-related patents for the full sample
        Aging between 1990 and 2025        1.396∗∗∗         1.347∗∗∗         1.300∗∗∗        1.274∗∗∗          1.422∗∗∗           1.381∗∗∗       1.402∗∗∗         1.353∗∗∗
                                           (0.188)          (0.175)          (0.160)          (0.159)           (0.158)            (0.177)       (0.192)          (0.178)
        Observations                          69               69              126              126               126                126            64               64
        R-squared                            0.80             0.80             0.75             0.75              0.68               0.68          0.81             0.81
        Instruments F-stat                                    24.1                              29.7                                 29.7                           23.3
        Overid p-value                                        0.11                              0.11                                 0.12                           0.10
                                                                               Panel B. Robotics related patents for the OECD sample
        Aging between 1990 and 2025        1.364∗∗∗         1.288∗∗∗         1.269∗∗∗        1.204∗∗∗          1.662∗∗∗           1.577∗∗∗       1.365∗∗∗         1.289∗∗∗
A-32




                                           (0.200)          (0.201)          (0.178)          (0.183)           (0.222)            (0.235)       (0.204)          (0.202)
        Observations                          31               31               35               35                35                 35            29               29
        R-squared                            0.82             0.82             0.79             0.79              0.82               0.82          0.82             0.82
        Instruments F-stat                                    62.8                              66.3                                 66.3                           59.8
        Overid p-value                                        0.15                              0.10                                 0.29                           0.13
        Country covariates in 1990            X                X                X                X                 X                  X             X                X

       Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and robotics-related patents. Columns 1 and 2 present our baseline estimates.
       Columns 3 and 4 present results using the log of one plus robotics-related patents per thousand utility patents. Columns 5 and 6 present results using the share
       of robotics-related patents per thousand utility patents, and normalizes the estimates relative to the mean of this variable. Finally, columns 7 and 8 return to our
       baseline estimates, but exclude outliers—countries with a standardized residual above 1.96 or below -1.96. The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of
       workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). The sample used varies by panel: Panel A presents
       estimates for the full set of countries. Panel B presents estimates for the OECD. In even columns, the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth
       cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. All columns include
       region dummies, the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55, and
       the log of total utility patents. All regressions are weighted by total utility patents, and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients
       with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.
Table A12: Robustness analysis for the IV estimates of aging on the location of robot integrators
in the US.

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                                Location of robot integrator
                                                                                                            Manuf.
                                                  All commuting zones                                                  Other areas
                                                                                                            areas
                                      (1)            (2)                (3)               (4)                 (5)          (6)
                                                             Panel A. Log of one plus size of integrators
 Aging between 1990 and 2015        4.334∗          1.271            0.534             2.380∗∗          3.891∗            1.436
                                    (2.454)        (1.020)          (1.047)            (1.060)          (2.158)          (1.174)
 Observations                         722            722              722                722               361             361
 First-stage F stat.                   4.2           21.5             20.0               22.9              9.8              8.4
 Overid p− value                      0.00           0.40             0.13               0.65             0.71             0.36
                                                         Panel B. Baseline specification removing outliers
 Aging between 1990 and 2015        1.765∗∗∗      0.657∗∗∗          0.468∗           0.993∗∗∗        1.541∗∗∗             0.256
                                    (0.568)       (0.211)          (0.246)           (0.231)          (0.424)            (0.173)
 Observations                         703           688              682               686              342                339
 First-stage F stat.                   5.4          21.4             18.6              25.3              9.2                8.1
 Overid p− value                      0.00          0.17             0.14              0.89             0.10               0.74
                                                    Panel C. Baseline specification weighting by population
 Aging between 1990 and 2015        -2.683∗       2.404∗∗∗            2.449∗∗            1.435              2.380∗∗∗      -0.618
                                    (1.621)       (0.843)             (1.028)           (1.046)             (0.678)      (1.520)
 Observations                         722           722                 722               722                 361          361
 First-stage F stat.                   4.6           8.2                4.8               10.7                 9.9          9.2
 Overid p− value                      0.00          0.20                0.25              0.10                0.30         0.07
 Covariates included:
 Regional dummies                      X             X                   X                X                    X           X
 Baseline covariates                                 X                   X                X                    X           X
 Industry composition                                                    X                X                    X           X
 Additional covariates                                                                    X                    X           X

Notes: The table presents IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the location of robot integrators across
US commuting zones. The dependent variable varies by panel. In panel A, the dependent variable is the log of one
plus the number of employees in robot integrators (from Leigh and Kraft, 2016). In panels B and C, the dependent
variable is a dummy for the presence of robot integrators in each US commuting zone (from Leigh and Kraft, 2016).
The aging variable is the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and
2015 (from the NBER-SEER). All panels present IV estimates, where the aging variable is instrumented using the
size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For all estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the
p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. We present results for three samples: columns 1-4 use the full sample;
column 5 focuses on commuting zones with share of employment in manufacturing above the median; and column
6 focuses on commuting zones with share of employment in manufacturing below the median. Column 1 includes
Census region dummies. Column 2 includes the 1990 values for the log of average income, the log of the population,
the initial ratio of older to middle-aged workers, and the share of workers with different levels of education in each
commuting zone. Column 3 includes the exposure to robots measure from Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a) and
also controls for the shares of employment in manufacturing, agriculture, mining, construction, and finance and real
estate in 1990. Finally, column 4 includes additional demographic characteristics measured in 1990, including the
racial composition of commuting zones and the share of male and female employment, and controls for other shocks
affecting US markets, including offshoring, trade with China and the decline of routine jobs. The regressions in panel
B are weighted by population, and all other regressions are unweighted. In parenthesis we report standard errors
that are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation in the error terms within states. The coefficients with ∗∗∗
are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                             A-33
Table A13: Estimates of the impact of aging on robot installations by country-industry pairs per
year for manufacturing industries.

                                                                           Potential for the use of robots
                                                             Replaceability index                      BCG measure
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)          (7)
                                                 Dependent variable: Installation of robots in country-industry pairs
                                                            normalizing by industry employment from UNIDO
                                                                             Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            3.765∗∗      11.395∗∗        8.624∗∗                        10.232∗∗∗ 7.739∗∗
                                        (1.425)       (4.427)        (3.434)                         (3.703)  (3.052)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                      3.814∗∗        2.934∗∗         3.023∗∗         0.984∗∗   0.848∗   1.028∗
                                                      (1.421)        (1.187)         (1.169)         (0.383)  (0.457)  (0.511)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                35.509∗∗       28.337∗∗        26.000∗∗         7.871∗∗  5.895∗∗  5.649∗∗
                                                     (16.850)       (13.007)        (11.962)         (2.965)  (2.335)  (2.194)
 Observations                            5,866         5,866          5,866           5,866           5866     5,866    5,866
 Countries in sample                       44            44             44              44              44       44       44
                                                                              Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            4.032∗∗∗     13.055∗∗∗     10.438∗∗∗                        11.924∗∗∗ 9.250∗∗∗
                                        (1.524)       (4.823)        (3.949)                         (4.102)  (3.550)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                     4.538∗∗∗       3.465∗∗∗        3.538∗∗∗         1.065∗∗   0.755∗  1.019∗∗
                                                      (1.556)        (1.316)         (1.318)         (0.421)  (0.421)  (0.501)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                40.220∗∗       38.568∗∗        33.033∗∗        9.731∗∗∗  7.728∗∗∗ 7.239∗∗∗
                                                     (18.711)       (15.356)        (13.906)         (3.492)  (2.962)  (2.750)
 Observations                            5,866         5,866          5,866           5,866           5866     5,866    5,866
 Countries in sample                       44            44             44              44              44       44       44
 Instruments F-stat                       17.9          11.5           8.8             13.4             8.7     10.7      7.7
 Overid p-value                           0.57          0.22           0.04            0.68            0.25     0.10     0.35
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993               X            X              X             X           X            X            X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                        X             X                        X            X
 Country fixed effects                                                              X                                     X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots for
industry-country cells. In all panels, the dependent variable is robot installations per thousand workers in each
industry-country cell for all available years between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The explanatory variables include
aging (defined as the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025); the
interaction between aging and industry reliance on middle-aged workers (proxied using 1990 US Census data on the
age distribution of workers in each industry); and the interaction between aging and two measures of opportunities for
automation: the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of opportunities
for the use of robots from the BCG in columns 5-7. Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates
where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For our
IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test All columns
include region dummies, the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the
ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the initial robot density in 1993 for
each industry-country cell as a control. All these covariates are allowed to affect industries differently. Columns 4
and 7 add a full set of country dummies. All regressions weigh industries by their share of employment in a country,
and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The coefficients with
∗∗∗
    are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                A-34
Table A14: Estimates of the impact of aging and past aging on robot installations by country-
industry pairs per year.

                                                                                  Potential for the use of robots
                                                                    Replaceability index                     BCG measure
                                              (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)         (7)
                                                       Dependent variable: Installation of robots in country-industry pairs
                                                           normalizing by average employment in an industry from ILO
                                                                                 Panel A. Placebo test
Past aging between 1950 and 1990             -0.053           0.368       1.643                          1.342    3.648
                                            (0.743)         (1.788)      (1.305)                        (3.115) (2.432)
Past aging × reliance on middle-aged                          0.316       0.472          0.467           0.123    0.055        0.057
                                                            (0.445)      (0.334)        (0.336)         (0.171) (0.121)       (0.121)
Past aging × opportunities for automation                    -0.404       2.912          2.822           1.532    3.857        3.797
                                                            (3.209)      (2.362)        (2.384)         (2.808) (2.308)       (2.328)
Observations                                10,602           10,602      10,602          10,602         10,602   10,602       10,602
Countries in sample                           50                50          50             50               50      50           50
                                                                            Panel B. Past vs. expected aging
Aging between 1990 and 2025                 1.598∗∗∗        3.801∗∗∗    2.527∗∗∗                       6.794∗∗∗ 4.712∗∗∗
                                            (0.421)         (0.989)      (0.796)                        (1.776) (1.448)
Aging × reliance on middle-aged                             0.899∗∗∗    0.617∗∗∗        0.618∗∗∗       0.262∗∗∗ 0.181∗∗       0.182∗∗
                                                            (0.240)      (0.203)        (0.200)         (0.085) (0.084)       (0.083)
Aging × opportunities for automation                        5.889∗∗∗    3.957∗∗∗        3.964∗∗∗       6.078∗∗∗ 4.285∗∗∗      4.303∗∗∗
                                                            (1.681)      (1.400)        (1.387)         (1.617) (1.273)       (1.257)
Past aging between 1950 and 1990             -0.573          -0.892       0.743                          -0.923   1.833
                                            (0.739)         (1.712)      (1.242)                        (2.915) (2.260)
Past aging × reliance on middle-aged                          0.014       0.257          0.256            0.035   0.002        0.002
                                                            (0.400)      (0.303)        (0.307)         (0.155) (0.114)       (0.114)
Past aging × opportunities for automation                    -2.382       1.422          1.410           -0.510   2.171        2.144
                                                            (3.104)      (2.256)        (2.304)         (2.573) (2.115)       (2.149)
Observations                                10,602           10,602      10,602          10,602         10,602   10,602       10,602
Countries in sample                           50                50          50             50               50      50           50
R-squared                                    0.36             0.37         0.45           0.47            0.39     0.47         0.48
Covariates included:
Country covariates in 1993                     X              X              X             X          X             X            X
Initial robot density in 1993                                                X             X                        X            X
Country fixed effects                                                                      X                                     X

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots for industry-
country cells. In all panels, the dependent variable is robot installations per thousand workers in each industry-country
cell for all available years between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The explanatory variables include past aging (defined
as the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1950 and 1990); current aging
(defined as the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2015); the
interaction between aging and industry reliance on middle-aged workers (proxied using 1990 US Census data on the
age distribution of workers in each industry); and the interaction between aging and two measures of opportunities for
automation: the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of opportunities
for the use of robots from the BCG in columns 5-7. All columns include region dummies, the 1993 values of log GDP
per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55
in 1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the initial robot density in 1993 for each industry-country cell as a control. All
these covariates are allowed to affect industries differently. Columns 4 and 7 add a full set of country dummies. All
regressions weigh industries by their share of employment in a country, and the standard errors are robust against
heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗
are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                    A-35
Table A15: Estimates of the impact of aging on the log of one plus robot installations per worker
in each country-industry cell.

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                   log of one plus installation of robots in country-industry pairs
                                                                         Potential for the use of robots
                                                             Replaceability index                            BCG measure
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)
                                                                           Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            0.426∗∗∗     0.909∗∗∗      0.534∗∗∗                       1.589∗∗∗     1.038∗∗∗
                                        (0.111)      (0.219)       (0.174)                        (0.356)      (0.273)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                     0.174∗∗∗      0.113∗∗∗       0.114∗∗∗         0.028         0.013       0.014
                                                     (0.042)       (0.035)         (0.034)        (0.018)      (0.020)     (0.019)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                1.545∗∗∗       0.816∗         0.828∗         1.419∗∗∗     0.968∗∗∗    0.982∗∗∗
                                                     (0.488)       (0.464)         (0.456)        (0.325)      (0.232)     (0.229)
 Observations                           10,602        10,602        10,602         10,602          10,602       10,602      10,602
 Countries in sample                      50            50            50              50             50            50          50
                                                                            Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            0.329∗∗∗     0.761∗∗∗      0.544∗∗∗                       1.372∗∗∗     1.017∗∗∗
                                        (0.111)      (0.235)       (0.191)                        (0.396)      (0.313)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                     0.170∗∗∗      0.111∗∗∗       0.111∗∗∗        0.040∗∗        0.014       0.015
                                                     (0.050)       (0.040)         (0.039)        (0.020)      (0.021)     (0.020)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                1.222∗∗       0.975∗∗         0.957∗∗        1.244∗∗∗     0.956∗∗∗    0.954∗∗∗
                                                     (0.504)       (0.444)         (0.434)        (0.366)      (0.277)     (0.273)
 Observations                           10,602        10,602        10,602         10,602          10,602       10,602      10,602
 Countries in sample                      50            50            50              50             50            50          50
 Instruments F-stat                      19.1            .            6.7             7.9             .           6.4         8.9
 Overid p-value                          0.63          0.08          0.34            0.38           0.11         0.15         0.06
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                X            X             X              X               X            X           X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                        X              X                            X           X
 Country fixed effects                                                               X                                        X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots for
industry-country cells. In all panels, the dependent variable is robot installations per thousand workers in each
industry-country cell for all available years between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The explanatory variables include
aging (defined as the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025); the
interaction between aging and industry reliance on middle-aged workers (proxied using 1990 US Census data on the
age distribution of workers in each industry); and the interaction between aging and two measures of opportunities for
automation: the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of opportunities
for the use of robots from the BCG in columns 5-7. Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates
where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For our
IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. All columns
include region dummies, the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the
ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the initial robot density in 1993 for
each industry-country cell as a control. All these covariates are allowed to affect industries differently. Columns 4
and 7 add a full set of country dummies. The standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation
within countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and
with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                A-36
Table A16: Estimates of the impact of aging on robot installations by country-industry pairs per
year removing outliers.

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                           Installation of robots in country-industry pairs
                                                                         Potential for the use of robots
                                                           Replaceability index                             BCG measure
                                          (1)        (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)
                                                                          Panel A. OLS estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            0.561∗∗∗   1.342∗∗∗       0.757∗∗∗                       3.615∗∗∗     1.948∗∗∗
                                        (0.162)    (0.315)        (0.236)                        (0.501)      (0.371)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                   0.243∗∗∗       0.153∗∗∗       0.151∗∗∗        0.082∗∗       0.032       0.036
                                                   (0.060)        (0.045)         (0.050)        (0.032)      (0.032)     (0.035)
 Aging × opportunities for automation              2.304∗∗∗        1.280∗         1.257∗         3.283∗∗∗     1.827∗∗∗    1.973∗∗∗
                                                   (0.691)        (0.697)         (0.727)        (0.469)      (0.322)     (0.429)
 Observations                            10290      10282          10336           10348          10260        10330       10345
 Countries in sample                       50         50             50              50             50           50          50
                                                                           Panel B. IV estimates
 Aging between 1990 and 2025            0.410∗∗∗   1.294∗∗∗       0.782∗∗∗                       3.487∗∗∗     1.953∗∗∗
                                        (0.151)    (0.304)        (0.222)                        (0.529)      (0.390)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                   0.249∗∗∗       0.150∗∗∗       0.145∗∗∗        0.100∗∗∗      0.039       0.044
                                                   (0.059)        (0.044)         (0.048)        (0.038)      (0.037)     (0.039)
 Aging × opportunities for automation              1.916∗∗∗       1.490∗∗         1.587∗∗        3.094∗∗∗     1.810∗∗∗    1.968∗∗∗
                                                   (0.707)        (0.631)         (0.672)        (0.534)      (0.380)     (0.522)
 Observations                            10287      10282          10336           10351          10260        10331       10345
 Countries in sample                       50         50             50              50             50           50          50
 Instruments F-stat                       28.6       26.0           10.5            12.8           16.9         13.0        13.5
 Overid p-value                           0.14       0.24           0.43            0.28           0.17         0.52        0.19
 Covariates included:
 Country covariates in 1993                X          X              X              X               X            X           X
 Initial robot density in 1993                                       X              X                            X           X
 Country fixed effects                                                              X                                        X

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots for
industry-country cells removing observations with standardized residuals above 1.96 or below -1.96. In all panels, the
dependent variable is robot installations per thousand workers in each industry-country cell for all available years
between 1993 and 2014 (from the IFR). The explanatory variables include aging (defined as the change in the ratio of
workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025); the interaction between aging and industry
reliance on middle-aged workers (proxied using 1990 US Census data on the age distribution of workers in each
industry); and the interaction between aging and two measures of opportunities for automation: the replaceability
index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of opportunities for the use of robots from
the BCG in columns 5-7. Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable
is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For our IV estimates, we report
the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. All columns include region dummies,
the 1993 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above
56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1990. Columns 3 and 6 add the initial robot density in 1993 for each industry-country
cell as a control. All these covariates are allowed to affect industries differently. Columns 4 and 7 add a full set of
country dummies. The standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The
coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant
at the 10% level.




                                                               A-37
Table A17: IV estimates of the impact of aging on value added and the labor share for country-
industry pairs using STAN data.

                                                                              Potential for the use of robots
                                                               Replaceability index                      BCG measure
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)      (7)
                                                    Dependent variable: Change in value added between 1995 and 2007
 Aging between 1995 and 2025            -2.072∗∗∗         0.572        0.982                    0.619      0.873
                                         (0.480)        (0.970)      (0.828)                  (1.043)    (0.913)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                       -0.499∗∗     -0.462∗∗     -0.383∗     -0.457∗∗    -0.417∗        -0.347
                                                        (0.228)      (0.230)     (0.227)      (0.230)    (0.235)       (0.234)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                  3.970∗∗∗     3.877∗∗∗    3.080∗∗∗     1.481∗∗∗    1.297∗∗∗      1.062∗∗∗
                                                        (1.310)      (1.159)     (0.758)      (0.502)    (0.432)       (0.407)
 Observations                             462              462          462         462          462        462          462
 Countries in sample                       27               27           27          27           27         27           27
 Instruments F-stat                      16.66            17.34        12.37       11.11        10.68       9.32        11.53
 Overid p-value                           0.99            0.43          0.48        0.30        0.41        0.40         0.27
                                                    Dependent variable: Change in labor share between 1995 and 2007
 Aging between 1995 and 2025             0.037           -0.245       -0.254                   -0.368     -0.379
                                        (0.131)         (0.290)      (0.287)                  (0.339)    (0.338)
 Aging × reliance on middle-aged                          0.067        0.070       0.043        0.071      0.074         0.049
                                                        (0.067)      (0.070)     (0.075)      (0.067)    (0.070)       (0.077)
 Aging × opportunities for automation                    -0.292       -0.307      -0.056       -0.212     -0.219        -0.116
                                                        (0.573)      (0.589)     (0.408)      (0.242)    (0.254)       (0.206)
Observations                              448              448          448         448          448        448           448
Countries in sample                        26               26           26          26           26         26            26
Instruments F-stat                       16.15            14.08         9.63        9.54        12.97     10.90         13.74
Overid p-value                            0.44            0.20          0.21        0.15        0.18        0.18          0.06
Covariates included:
Country covariates in 1995                 X              X             X             X           X             X         X
Initial value added in 1995                                             X             X                         X         X
Country fixed effects                                                                 X                                   X

Notes: The table presents IV estimates of the relationship between aging and value added and the labor share for
industry-country cells. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the change in value added per worker between 1995
and 2007 for each industry-country cell (from the STAN data). In Panel B, the dependent variable is the change
in the labor share between 1995 and 2007 for each industry-country cell (from the STAN data). The explanatory
variables include aging (defined as the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between
1995 and 2025); the interaction between aging and industry reliance on middle-aged workers (proxied using 1990 US
Census data on the age distribution of workers in each industry); and the interaction between aging and two measures
of opportunities for automation: the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a
measure of opportunities for the use of robots from the BCG in columns 5-7. In all panels, we present IV estimates
where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. For our
IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. All columns
include region dummies, the 1995 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and
the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55. All these covariates are allowed to affect industries differently.
Columns 3 and 6 add the log of value added per worker in 1995 for each industry-country cell as a control. Columns 4
and 7 add a full set of country dummies. All regressions weigh industries by their share of employment in a country,
and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The coefficients with
∗∗∗
    are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                 A-38
              Table A18: Estimates of the impact of aging using EUKLEMS and Penn World tables data on output and the share of labor.

                                                                OLS estimates                                                        IV estimates
                                         EUKLEMS                                                             EUKLEMS
                                                                    Penn World tables data                                              Penn World tables data
                                           data                                                                data
                                                                                              Baseline                                                            Baseline
                                              EUKLEMS sample                 OECD                                 EUKLEMS sample                  OECD
                                                                                              sample                                                              sample
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                                          Panel A. Change in GDP (or value added) between 1995 and 2007
        Aging between 1995 and 2025        -1.407∗∗          -0.311            0.031          0.344∗           -1.668∗∗        -0.718∗            -0.049            0.321
                                            (0.569)         (0.275)          (0.232)          (0.204)           (0.655)        (0.367)           (0.379)           (0.296)
        Observations                           21              21                30              52                21             21                30                52
        First-stage F stat.                                                                                        5.5            5.5               9.4              17.9
        Overid p− value                                                                                           0.13           0.26              0.11              0.00
A-39




                                                                                Panel B. Change in labor share between 1995 and 2007
        Aging between 1995 and 2025        -0.360∗∗         -0.173∗∗          -0.090          -0.110∗            -0.343         -0.013            0.070             -0.061
                                            (0.156)          (0.075)         (0.072)          (0.062)           (0.222)        (0.080)           (0.069)           (0.057)
        Observations                           21               21               30              50                21             21                30                50
        First-stage F stat.                                                                                        5.5            5.5               9.4              17.2
        Overid p− value                                                                                           0.29           0.48              0.63              0.32

       Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between aging and the change in GDP (panel A) and the labor share (panel B) across countries.
       The aging variable is the expected change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics).
       Columns 1-4 present OLS estimates. Columns 5-8 present IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between
       1950 and 1985. For our IV estimates, we report the first-stage F −statistic and the p−value of Hansen’s overidentification test. We present results for several samples:
       columns 1-2 and 5-6 use the EUKLEMS sample; columns 3 and 7 use the OECD sample, and columns 4 and 8 use the sample of all countries with IFR data. In
       columns 1 and 5 we use data from EUKLEMS aggregated to the country level. In the remaining tables, we use data from the Penn World Tables, version 9.0
       (Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2015). All models control for regional dummies, the 1995 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling
       and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers aged 21-55 in 1995. All regressions are unweighted, and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The
       coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.
