NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACTS OF PAID FAMILY LEAVE BENEFITS:
REGRESSION KINK EVIDENCE FROM CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE DATA
Sarah Bana
Kelly Bedard
Maya Rossin-Slater
Working Paper 24438
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24438

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018, Revised June 2019

We thank Clement de Chaisemartin, Yingying Dong, Peter Ganong, Simon Jaeger, Zhuan Pei,
Lesley Turner, and seminar and conference participants at UCSB, UC Berkeley (Haas),
University of Notre Dame, Brookings Institution, the Western Economic Association
International (WEAI), the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Summer Institute, the
“Child Development: The Roles of the Family and Public Policy” conference in Vejle, Denmark,
the All-California Labor Economics Conference, the ESSPRI workshop at UC Irvine, and the
Southern Economic Association meetings for valuable comments. Rossin-Slater is grateful for
support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award No. 1752203. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. All errors are
our own. The California Employment Development Department (EDD) had the right to comment
on the results of the paper, per the data use agreement between the authors and the EDD. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sarah Bana, Kelly Bedard, and Maya Rossin-Slater. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impacts of Paid Family Leave Benefits: Regression Kink Evidence from California Administrative
Data
Sarah Bana, Kelly Bedard, and Maya Rossin-Slater
NBER Working Paper No. 24438
March 2018, Revised June 2019
JEL No. I18,J13,J16,J18
ABSTRACT
We use ten years of California administrative data with a regression kink design to estimate the
causal impacts of benefits in the first state-level paid family leave program for women with
earnings near the maximum benefit threshold. We find no evidence that a higher weekly benefit
amount (WBA) increases leave duration or leads to adverse future labor market outcomes for this
group. In contrast, we document that a rise in the WBA leads to an increased likelihood of
returning to the pre-leave firm (conditional on any employment) and of making a subsequent paid
family leave claim.
Sarah Bana
Department of Economics
2127 North Hall
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9210
sarah_bana@umail.ucsb.edu
Kelly Bedard
Department of Economics
2127 North Hall
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9210
kelly@econ.ucsb.edu

Maya Rossin-Slater
Department of Health Research and Policy
Stanford University School of Medicine
259 Campus Drive
Redwood Building T101C
Stanford, CA 94305-5405
and NBER
mrossin@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

A vast body of research has documented a persistent “motherhood wage penalty” that can
last 10 to 20 years after childbirth. Mothers earn lower wages, work fewer hours, and are
less likely to be employed than fathers or childless women and men (see, e.g.: Waldfogel,
1998; Lundberg and Rose, 2000; Blau and Kahn, 2000; Anderson et al., 2002; Molina and
Montuenga, 2009; Angelov et al., 2016; Chung et al., 2017; Kleven et al., 2018, 2019), and
these differences are particularly pronounced for highly-educated women at the top of the
female earnings distribution (Anderson et al., 2002; Bertrand et al., 2010; Hotchkiss et al.,
2017; Chung et al., 2017). Paid family leave (PFL)—a policy that allows working mothers to
take time off work to recover from childbirth and care for their newborn (or newly adopted)
children while receiving partial wage replacement—may be a tool for reducing this penalty
if it facilitates career continuity and advancement for women. However, opponents of PFL
caution that it could have the opposite effect: by allowing mothers to have paid time away
from work, PFL may lower their future labor market attachment, while employers could face
substantial costs that lead to increased discrimination against women.1 These discussions
are especially fervent in the United States, which is the only developed country without a
national paid maternity or family leave policy.
In this paper, we use administrative data from California—the first state to implement a
PFL program (hereafter, CA-PFL)—and use a regression kink (RK) design to identify the
effects of the benefit amount on leave duration, labor market outcomes, and subsequent leavetaking among high-earning mothers.2 Isolating the effect of the benefit amount is critical
for informing debates about payment during leave. Since the vast majority of American
workers already have access to unpaid leave through their employers and the federal Family
1
For more information on the arguments surrounding paid leave in the U.S., see, e.g.:
https://www.usnews.com/news/best-states/articles/2017-04-07/affordable-child-care-paid-familyleave-key-to-closing-gender-wage-gap
and
https://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/01/27/
the-business-of-paid-family-leave/?_r=0.
2
As we detail in Section 2, most women in California are eligible for a total of up to 16 weeks of paid
leave.

1

and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), the wage replacement rate is arguably the most salient
parameter under debate.3 A long literature on other social insurance programs—including
unemployment insurance (UI) (Baily, 1978; Chetty, 2008; Card et al., 2012; Landais, 2015;
Card et al., 2015a,b, 2016; Schmieder and Von Wachter, 2016; Schmieder and von Wachter,
2017), Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) (Gelber et al., 2016), and the Workers’
Compensation program (Hansen et al., 2017)—finds a positive relationship between the
benefit amount and program participation duration, with elasticities ranging between 0.3
and 2 in the case of UI (Card et al., 2015a).4 As such, a higher PFL benefit may increase
maternity leave duration, which could in turn adversely affect women’s subsequent labor
market trajectories.5
Since the leave benefit amount is not randomly assigned, it is challenging to disentangle
its causal impact from the possible influences of other unobservable differences between
individuals. To circumvent this issue, we make use of a kink in the PFL benefit schedule
in California: during our analysis time frame, participants get 55 percent of their prior
earnings replaced, up to a maximum benefit amount.6 Intuitively, we compare the outcomes
of mothers with pre-leave earnings just below and just above the threshold at which the
maximum benefit applies. These women have similar observable characteristics, but face
dramatically different marginal wage replacement rates of 55 and 0 percent, respectively.
3
Data from the 2016 National Compensation Survey show that 88 percent of civilian workers have access
to unpaid leave through their employers (see: https://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2016/ownership/
civilian/table32a.htm. The FMLA was enacted in 1993 and provides 12 weeks of unpaid job protected
family leave to qualifying workers. To be eligible for the FMLA, workers must have worked at least 1,250
hours in the preceding year for an employer with at least 50 employees (within a 75 mile radius of the
employment location). According to most recent data from 2012, about 60 percent of American private
sector workers are eligible for the FMLA (Klerman et al., 2012).
4
A recent paper on the elasticity of injury leave duration with respect to the benefit amount provided
under Oregon’s Workers’ Compensation program finds an elasticity estimate in the range of 0.2 to 0.4 (Hansen
et al., 2017).
5
If higher benefits increase maternity leave duration, the impacts on women’s future labor market outcomes are theoretically ambiguous (Klerman and Leibowitz, 1994; Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2017). Increased
time away from the job may be detrimental to future labor market success as a result of human capital
depreciation or employer discrimination. Alternatively, if a higher benefit encourages a longer leave for a
mother who would have otherwise quit her job, then there may be a positive effect on her future labor market
outcomes through increased job continuity.
6
More details on the program are in Section 2.

2

The RK method identifies the causal effect of the benefit amount by testing for a change
in the slope of the relationship between an outcome and pre-claim earnings at the same
threshold (Card et al., 2016).
While a key advantage of the RK method is that it can account for the endogeneity
in the benefit amount, the primary limitation is that the RK sample is not representative
of the population of leave-takers. The kink is located around the 92nd percentile of the
California female earnings distribution, and women in the vicinity of the kink point are
older and work in larger firms than the average female program participant. That being said,
high-earning women’s careers may be especially sensitive to employment interruptions—for
example, Stearns (2016) shows that access to job protected paid maternity leave in Great
Britain reduces the likelihood that high-skilled women are promoted or hold management
positions five years after childbirth. In the U.S., Hotchkiss et al. (2017) document that the
motherhood penalty for college graduates is approximately double that of women with only
a high school degree.
Additionally, RK estimates provide information about the implications of benefit changes
around the maximum benefit threshold. These are highly policy relevant because all existing
state PFL programs, as well as the current national PFL proposal (the Family and Medical
Insurance Leave Act, or FAMILY Act), feature similar kinked benefit schedules, but have
different kink point locations.7
Our results show that higher benefits do not increase maternity leave duration among
women with earnings near the maximum benefit threshold. Our RK estimates allow us to
rule out that a 10 percent increase in the weekly benefit amount (WBA) would increase leave
7

The states with PFL policies are: California (since 2004), New Jersey (since 2008), Rhode Island
(since 2014), New York (since 2018), Washington state (will go into effect in 2020), Washington D.C.
(will go into effect in 2020), and Massachusetts (will go into effect in 2021). In all states, benefits
are paid as a percentage of prior earnings, up to a maximum benefit amount. The wage replacement
rates are: 55 percent (California), 66 percent (New Jersey), 60 percent (Rhode Island), 67 percent
(New York). D.C.’s marginal replacement rates vary with prior earnings. The maximum weekly benefit
amounts as of 2018 are: $1,216 (California), $637 (New Jersey), $831 (Rhode Island), and $652.86 (New
York). More information is available here: https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R44835.pdf. For information on the FAMILY Act, see: http://www.nationalpartnership.org/research-library/work-family/
paid-leave/family-act-fact-sheet.pdf.

3

duration by more than 0.3 to 2.1 percent (i.e., we can reject elasticities higher than 0.03 to
0.21), depending on the specification. Our results underscore the notion that PFL provides
a distinct type of social insurance and targets a unique population of parents and caregivers,
making the (much larger) elasticities from the prior social insurance literature less relevant
for PFL (Krueger and Meyer, 2002).
We also find no evidence that PFL benefits have any adverse consequences on subsequent
maternal labor market outcomes for high-earning women in our sample. A higher benefit
amount does not have a significant effect on the likelihood of returning to employment
following the end of the leave. However, conditional on returning to work, we find that
women who receive a higher benefit during leave are more likely to return to their pre-leave
employers rather than find new jobs: a 10 percent increase in the WBA raises the likelihood of
return to the pre-leave firm (conditional on any employment) by 0.3 to 4.2 percentage points
(0.3 to 5 percent), depending on specification. While our data do not allow us to observe
the exact mechanisms underlying this result, it is possible that higher benefits during leave
improve worker morale or promote firm loyalty (even if she recognizes that her employer is
not paying her benefits directly), similar in spirit to efficiency wage models (Akerlof, 1984;
Stiglitz, 1986; Katz, 1986; Krueger and Summers, 1988).8
Lastly, we provide novel evidence that the benefit amount predicts repeat program use.
We find that an additional 10 percent in the benefit received during a mother’s first period
of leave is associated with a 0.8 to 1.6 percentage point higher likelihood of having another
PFL claim within the following three years (a 3 to 7 percent increase), depending on the
specification. This effect may in part operate through the positive impact on the likelihood
of return to the pre-leave employer after the first period of leave. As shown in Bana et al.
(2018b), firm-specific factors (potentially including workplace culture and information provision) explain a substantial amount of the variation in CA-PFL take-up. Our results suggest
8
By contrast, our results are inconsistent with prior evidence of an income effect that reduces employment:
Wingender and LaLumia (2017) find that higher after-tax income during a child’s first year of life reduces
labor supply among new mothers.

4

that a higher benefit amount causes mothers to return to the firms where they took their first
period of leave instead of switching to different firms, which could have lower leave-taking
rates. It is also possible that women who get more wage replacement during leave may
simply have a better experience and are therefore more likely to participate in the program
again than those with lower benefits. Indeed, a similar relationship between current benefits
and future claims has been found in the context of the Workers’ Compensation program in
Oregon (Hansen et al., 2017).9
Our study builds on several recent papers that use survey data to analyze the labor
market effects of CA-PFL with difference-in-difference (DD) designs (Rossin-Slater et al.,
2013; Bartel et al., 2018; Das and Polachek, 2015; Baum and Ruhm, 2016; Stanczyk, 2016;
Byker, 2016). Our analysis of administrative data can overcome several limitations of these
studies, which include small sample sizes, measurement error, non-response bias, lack of panel
data, and missing information on key variables such as PFL take-up and leave duration.10
We also contribute to a body of research set outside the U.S., in which studies have analyzed the impacts of extensions in existing PFL policies (or, less frequently, introductions
of new programs) on maternal leave-taking and labor market outcomes, delivering mixed results (see Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2017 and Rossin-Slater, 2018 for recent overviews).11 The
9

It is also possible that the increase in repeat leave-taking arises due to a change in fertility behavior,
although past research offers mixed evidence on the relationship between PFL and fertility. For example,
Dahl et al. (2016) find no effects of Norwegian maternity leave extensions on mothers’ completed fertility.
By contrast, Lalive and Zweimüller (2009) find that an extension in parental leave in Austria increased
subsequent fertility rates among mothers. In the case of CA-PFL, Lichtman-Sadot (2014) finds some evidence
that disadvantaged women re-timed their pregnancies to become eligible for CA-PFL in the second half of
2004. However, we are not aware of any studies documenting effects of CA-PFL on subsequent fertility.
10
In an ongoing study, Campbell et al. (2017) use administrative data from Rhode Island to study the
effects of paid maternity leave provided through Rhode Island’s Temporary Disability Insurance system on
maternal and child outcomes, exploiting the earnings threshold for TDI eligibility. Our focus on high-earning
women in California is complementary to their evidence on women at the low end of the earnings distribution.
11
For example, some studies find either positive or zero effects on maternal employment in the years after
childbirth (Baker and Milligan, 2008; Kluve et al., 2013; Bergemann and Riphahn, 2015; Carneiro et al., 2015;
Dahl et al., 2016; Stearns, 2016), while others document negative impacts, especially in the long-term (Lalive
and Zweimüller, 2009; Lequien, 2012; Schönberg and Ludsteck, 2014; Bičáková and Kalíšková, 2016; Canaan,
2017). Cross-country comparisons suggest that provisions of leave up to one year in length typically increase
the likelihood of employment shortly after childbirth, whereas longer leave entitlements can negatively affect
women’s long-term labor market outcomes (Ruhm, 1998; Blau and Kahn, 2013; Thévenon and Solaz, 2013;
Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2017).

5

substantial cross-country heterogeneity in major policy components—the benefit amount,
statutory leave duration, and job protection—generates challenges for comparing policies
and likely contributes to the lack of consistency in the literature.12
Additionally, we bring the novel RK research design to isolate the effect of the PFL benefit
amount.13 To the best of our knowledge, the only existing study that isolates the effect of the
maternity leave wage replacement rate while holding constant other policy parameters is set
in Japan and finds no impact on maternal job continuity or leave duration (Asai, 2015).14
This evidence may not be readily applicable to the U.S. setting, however, since Japanese
mothers are guaranteed one year of job protected paid maternity leave. By contrast, U.S.
maternity leave durations are much shorter and often not job protected, and even among the
highest-wage workers, less than a quarter have access to any employer-provided paid leave.15
The rest of the paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 provides more details on the CA-PFL
program and the benefit schedule. Section 3 describes our data, while Section 4 explains our
empirical methods. Section 5 presents our results and sensitivity analyses, while Section 6
offers some conclusions.

2

Background on CA-PFL and the Benefit Schedule

Californian mothers have been eligible for several weeks of paid maternity leave to prepare
for and recover from childbirth through California’s State Disability Insurance (CA-SDI)
12

See Addati et al. (2014) and Olivetti and Petrongolo (2017) for more information on maternity and
family leave policy details in countries around the world.
13
Less relevant to the topic of this paper, the RK research design has also been used in studies of student
financial aid and higher education (Nielsen et al., 2010; Turner, 2014; Bulman and Hoxby, 2015), tax behavior
(Engström et al., 2015; Seim, Forthcoming), payday lending (Dobbie and Skiba, 2013), and local government
expenditures (Garmann, 2014; Lundqvist et al., 2014).
14
We are also aware of two other studies that isolate the impacts of other PFL policy parameters in
countries outside the U.S.: Lalive et al. (2014) separately estimate the labor market impacts of the duration
of paid leave and job protection for Austrian mothers, while Stearns (2016) distinguishes between access to
any paid leave and job protection in Great Britain.
15
Data from the 2016 National Compensation Survey show that 14 percent of all civilian workers have
access to PFL through their employers. Among those in occupations with wages in the highest decile, 23
percent have access to employer-provided PFL. With regard to leave duration, Rossin-Slater et al. (2013)
estimate that California mothers took an average of about three weeks of maternity leave prior to the
implementation of CA-PFL.

6

system since the passage of the 1978 Pregnancy Discrimination Act. In 2004, most working
mothers also became eligible for 6 weeks of leave through CA-PFL, which they can take
anytime during the child’s first year of life.16 In total, women with uncomplicated vaginal
deliveries can get up to 16 weeks of paid maternity/family leave through SDI and PFL.17
Paid leaves under SDI and PFL are not directly job protected, although job protection is
available if the job absence simultaneously qualifies under the federal Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) or California’s Family Rights Act (CFRA).18
The CA-PFL/SDI benefit schedule is a piece-wise linear function of base period earnings,
which is defined as the maximum quarterly earnings in quarters 2 through 5 before the claim.
Figures 1a and 1b plot the WBA as a function of quarterly based period earnings in nominal
terms for the years 2005 and 2014, the first and last years in our data, respectively. These
graphs clearly show that there is a kink in the relationship between the WBA and base
period quarterly earnings—the slope of the benefit schedule changes from

0.55
13

= 0.04 to 0 at

the maximum earnings threshold. Note that the replacement rate is divided by 13 to convert
to a weekly amount since there are 13 weeks in a quarter. The location of this kink varies
over time (i.e., both the maximum benefit amount and the earnings threshold change).19
These graphs highlight that individuals with earnings near the kink point—who form the
basis for our RK estimation—are relatively high earners. We describe the characteristics of
16
To be eligible for CA-SDI and CA-PFL, an individual must have earned at least $300 in wages in a
base period between 5 and 18 months before the PFL claim begins. Only wages subject to the SDI tax are
considered in the $300 minimum. California’s PFL and SDI programs are financed entirely through payroll
taxes levied on employees.
17
Women who have a vaginal delivery can get up to four weeks of leave before the expected delivery date
and up to six weeks of leave after the actual delivery date through CA-SDI. A woman’s doctor may certify
for her to obtain a longer period of SDI leave if the delivery is by Cesarean section, or if there are medical
complications that prohibit her from performing her regular job duties.
18
The CFRA is nearly identical to the FMLA in its provisions and eligibility criteria. There are minor differences between the two laws: for example, women who have difficult pregnancies can use FMLA
prior to giving birth, but CFRA leave can only be used after childbirth. See: https://www.shrm.org/
resourcesandtools/tools-and-samples/hr-qa/pages/californiadifferencecfrafmla.aspx.
19
The nominal quarterly earnings thresholds for 2005 and 2014 were $19,830 and $25,385, respectively.
In $2014 dollars, the 2005 threshold is $23,461.09. Figure 1c plots the maximum WBA in nominal terms
in each quarter during our sample time frame. The maximum WBA has nominally increased from $840 in
2005 to $1,075 in 2014. In $2014 dollars, this translates to an increase from $1,018.22 to $1,075 during this
time period.

7

our analysis sample in more detail in Section 3 below.
Finally, although the state pays PFL and SDI benefits according to the schedule just
described, individual employers are able to supplement these benefits, making it possible for
an employee to receive up to 100 percent of her base period earnings. To the extent that this
phenomenon occurs, it diminishes the strength of the first stage relationship in our analysis,
since some employees effectively do not face a kinked benefit schedule. While we could find
no anecdotal evidence suggesting that this practice is common, we also have no data on
such supplemental payments, and are therefore unable to precisely assess the magnitude of
any attenuation. We can, however, focus on sub-samples of the data where this issue is
least likely to be important: employees who made claims soon after the implementation of
CA-PFL (2005-2010), employees who are not in the information/technology industry, and
employees at firms with fewer than 1,000 workers. In all three cases, the pattern of findings
remains the same, although the estimates are less precise (see Section 5 for more details).

3

Data and Sample

We use two administrative data sets available to us through an agreement with the California
Employment Development Department (EDD).
First, we have data on the universe of PFL claims from 2005 to 2014. For each claim,
we have information on the reason for the claim (bonding with a new child or caring for an
ill family member), claim effective date, claim filed date, the total benefit amount received,
the authorized weekly benefit amount, the employee’s date of birth, the employee’s gender,
and a unique employee identifier.20 For women, we also have an indicator for whether there
was an associated transitional SDI claim (i.e., an SDI claim for the purposes of preparation
for and recovery from childbirth), along with the same information for SDI claims as we do
for PFL claims.
20

The employee identifiers in our data are scrambled. Thus, we cannot actually identify any individual in
our data set, but we can link information across data sets for each employee using the unique identifiers.

8

Second, we have quarterly earnings data over 2000-2014 for the universe of employees
working for an employer that reports to the EDD tax branch.21 For each employee, we have
her unique identifier, her earnings in each quarter and in each job, a unique employer identifier associated with those earnings, and a North American Industry Classification System
(NAICS) industry code associated with that employer.

Sample construction and key variables. For our main analysis sample, we begin with
the universe of female PFL claims for the purpose of bonding with a new child (hereafter,
“bonding claims” or “bonding leave”) over 2005-2014.22 We then merge the claims data
to the quarterly earnings data using employee identifiers, and limit our sample to the first
bonding claim observed for each woman.23 Next, since the location of the kink changes over
our sample time frame (recall Figure 1), we drop women who make their first bonding claim
in quarters during which these changes happen.24
For each claim, we assign the relevant base period earnings by calculating the maximum
quarterly earnings (summing over all earnings each quarter for workers holding multiple
jobs) in quarters 2 through 5 before the claim effective date. We also obtain information on
the size and industry code associated with the most recent employer prior to the claim. For
workers who have multiple jobs, we use the employer associated with the highest earnings.
Employer size is calculated by adding up all of the employees working at that firm in that
quarter.
Next, in an effort to create a sample that is reasonably homogeneous and most likely
21

Employers that employ one or more employees and pay wages in excess of $100 in a calendar quarter
are required to report to the EDD according to California law. See http://www.edd.ca.gov/pdf_pub_ctr/
de44.pdf.
22
In previous versions of this paper, we had also reported results for male bonding claimants. However,
since there are substantially fewer men than women in our claims data, the RK analysis yields imprecise
results for fathers, and we have opted to focus our current analysis on mothers.
23
Note that the first bonding claim may not necessarily be for the firstborn child. Some mothers may
have chosen not to claim PFL for their firstborn child (but do claim for a later-born). Additionally, many
mothers had lower parity children before CA-PFL existed. Unfortunately, we cannot link our EDD data to
information on births, and we therefore cannot focus on claims for firstborns only.
24
We do so because we observe that in these quarters some individuals get assigned their WBA according
to the old schedule, while others according to the new schedule. Women with first bonding claims in the
following quarters are dropped: 2005q1, 2007q4, 2009q1, 2010q1, 2012q1, 2013q1, and 2014q1.

9

to be affected by the kink variation, we make the following sample restrictions: (1) We
only include women who are aged 20-44 at the time of the first bonding claim; (2) We only
keep female workers with base period quarterly earnings within a $10, 000 bandwidth of the
kink point; (3) We drop women employed in industries in which employees are least likely
to be subject to the SDI tax—private household workers, elementary and secondary school
teachers, and public administration.
We then create a variable measuring the duration of leave in weeks by dividing the total
benefit amount received by the authorized WBA. Since PFL does not need to be taken
continuously, this duration measure accounts for possible gaps in between periods of leave.
For women who make both bonding and transitional SDI claims, we add the two durations.25
We analyze the natural log of leave duration in all of our specifications.
In addition to studying leave duration, we examine several post-leave labor market outcomes. We create indicators for being employed in the two, three, and four quarters after the
quarter of the initiation of the claim (as measured by having any earnings in those quarters).
We also create indicators for working at the pre-leave employer in quarters two, three, and
four post-claim, which take the value 1 for mothers whose highest earnings in those quarters come from their pre-claim firms and 0 otherwise. We create these indicators separately
conditioning and not conditioning on any employment in the respective quarters. We also
calculate the change in the log of total earnings (in $2014) in quarters 2 through 5 post-claim
relative to quarters 2 through 5 pre-claim. Lastly, we create an indicator for any subsequent
PFL bonding claim in the 12 quarters after the first bonding claim.

Summary statistics. Table 1 presents the means of key variables for women in the $10,000
bandwidth sample, as well as for women in narrower ($2,500, $5,000, and $7,500) bandwidths
of base period quarterly earnings surrounding the kink point. As we zoom in closer to the
threshold, women in our sample become slightly older, work in somewhat larger firms, and
have higher base period earnings.
25

We cap the maximum combined duration on SDI and PFL at 24 weeks (the 99th percentile).

10

For descriptive ease, the following discussion focuses on the $5,000 bandwidth sample.
About 32 percent of the women are employed in the health industry before the claim, which
is the top female industry in our data. The average weekly benefit received is $933 (in $2014),
while average leave duration is almost 12 weeks, which is consistent with most women filing
both transitional SDI and PFL bonding claims. When we consider subsequent labor market
outcomes, we see that on average, 87, 86, and 85 percent of women are employed in quarters
two, three, and four post-claim, respectively. Conditional on any employment, 88, 83, and
80 percent of women are employed by their pre-leave firms in these quarters, respectively.
We also see that women have 10 percent lower earnings post-claim than they did pre-claim.
Lastly, 23 percent of women make a subsequent bonding claim in the next three years.
Lastly, to provide more information on characteristics of women included in our analysis
sample that are not available in the EDD data, we use data from the 2005-2014 American
Communities Survey (ACS) on comparable Californian mothers of children under age 1.26
We use each woman’s prior year earnings to calculate her average quarterly earnings (by
dividing by four), and then use them to find her place in the prior year’s benefit schedule.27
Appendix Table A1 reports means of characteristics of women in the same bandwidths as in
Table 1. In the $5,000 bandwidth sample, 48 percent of mothers are non-Hispanic white, 4
percent are non-Hispanic black, while 12 percent are Hispanic. The vast majority of these
women—91 percent—are married, and average spousal annual earnings (including zeros for
women who are not married) are $90,712 (in $2014).
26

For comparability with the EDD data, we make similar restrictions to the ACS sample: (1) We only
include women who are aged 20-44; (2) We drop women employed in industries in which employees are least
likely to be subject to the SDI tax—private household workers, elementary and secondary school teachers,
and public administration; (3) We drop women with zero reported earnings in the previous year.
27
This procedure generates measurement error in assigning women to the benefit schedule, which, as we
explain above, uses women’s maximum (not average) quarterly earnings in quarters 2 through 5 before the
claim. Unfortunately, we do not have information on quarterly earnings in the ACS.

11

4

Empirical Design

We are interested in identifying the causal impacts of PFL/SDI benefits on mothers’ leave
duration, labor market outcomes, and subsequent claiming. To make our research question
more precise, consider the following stylized model:

Yiq = γ0 + γ1 ln(biq ) + uiq

(1)

for each woman i who makes a benefit claim in year by quarter (year×quarter) q.28 Yiq is an
outcome of interest, such as log leave duration or an indicator for returning to the pre-leave
firm. ln(biq ) is the natural log of the WBA (in $2014), while uiq is a random vector of
unobservable individual characteristics. We are interested in estimating γ1 , which measures
the effect of a 100 percent increase in the WBA on the outcome of interest. The challenge
with estimating equation (1) using an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression is that there
are unobserved variables that are correlated with the benefit amount that may also affect
our outcomes of interest, making it difficult to separate out the causal effect of the benefit
from the influences of these other factors.
To overcome this challenge, we leverage quasi-experimental variation stemming from a
kink in the CA-PFL/SDI benefit schedule. The benefit function can be described as follows:
For each individual i who files a claim in quarter q, biq (Ei , bmax
, Eq0 ) is a fixed proportion,
q
τ =

0.55
13

= 0.04, of an individual’s base period earnings, Ei , up to the maximum benefit in

quarter q, bmax
, where Eq0 denotes the earnings threshold that corresponds to the amount of
q
base period earnings above which all employees receive the maximum benefit amount:

biq (Ei , bmax
, Eq0 ) =
q




 τ · Ei


 bmax
q

28

if Ei ≥ Eq0

Throughout the paper, we use the terms “year×quarter” and “quarter” interchangeably. We are referring
to each distinct quarter over our analysis time frame, i.e., 2005q1 through 2014q4.

12

Put differently, there is a negative change in the slope of biq (·) at the earnings threshold,
Eq0 , from 0.04 to 0. The RK design, described in detail by Card et al. (2012), Card et al.
(2015b) and Card et al. (2016), makes use of this change in the slope of the benefit function
to estimate the causal effect of the benefit amount on the outcome of interest. Intuitively,
the RK method tests for a change in the slope of the relationship between the outcome and
base period earnings at the earnings threshold. Assuming that—in the absence of the kink
in the benefit function—there would be a smooth (i.e., non-kinked) relationship between
the outcome and base period earnings, evidence of a change in the slope would imply a
causal effect of the benefit amount on the outcome. The RK design can be thought of as
an extension of the widely used Regression Discontinuity (RD) method, and Card et al.
(2016) provide a guide for practitioners on how local polynomial methods for estimation
and inference (Porter, 2003; Imbens and Lemieux, 2008; Imbens and Kalyanaraman, 2012;
Calonico et al., 2014, 2016) can be applied to the RK setting.
More formally, the RK estimator identifies:




∂Y |E=Eq0 +

lim↑0 
∂E

γRK =





lim↑0 

∂ln(b)|E=Eq0 +
∂E



−



∂Y |E=Eq0 +

lim↓0 
∂E



 − lim↓0 



(2)

∂ln(b)|E=Eq0 +
∂E



In words, the RK estimator is a ratio of two terms. The numerator is the change in the
slope of the outcome as a function of base period earnings at the earnings threshold. The
denominator is the change in the slope of the benefit function at the earnings threshold.
In theory, if benefit assignments followed the formula exactly and our data contained no
measurement errors, then the denominator in the ratio in equation (2) would be a known
constant. In practice, as in many other policy settings, there may be small deviations from
the benefit formula due to non-compliance or measurement error. Additionally, in our setting,
only base period earnings subject to the SDI tax are used to calculate SDI and PFL benefits,
but we cannot distinguish between earnings that are and are not subject to this tax in our

13

data. As such, we must estimate the slope change in the denominator of equation (2) in a
“fuzzy” RK design.29
For estimation, we follow the methods outlined in Card et al. (2015b) and Card et al.
(2016). In particular, the slope changes in the numerator and denominator in equation (2)
are estimated with local polynomial regressions to the left and right of the kink point. Key
to this estimation problem are choices about the kernel, the bandwidth, and the order of the
polynomial. We follow the literature by using a uniform kernel, which allows us to apply
a simple two-stage least squares (2SLS) method (i.e., the denominator is estimated with a
first stage regression).30
There is an active econometrics literature on optimal bandwidth choice in RD and RK
settings. For all of our outcomes, we first present estimates using all possible bandwidths in
$500 increments from $2,500 to $10,000 of quarterly earnings. Additionally, we implement
three different algorithms proposed in the literature: a version of the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) bandwidth for the fuzzy RK design (hereafter, “fuzzy IK”),31 as well as
a bandwidth selection procedure developed by Calonico et al. (2014) (hereafter, “CCT”)
with and without a bias-correction (“regularization”) term.32 Moreover, following other RK
studies, we try local linear and quadratic polynomials.
We estimate the following first stage regression:

ln(biqw ) = β0 +

p
X

[ψp (Ei − Eq0 )p + θp (Ei − Eq0 )p · Di ] + ωq + αw + ρ0 Xi + eiqw

if |Ei − Eq0 | ≤ h

p=1

(3)
for each woman i with a first bonding claim in year×quarter q that was initiated in week
29

The “fuzzy” RK design is formally discussed in detail in Card et al. (2015b).
Card et al. (2016) note that while a triangular kernel is boundary optimal, the efficiency losses from
using a uniform kernel are small both in actual applications and in Monte Carlo simulations. Results from
using triangular kernels are similar and available upon request.
31
Specifically, Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) proposed an algorithm for computing the mean squared
error (MSE) optimal RD bandwidth, while Card et al. (2015b) proposed its analog for the fuzzy RK setting,
using asymptotic theory from Calonico et al. (2014).
32
Both IK and CCT procedures involve a regularization term, which reflects the variance in the bias
estimation and guards against the selection of large bandwidths.
30

14

of quarter w and with base period earnings Ei in a narrow bandwidth h surrounding the
threshold Eq0 . The variable Di is an indicator that is set equal to 1 when earnings are above
Eq0 and 0 otherwise: Di = 1[Ei −E0q >0] . As noted above, we control for normalized base period
earnings relative to the threshold (Ei − Eq0 ) using local linear or quadratic polynomials (i.e.,
p is either equal to 1 or 2). To account for any effects of the business cycle and the Great
Recession, we control for year×quarter fixed effects, ωq , in all of our models. We also control
for fixed effects for every week of each quarter (1 through 13), αw , to account for the fact that
subsequent labor market participation in post-leave quarters may differ depending on when
during a particular quarter a leave claim is initiated (recall that we have exact claim effective
dates, but observe employment and earnings at a quarterly level). The estimated change in
the slope in the denominator of the ratio in equation (2) is given by θ1 . We show results with
and without a vector of individual controls, Xi , which includes indicators for employee age
categories (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44), pre-claim employer industry (NAICS industry
groups), and firm size (1-49, 50-99, 100-499, 500+). eiqw is the unobserved error term, and
we use heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, following Card et al. (2015a).
The second stage regression is:

d )+
Yiqw = π0 + π1 ln(b
iq

p
X

λp (Ei − Eq0 )p + δq + ηw + ζ 0 Xi + εiqw

if |Ei − Eq0 | ≤ h

(4)

p=1

for each woman i with a first bonding claim in year×quarter q in week of quarter w. Here,
d ) is instrumented with the interaction between D and the
Yiqw is an outcome, and ln(b
iq
i

polynomial in normalized base period earnings. The remainder of the variables are as defined
before. The coefficient of interest, π1 , measures the effect of a 100 percent increase in the
WBA on the outcome, and provides an estimate of γRK defined above.
Identifying assumptions. The identifying assumptions for inference using the RK design
are: (1) in the vicinity of the earnings threshold, there is no change in the slope of the
15

underlying direct relationship between base period earnings and the outcome of interest,
and (2) the conditional density of base period earnings is continuously differentiable at the
earnings threshold. These assumptions imply that individuals cannot perfectly sort at the
earnings threshold (i.e., they cannot manipulate their earnings to end up on one or the other
side of the threshold).
Importantly, since we only use data on women who make a bonding claim, differential
selection into program take-up across the threshold would violate our identifying assumptions.33 Lack of data on individuals who are eligible for a social insurance program but do
not take it up is a common feature of RK studies (e.g., Landais, 2015, Card et al., 2015a,
and Card et al., 2015b only use data on UI claimants, while Gelber et al., 2016 and Hansen
et al., 2017 use data on SSDI and Workers’ Compensation program claimants, respectively).
Following the literature, we conduct standard tests of the identifying assumptions to address
concerns about differential selection into take-up.
First, we show the frequency distribution of normalized base period earnings around
the earnings threshold in Figure 2a. This graph uses $100 bins and a $5,000 bandwidth.34
The histogram looks reasonably smooth, and we also perform formal tests to support this
assertion. Specifically, we conduct a McCrary test (McCrary, 2008) for a discontinuity in the
assignment variable at the kink, reporting the change in height at the kink and the standard
error. We also test for a discontinuity in the first derivative of the p.d.f. of the assignment
variable, following Card et al. (2012), Landais (2015), and Card et al. (2015b): we regress
the number of observations in each bin on a 3rd order polynomial in normalized base period
earnings, interacted with D, the indicator for being above the threshold. The coefficient on
the interaction between D and the linear term, which tests for a change in the slope of the
33

While our quarterly earnings data include many individuals who are not PFL claimants, these data
contain no demographic information, preventing us from identifying sub-groups who are plausibly eligible
for PFL (i.e., mothers of infants or even women of childbearing age). Our calculations based on aggregate
births data and employment estimates from the American Communities Survey (ACS) suggest that between
40 and 47 percent of all employed new mothers used CA-PFL bonding leave during 2005-2014 (Bana et al.,
2018a). See also Pihl and Basso (2016) for similar estimates on program take-up.
34
The results presented in Figure 2a are similar under alternative bandwidths.

16

p.d.f., is reported in each panel, along with the standard error.
We do not detect any statistically significant discontinuities in either the frequency distribution or the slope change at the threshold.35 Additionally, we have conducted separate
McCrary tests for each distinct kink over our analysis time frame, and found that out of
16 possible coefficients, only two are statistically significant (for the last two kinks in the
data). As we show below, our results are similar if we limit our analysis to claimants in 20052010, where we do not observe any significant discontinuities or slope changes at kink points.
Thus, we do not think that differential sorting over time presents concerns for interpreting
our main estimates.
Second, we check for any kinks in pre-determined covariates around the threshold. In
Appendix Figure A1, we use $100 bins of normalized base period earnings and plot the
mean employee age and firm size as well as the number of women in the health industry (the
top industry in our data) in each bin. Results from regressions testing for a change in the
slope of the relationship between the covariate and the running variable yield insignificant
coefficients for employee age and firm size. The coefficient for the number of women in the
health industry is statistically significant, but very small in magnitude.36
These figures provide support for the validity of the RK research design: We do not observe any evidence of sorting or underlying non-linearities around the kink point, which also
argues against any differential selection into CA-PFL take-up across the earnings threshold.

5

Results

Main results. Figure 2b plots the empirical relationship between the natural log of the
authorized WBA and normalized quarterly base period earnings. The empirical distribution
35

We follow Card et al. (2015b) to choose the order of the polynomial. We fit a series of polynomial models
of different orders that allow for a discontinuity at the threshold and also allow the first and higher-order
derivatives to vary at the threshold, and then select the model with the smallest Akaike Information Criterion
(AIC) value (3rd order in our case).
36
Specifically, the kink coefficients and standard errors are as follows: mean age −0.00002 (SE= 0.00002);
mean firm size 0.04667 (SE= 0.0581); number in health industry −0.0073 (SE= 0.0029).

17

of benefits is very similar to the benefit schedules depicted in Figure 1, with clear evidence
of a kink at the threshold at which the maximum benefit begins. The first stage F −statistic
is 2634.5.
Figure 3 shows graphs using our main outcome variables on the y−axes; we use $100 bins
in the assignment variable and plot the mean outcome values in each bin. In Figure 4, we also
graphically present the 2SLS estimates of π1 and the 95% confidence intervals from equation
(4), using specifications that implement different optimal bandwidth selection algorithms and
controlling for first or second order polynomials in the running variable. We show results from
models without and with individual controls (all models control for year×quarter and week
of quarter fixed effects). The specifications are: (1) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local linear
polynomials, (2) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local quadratic polynomials, (3) CCT bandwidth
with regularization and local linear polynomials, (4) CCT bandwidth with regularization
and local quadratic polynomials, (5) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local
linear polynomials, and (6) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local quadratic
polynomials. Appendix Tables A2 through A6 present the corresponding point estimates
and standard errors in table format, along with the first stage coefficients and standard
errors (multiplied by 105 to reduce the number of leading zeros reported), the bandwidths,
and the dependent variable means.37 While the estimates just discussed report results from
specifications that use the natural log of the benefit amount (as written in equation (4)),
we show estimates from models that use the benefit amount in levels in Appendix Figure
A2.38 Lastly, Figure 5 plots the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from local linear
specifications that use all possible bandwidths in $500 increments of normalized quarterly
base period earnings from $2,500 to $10,000.
Across the multiple RK specifications we consider, we find no evidence that a higher
WBA increases maternity leave duration among new mothers. The upper bounds on the
37

We report the main and pilot bandwidth, as in Card et al. (2015b). The pilot bandwidth is used in the
bias estimation part of the bandwidth selection procedure. See Card et al. (2015b) for more details.
38
Note that the sample sizes differ across the outcomes we consider because we use different sets of years
for estimation; see Section 3.

18

95% confidence intervals of the estimates in Appendix Table A2 allow us to rule out that a
10 percent increase in the WBA would increase leave duration by more than than 0.3 to 2.1
percent (or, elasticities from 0.03 to 0.21). Importantly, this finding is not explained by a
highly skewed distribution of leave duration in which most women are “maxing out” their
leave. In Figure 6, we plot the distribution of leave duration for women near the kink point
($5,000 bandwidth sample). We show the distribution of SDI leave, PFL leave, and combined
SDI+PFL leave. About 16 percent of women take zero weeks of SDI leave (sub-figure a),
which likely explains the mass at 6 weeks in the distribution of combined leave (sub-figure
c). Conditional on taking PFL, about 80 percent of women use the entire 6 weeks (sub-figure
b). But most women use both SDI and PFL to take less than the maximum amount of leave
allowed on the two programs (16 weeks for women with uncomplicated vaginal deliveries).39
It also does not appear that leave benefits have any adverse consequences for subsequent
maternal labor market outcomes. The estimates for the likelihood of employment in quarter
2 after the claim and on the change in log earnings are insignificant in nearly all of the
specifications (Appendix Tables A3 and A5). When we consider employment in the preleave firm conditional on any employment in quarter 2 post-claim, however, we find robust
and consistently positive treatment coefficients, which are significant at the 1% level in 8
out of the 12 models (Appendix Table A4). The range of estimates suggests that a 10
percent increase in the WBA raises the likelihood of return to the pre-leave firm by 0.3 to
4.2 percentage points (0.3 to 5 percent at the sample mean).40
On the whole, the evidence on post-leave labor market outcomes is inconsistent with
an income effect channel (which would reduce maternal labor supply; see Wingender and
LaLumia, 2017). Instead, these results suggest that higher pay during leave might improve
employee morale and possibly promotes firm loyalty, such that a mother is more likely to
return to her pre-leave firm rather than search for a new employer.
39

There is no statistically significant kink in the relationship between the share of women taking SDI and
base period earnings (results available upon request).
40
We have also examined unconditional employment in the pre-leave firm, finding no significant impacts
(results available upon request).

19

Further, when we examine subsequent bonding claims, we find a robust positive effect.
Our estimates in Appendix Table A6 indicate that a 10 percent increase in the WBA raises
the likelihood of a future bonding claim by 0.8 to 1.6 percentage points (3 to 7 percent
at the sample mean). This effect, combined with evidence on the increased likelihood of
return to the pre-leave firm, echoes conclusions in Bana et al. (2018b), who document that
firm-specific factors drive a large share of the variation in PFL use. Our results suggest that
a higher benefit amount leads mothers to return to the employers at which they make their
first bonding claims instead of switching to other firms which may have lower leave-taking
rates.
It is also possible that the increase in repeat claiming could operate through an effect
on subsequent fertility, which we do not observe in our data. However, past research from
other countries offers mixed evidence on the relationship between PFL and maternal fertility
(Dahl et al., 2016; Lalive and Zweimüller, 2009), so we do not believe this to be the primary
channel. A third possibility is that even in the absence of changes to employment or fertility,
mothers with a higher benefit have a better experience during leave and are more likely to
use the program again than those with lower payments.

Timing of effects. In Appendix Figure A3, we examine how the impact of the WBA
evolves over the quarters following the claim. The graphs show the coefficients and 95%
confidence intervals from separate regression models that use the fuzzy IK bandwidth with
a local linear polynomial specifications. In sub-figures (a) and (b) we consider as outcomes
indicators for employment and employment in the pre-leave firm (conditional on any employment) in quarters 2 through 5 after the claim, respectively. In sub-figure (c), we use an
indicator for any subsequent bonding claim by the quarter listed on the x-axis (4 through
20).
We find no significant effects on the likelihood of any employment in quarter 2, 4, or 5
after the claim. The effect on employment in quarter 3 post-claim is statistically significant,

20

but we note that this is largely due to the wide bandwidth chosen by the fuzzy IK algorithm
(the effect is not significant in any of the other specifications). When we consider the effect
on employment in the pre-leave firm conditional on any employment, we find that it is large
and statistically significant in both quarters 2 and 3 post-claim, becoming insignificant in
the subsequent quarters. The impact on subsequent bonding materializes in quarter 8 after
the claim, which is consistent with mothers returning to their pre-leave employers in quarter
2, working for the next four quarters to set the base period earnings for their next claim,
and then making a subsequent claim 3 quarters later, which is the approximate duration of
a pregnancy.

Heterogeneity and subsample analysis. We have analyzed heterogeneity in the effects
of benefits across employee and employer characteristics (age, firm size, and industry groups),
finding no consistent patterns. The lack of significant heterogeneity across women in firms
that have 50 or more employees and their counterparts in smaller firms is notable in light
of the fact that workers in the former group are more likely to be eligible for job protection through the FMLA or the CFRA. Our results suggest that eligibility for governmentmandated job protection does not contribute to differences in the impacts of PFL benefits,
at least in our high-earning RK sample.
Additionally, as discussed in Section 2, one might be concerned that some employers are
undoing the CA-PFL benefit cap—and thereby weakening our RK design—by supplementing
PFL benefits so that employees on leave receive 100 percent of their salary (or at least more
than 55 percent of their salary). Unfortunately, our data do not report such payments, nor
could we locate any external evidence that such practices are common. Instead, to assess
whether this issue may be impacting our main results, we examine subsamples where it is
least likely to be important. First, employees who made claims soon after the implementation
of CA-PFL (in 2005-2010) are less likely to have received such payments as it takes time
for new programs to be incorporated in firm benefit plans, and media coverage of existing

21

employer-provided paid leave policies (mostly at tech companies in California) suggests that
such policies were rare prior to 2010.41 Second, workers in smaller firms are less likely to have
access to such generous supplemental funds, as these employers tend to have more modest
human resource infrastructures. We therefore replicate Figure 5 for the following subsamples:
claimants in 2005-2010, claimants in non-tech companies (we drop NAICS industry code 51,
Information), and claimants in firms with less than 1,000 workers. The results are reported
in Appendix Figures A4, A5, and A6, respectively. In all cases, the pattern of findings for
these subsamples are similar to those for the entire sample, although the estimates are less
precise. Put differently, we find no suggestion that supplemental payments that remove the
kink are driving the main results.

Permutation tests. An important concern for the RK design is the possibility of spurious
effects resulting from non-linearities in the underlying relationship between the outcome and
the assignment variable. To address this concern, we perform a series of permutation tests,
as proposed in recent work by Ganong and Jäger (2017). The idea is to estimate RK models
using placebo kinks at various points in the distribution of base period earnings. Specifically,
we use a sample of women making their first bonding claims with base period earnings within
a $40,000 window of the true kink point, and estimate 150 RK models for each outcome,
using a $4,000 bandwidth surrounding each placebo kink point. All regressions include
year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects, as in the main specifications
without individual-level controls.42 Note that the permutation tests are estimated as reduced
form models. As such, the placebo kink coefficients are of the opposite sign from those in
our main IV models (which are scaled by negative first stage coefficients).
Figure 7 presents the results, where the placebo kink points are denoted on the x−axis
normalized relative to the true kink point (i.e., the true kink point is at 0). For log leave
duration and change in log earnings, we do not find any statistically significant estimates
41

See, for example: https://tcf.org/content/report/tech-companies-paid-leave/.
We have also estimated the permutation tests with individual-level controls, which yield similar results
and are available upon request.
42

22

using any of the placebo kinks that we consider. For employment in quarter 2 post-leave, we
do observe significant coefficients when we use placebo kinks $2,000 to $4,000 less than the
true kink, suggesting that there may be non-linearities in this outcome function that may
bias the results. By contrast, when we consider the outcomes for which we find the most
robust effects—indicators for employment in the same firm conditional on any employment
and for a subsequent bonding claim—we do not observe any significant placebo coefficients,
while the coefficients in close vicinity to the true kink point are consistently statistically
significant, as in our main results.

Difference-in-difference models. As an alternative to the RK design, we examine estimates from difference-in-difference models, which leverage non-linear variation over time
in benefit amounts. Specifically, we use our baseline analysis sample of women with base
period quarterly earnings within a $10, 000 bandwidth of the kink point in every year, and
split them into groups defined by $1,000 bins of real ($2014) base period earnings. We then
estimate versions of the following model:

Yiqw = ς0 + ς1 ln(biq ) + %q + ϕEiq × q + ϑw + υiqw

(5)

for each woman i with a first bonding claim in year×quarter q in week of quarter w. ϕEiq
are fixed effects for the $1,000 base period earnings bins, which in some specifications we
interact with linear trends in q. As before, we include year×quarter and week-of-quarter
fixed effects. The coefficient ς1 represents the effect of a 100 percent increase in the WBA
on the outcome of interest, and is identified using variation in benefit amounts within $1,000
bins of women’s base period quarterly earnings.
Appendix Table A7 presents the results from these models, for each of our five main
outcomes.43 Broadly speaking, these results—which are based on a different identification
strategy that uses a sample of women with a wider range of base period earnings than
43

We have also estimated analogous difference-in-difference models, using the WBA in levels rather than
in logs. Results are similar and available upon request.

23

our primary RK specifications—are consistent with our main findings. The coefficient for
the effect of the WBA on leave duration is now statistically significant, but the magnitude
is small and comparable to the RK estimates: a 10 percent increase in the WBA increases
maternity leave duration by only 0.2 percent. We also find that a 10 percent rise in the WBA
is associated with a 0.5 percentage point decline in the likelihood of employment in quarter
2 post-claim, which is very small relative to the 87 percent mean (see column (4) of Table 1).
Consistent with the RK results, we further show that the WBA is positively associated with
the likelihood of return to the pre-leave employer conditional on any employment, with a 10
percent increase in the WBA leading to a 2 percentage point rise in this outcome (which is in
the range of estimates suggested by the RK models). We also now find that a 10 percent rise
in the WBA results in a significant 1.5 percent increase in the earnings change from before
to after the leave, an estimate that is larger than those suggested by the RK specifications.
Lastly, we see that a 10 percent higher WBA leads to a 0.8 percentage point higher likelihood
of having a subsequent bonding claim; this estimate is comparable to those from the RK
models. In sum, our results are robust to using an alternative empirical strategy to the RK
method.

6

Conclusion

According to the most recent statistics, only 14 percent of American workers have access to
paid family leave through their employers.44 The fact that the U.S. does not provide any paid
maternity or family leave at the national level—and, in doing so, is an outlier when compared
to other developed countries—has received substantial attention from politicians, policy
advocates, and the press. There exists, however, some access to government-provided unpaid
family leave through the FMLA, implying that understanding the specific consequences of
monetary benefits during leave is of first-order importance to both researchers and policymakers. In this paper, we attempt to make progress on this question by estimating the
44

See: http://www.nationalpartnership.org/issues/work-family/paid-leave.html.

24

causal effects of PFL wage replacement rates on maternal leave duration, labor market
outcomes, and future leave-taking among high-earning mothers in California, the first state
to implement its own PFL program.
We leverage detailed administrative data on the universe of PFL claims linked to quarterly
earnings records together with an RK research design. Comparing outcomes of mothers with
base period earnings below and above the maximum benefit threshold, we find that higher
benefits have zero impacts on leave duration, a result that contrasts sharply with prior evidence from other social insurance programs. We also find some evidence of positive impacts
on the likelihood that mothers return to their pre-leave employers instead of switching to
new firms: conditional on any employment in quarter 2 post-claim, a 10 percent increase in
the WBA raises the likelihood of employment at the pre-leave employer by 0.3 to 5 percent,
depending on specification. Further, benefits during the first period of paid family leave
predict future program use. An additional 10 percent in benefits is associated with a 3 to 7
percent increase in the probability of having a subsequent PFL claim in the following three
years.
The results reported in this paper serve as an important step toward understanding the
influence of benefit levels on leave duration, subsequent labor market outcomes, and future leave-taking for high-earning women in the United States, who are disproportionately
affected by the “motherhood wage penalty” (Anderson et al., 2002; Bertrand et al., 2010;
Hotchkiss et al., 2017; Chung et al., 2017). Our results assuage concerns that wage replacement during family leave may have unintended negative consequences for mothers’ future
labor market outcomes through an increase in time away from work, at least among these
women. Of course, it is important to recognize that these findings may be specific to the
relatively short statutory leave duration permitted under CA-PFL; benefits provided in the
context of much longer leaves—such as those in many European countries—may have different effects. Our RK estimates also generate insights on the implications of benefit changes
around the maximum benefit threshold. This evidence is valuable because all existing state

25

PFL programs, as well as the national FAMILY Act proposal, feature similar kinked benefit
schedules. As other jurisdictions have opted for different replacement rates and benefit caps
than California, future research on these other policies will further contribute to our understanding about the relationships between PFL benefits and outcomes across the earnings
distribution.

References
Addati, L., Cassirer, N. and Gilchrist, K. (2014). Maternity and paternity at work:
Law and practice across the world. International Labour Office.
Akerlof, G. A. (1984). Gift exchange and efficiency-wage theory: Four views. The American Economic Review, 74 (2), 79–83.
Anderson, D. J., Binder, M. and Krause, K. (2002). The motherhood wage penalty:
Which mothers pay it and why? The American Economic Review, 92 (2), 354–358.
Angelov, N., Johansson, P. and Lindahl, E. (2016). Parenthood and the gender gap
in pay. Journal of Labor Economics, 34 (3), 545–579.
Asai, Y. (2015). Parental leave reforms and the employment of new mothers: Quasiexperimental evidence from japan. Labour Economics, 36, 72–83.
Baily, M. N. (1978). Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of Public
Economics, 10 (3), 379–402.
Baker, M. and Milligan, K. (2008). How Does Job-Protected Maternity Leave Affect
Mothers’ Employment? Journal of Labor Economics, 26 (4), 655–691.
Bana, S., Bedard, K. and Rossin-Slater, M. (2018a). Trends and disparities in leave
use under california’s paid family leave program: New evidence from administrative data.
AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108, 388–391.
—, —, — and Stearns, J. (2018b). Unequal Use of Social Insurance Benefits: The Role
of Employers. Working Paper w25163, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bartel, A., Rossin-Slater, M., Ruhm, C., Stearns, J. and Waldfogel, J. (2018).
Paid family leave, fathers’ leave-taking, and leave-sharing in dual-earner households. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 37 (1), 10–37.
Baum, C. L. and Ruhm, C. J. (2016). The effects of paid family leave in california on
parental leave-taking and labor market outcomes. ,â Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 35 (2), 333–356.
Bergemann, A. and Riphahn, R. T. (2015). Maternal Employment Effects of Paid
Parental Leave (IZA DP No. 9073).

26

Bertrand, M., Goldin, C. and Katz, L. F. (2010). Dynamics of the gender gap for
young professionals in the financial and corporate sectors. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2 (3), 228–55.
Bičáková, A. and Kalíšková, K. (2016). Career Breaks after Childbirth: The Impact of
Family Leave Reforms in the Czech Republic. Discussion Paper 10149, Institute for the
Study of Labor (IZA).
Blau, F. and Kahn, L. (2000). Gender differences in pay. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14 (4), 75–99.
Blau, F. D. and Kahn, L. M. (2013). Female labor supply: Why is the united states
falling behind? The American Economic Review, 103 (3), 251–256.
Bulman, G. B. and Hoxby, C. M. (2015). The returns to the federal tax credits for higher
education. Tax Policy and Economy, 29 (1), 13–88.
Byker, T. S. (2016). Paid parental leave laws in the united states: Does short-duration
leave affect women’s labor-force attachment? American Economic Review, 106 (5), 242–
46.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D. and Farrell, M. H. (2016). Coverage error optimal
confidence intervals for regression discontinuity designs, University of Michigan, unpublished manuscript.
—, — and Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust nonparametric confidence intervals for regressiondiscontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82 (6), 2295–2326.
Campbell, Z., Chin, I., Chyn, E. and Hastings, J. (2017). The impact of paid leave:
Evidence from temporary disability insurance in rhode island, Brown University, unpublished manuscript.
Canaan, S. (2017). Parental leave, household specialization and children’s well-being,
American University of Beirut, unpublished manuscript.
Card, D., Johnston, A., Leung, P., Mas, A. and Pei, Z. (2015a). The effect of
unemployment benefits on the duration of unemployment insurance receipt: New evidence
from a regression kink design in missouri, 2003–2013. The American Economic Review,
105 (5), 126–130.
—, Lee, D., Pei, Z. and Weber, A. (2012). Nonlinear policy rules and the identification
and estimation of causal effects in a generalized regression kink design. Working Paper
18564, National Bureau of Economic Research.
—, Lee, D. S., Pei, Z. and Weber, A. (2015b). Inference on causal effects in a generalized
regression kink design. Econometrica, 83 (6), 2453–2483.
—, —, — and — (2016). Regression Kink Design: Theory and Practice. Working Paper
22781, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carneiro, P., Loken, K. and Salvanes, K. (2015). A Flying Start: Maternity Leave
Benefits and Long Run Outcomes of Children. Journal of Political Economy, 123 (2),
365–412.
27

Chetty, R. (2008). Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance.
Journal of political Economy, 116 (2), 173–234.
Chung, Y., Downs, B., Sandler, D. H., Sienkiewicz, R. et al. (2017). The parental
gender earnings gap in the United States. Working Paper 17-68, Center for Economic
Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.
Dahl, G. B., Løken, K. V., Mogstad, M. and Salvanes, K. V. (2016). What is the
case for paid maternity leave? Review of Economics and Statistics, 98 (4), 655–670.
Das, T. and Polachek, S. W. (2015). Unanticipated effects of california’s paid family
leave program. Contemporary Economic Policy, 33 (4), 619–635.
Dobbie, W. and Skiba, P. M. (2013). Information asymmetries in consumer credit markets: Evidence from payday lending. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
5 (4), 256–282.
Engström, P., Nordblom, K., Ohlsson, H. and Persson, A. (2015). Tax compliance
and loss aversion. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7 (4), 132–164.
Ganong, P. and Jäger, S. (2017). A permutation test for the regression kink design.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, (just-accepted).
Garmann, S. (2014). The causal effect of coalition governments on fiscal policies: evidence
from a regression kink design. Applied Economics, 46 (36), 4490–4507.
Gelber, A., Moore, T. and Strand, A. (2016). The Effect of Disability Insurance
Payments on Beneficiaries’ Earnings. Working Paper 21851, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Hansen, B., Nguyen, T. and Waddell, G. R. (2017). Benefit Generosity and Injury
Duration: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Regression Kinks. Discussion Paper 10621,
IZA.
Hotchkiss, J. L., Pitts, M. M. and Walker, M. B. (2017). Impact of first birth career
interruption on earnings: evidence from administrative data. Applied Economics, 49 (35),
3509–3522.
Imbens, G. and Kalyanaraman, K. (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression
discontinuity estimator. The Review of Economic Studies, p. rdr043.
Imbens, G. W. and Lemieux, T. (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to
practice. Journal of econometrics, 142 (2), 615–635.
Katz, L. F. (1986). Efficiency wage theories: A partial evaluation. NBER macroeconomics
annual, 1, 235–276.
Klerman, J. A., Daley, K. and Pozniak, A. (2012). Family and medical leave in 2012:
Technical report. Tech. rep., Abt Associates Inc, Prepared for the U.S. Department of
Labor (Contract No. GS10FOO86K).
— and Leibowitz, A. (1994). The Work-Employment Distinction Among New Mothers.
The Journal of Human Resources, 29 (2), 277–303.
28

Kleven, H., Landais, C., Posch, J., Steinhauer, A. and Zweimüller, J. (2019).
Child penalties across countries: Evidence and explanations. AEA Papers Proceedings.
—, — and Søgaard, J. E. (2018). Children and gender inequality: Evidence from Denmark. Working Paper 24219, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kluve, J., Tamm, M., Kluve, J. and Tamm, M. (2013). Parental leave regulations,
mothers’ labor force attachment and fathers’ childcare involvement: evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of Population Economics, 26 (3), 983–1005.
Krueger, A. B. and Meyer, B. D. (2002). Labor supply effects of social insurance. In
A. J. Auerbach and M. S. Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 4, New
York: Elsevier, pp. 2327–2392.
— and Summers, L. H. (1988). Efficiency wages and the inter-industry wage structure.
Econometrica, pp. 259–293.
Lalive, R., Schlosser, A., Steinhauer, A. and Zweimüller, J. (2014). Parental
leave and mothers’ careers: The relative importance of job protection and cash benefits.
Review of Economic Studies, 81 (1), 219–265.
— and Zweimüller, J. (2009). How Does Parental Leave Affect Fertility and Return to
Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124 (3), 1363–1402.
Landais, C. (2015). Assessing the welfare effects of unemployment benefits using the regression kink design. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7 (4), 243–278.
Lequien, L. (2012). The Impact of Parental Leave Duration on Later Wages. Annals of
Economics and Statistics, 107/108 (July/December), 267–285.
Lichtman-Sadot, S. (2014). The value of postponing pregnancy: Californiaâs paid family
leave and the timing of pregnancies. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy,
14 (4), 1467–1499.
Lundberg, S. and Rose, E. (2000). Parenthood and the earnings of married men and
women. Labour Economics, 7 (6), 689–710.
Lundqvist, H., Dahlberg, M. and Mörk, E. (2014). Stimulating local public employment: Do general grants work? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6 (1),
167–192.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
design: A density test. Journal of econometrics, 142 (2), 698–714.
Molina, J. A. and Montuenga, V. M. (2009). The motherhood wage penalty in spain.
Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 30 (3), 237–251.
Nielsen, H. S., Sørensen, T. and Taber, C. (2010). Estimating the effect of student
aid on college enrollment: Evidence from a government grant policy reform. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2 (2), 185–215.

29

Olivetti, C. and Petrongolo, B. (2017). The economic consequences of family policies:
lessons from a century of legislation in high-income countries. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 31 (1), 205–230.
Pihl, A. and Basso, G. (2016). Paid Family Leave, Job Protection and Low Take-Up
among Low-Wage Workers. Policy Brief 12, UC Davis Center for Poverty Research.
Porter, J. (2003). Estimation in the regression discontinuity model, University of Wisconsin at Madison, unpublished manuscript.
Rossin-Slater, M. (2018). Maternity and family leave policy. In S. L. Averett, L. M.
Argys and S. D. Hoffman (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Women and the Economy,
Oxford University Press.
—, Ruhm, C. J. and Waldfogel, J. (2013). The effects of california’s paid family leave
program on mothersâ leave-taking and subsequent labor market outcomes. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 32 (2), 224–245.
Ruhm, C. J. (1998). The economic consequences of parental leave mandates: Lessons from
Europe. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (1), 285–317.
Schmieder, J. F. and Von Wachter, T. (2016). The effects of unemployment insurance
benefits: New evidence and interpretation. Annual Review of Economics, 8, 547–581.
— and von Wachter, T. (2017). A context-robust measure of the disincentive cost of
unemployment insurance. American Economic Review, 107 (5), 343–48.
Schönberg, U. and Ludsteck, J. (2014). Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and
Mothers’ Labor Market Outcomes after Childbirth. Journal of Labor Economics, 32 (3),
469–505.
Seim, D. (Forthcoming). Behavioral responses to wealth taxes: Evidence from sweden.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Stanczyk, A. (2016). Does paid family leave improve household economic security following a birth? evidence from california, University of California at Berkeley, unpublished
manuscript.
Stearns, J. (2016). Long-run effects of maternity leave: Evidence from britain, UC Santa
Barbara, unpublished manuscript.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1986). Theories of wage rigidity. In e. a. J. Butkiewicz (ed.), Keynes’
Economic Legacy: Contemporary Economic Theories, New York: Praeger Publishers, pp.
153–206.
Thévenon, O. and Solaz, A. (2013). Labour market effects of parental leave policies in
OECD countries. Working Paper 141, OECD Social, Employment, and Migration.
Turner, L. J. (2014). The road to pell is paved with good intentions: The economic
incidence of federal student grant aid, University of Maryland, unpublished manuscript.
Waldfogel, J. (1998). The family gap for young women in the united states and britain:
Can maternity leave make a difference? Journal of labor economics, 16 (3), 505–545.
Wingender, P. and LaLumia, S. (2017). Income effects on maternal labor supply: Evidence from child-related tax benefits. National Tax Journal, 70 (1), 11.
30

Figure 1: PFL/SDI Benefit Schedule in 2005 and 2014 and the Maximum Weekly Benefit
Amount Over Time

$25,385.46

1,000

1,000

1,200

(b) 2014 Schedule

1,200

(a) 2005 Schedule

Weekly Benefit Amount
400
600
800
200
0

0

200

Weekly Benefit Amount
400
600
800

$19,830.92

0

5,000

10,000
15,000
20,000
Base Period Quarterly Earnings

25,000

30,000

0

5,000

10,000
15,000
20,000
Base Period Quarterly Earnings

25,000

850

Nominal Weekly Benefit Amount
900
950
1000
1050

1100

(c) Maximum WBA by Quarter

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010
Year

2011

2012

2013

2014

Notes: Sub-figures (a) and (b) plot nominal quarterly base period earnings on the x−axis and the nominal weekly benefit
amount on the y−axis for 2005 and 2014, respectively, with the earnings threshold at which the maximum benefit begins
labeled in each sub-figure. Sub-figure (c) plots the maximum weekly benefit amount by quarter in nominal dollars over the
time period 2005 quarter 1 through 2014 quarter 4.

31

30,000

Figure 2: Frequency Distribution of Base Period Earnings Around the Earnings Threshold
and First Stage

Number of obs. per bin
1000
1500

2000

(a) Frequency Distribution

500

McCrary Tests:
Discontinuity est. = 5.49 (31.6)
Kink est. = -.036 (.055)

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

5000

6.6

Log Weekly Benefit Amount
6.7
6.8

6.9

(b) First Stage

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

5000

Notes: Sub-figure (a) shows the frequency distribution for women. The x−axis plots normalized base period quarterly
earnings (relative to the earnings threshold in each year) in bins, using $100 bins, and with a $5,000 bandwidth. We display
two tests of the identifying assumptions of the RK design. The first is a standard McCrary test of the discontinuity of the
p.d.f. of the assignment variable (“Discontinuity est.”). The second is a test for discontinuity in the first derivative of the
p.d.f. (“Kink est.”). For both, we report the estimate and the standard error in parentheses. We follow Card et al. (2015b) to
choose the order of the polynomial in these tests. We fit a series of polynomial models of different orders that impose
continuity but allow the first and higher-order derivatives to vary at the threshold, and then select the model with the
smallest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) value (3rd order in our case). Sub-figure (b) shows the empirical relationship
between the log weekly benefit amount received and normalized base period earnings for women. The x−axis plots normalized
base period quarterly earnings (in terms of distance to the earnings threshold) in bins, using $100 bins.

32

Figure 3: RK Figures for Main Outcomes
(b) Employed, 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim

.84

2.34

2.36

Log Leave Duration
2.38
2.4

Employed 2 Qtrs Post-Claim
.86
.88
.9

2.42

.92

2.44

(a) Log Leave Duration

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

5000

-5000

5000

(d) ∆ Log Earnings

.84

-.16

-.14

Change in Log Earnings
-.12
-.1
-.08

Same Firm 2 Qtrs Post-Claim (if emp.)
.86
.88
.9

-.06

.92

(c) Same Firm (if Employed)

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

5000

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

5000

.2

Subsequent Claim 12 Qtrs Post-Claim
.22
.24
.26
.28

(e) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

5000

Notes: The x−axis plots normalized base period quarterly earnings (relative to the earnings threshold in each year) in bins,
using $100 bins. The y−axis plots the mean of the outcome in each bin. The outcomes are: (1) natural log of leave duration
in weeks, (2) an indicator for the woman being employed in quarter 2 after the claim, (3) an indicator for the woman being
employed in her pre-claim firm in quarter 2 after the claim, conditional on any employment in that quarter, (4) the change in
log earnings from quarters 2-5 before the claim to quarters 2-5 after the claim, and (5) an indicator for any subsequent
bonding claim in the 12 quarters following the first claim.

33

Figure 4: RK Estimates for Main Outcomes Using Different Specifications
(a) Log Leave Duration

(b) Employed, 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim

Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 8690

Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 3810

Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 7565

Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 5912

CCT LL
bw = 2664

CCT LL
bw = 2153

CCT LQ
bw = 3923

CCT LQ
bw = 3070

CCT LL No Reg
bw = 5732

CCT LL No Reg
bw = 2382

CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 8633

CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 6246
-.2

-.1

0

No Covariates

.1

.2

-.3

Covariates

(c) Same Firm (if Employed)
Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 8559

Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 4045

Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 5057

CCT LL
bw = 1569

CCT LL
bw = 1767

CCT LQ
bw = 2973

CCT LQ
bw = 3524

CCT LL No Reg
bw = 1815

CCT LL No Reg
bw = 3717

CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 6314

CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 4991
0

.2

.4

No Covariates

-.1

.6

0

.1

Covariates

(d) ∆ Log Earnings

Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 2041

-.2

-.2

No Covariates

.8

-.6

Covariates

-.4
No Covariates

-.2

0

.2

Covariates

(e) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim
Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 8775
Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 6555
CCT LL
bw = 1994
CCT LQ
bw = 3862
CCT LL No Reg
bw = 3466
CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 5442
-.2

0

.2

No Covariates

.4

.6

Covariates

Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals (as horizontal bars) from different RK specifications,
estimated separately with and without individual-level controls. The coefficients and standard errors from these regressions
are reported in Appendix Tables A2, A3, A4, A5, and A6. See notes under Figure 3 for more details about the outcomes. All
regressions include year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects. The specifications with individual controls
include the following variables: indicators for employee age categories (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44), dummies for
pre-claim employer industry (NAICS industry groups), and dummies for employer size (1-49, 50-99, 100-499, 500+). The
specification models are: (1) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local linear polynomials, (2) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local quadratic
polynomials, (3) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local linear polynomials, (4) CCT bandwidth with regularization
and local quadratic polynomials, (5) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local linear polynomials, and (6) CCT
bandwidth without regularization and with local quadratic polynomials. The optimal bandwidths from each specification are
listed.

34

Figure 5: RK Estimates for Main Outcomes Using Different Bandwidths
(a) Log Leave Duration
.1
-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

Employed 2 Qtrs Post-Claim
-.2
-.1
0

.2

.3

(b) Employed, 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim

2500

5000

7500

Bandwidth

10000

2500

Bandwidth

7500

10000

-.4

0

-.2

0

.2

Same Firm 2 Qtrs Post-Claim (cond.)
.1
.2
.3

.4

(d) ∆ Log Earnings

.4

(c) Same Firm (if Employed)

5000

2500

5000

7500

Bandwidth

10000

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

(e) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

Notes: These figures show the coefficients (as dark gray triangles) and 95 percent confidence intervals (as light gray triangles)
from RK specifications that use different bandwidths in increments of $500 of normalized quarterly base period earnings
(denoted on the x−axis) and local linear polynomials. All regressions include year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim
fixed effects. See notes under Figure 3 for more details about the outcomes.

35

Figure 6: Distribution of Leave Duration for Women with Earnings Near the Threshold
(b) PFL Only

0

0

.2

.05

Fraction
.1

Fraction
.4

.6

.15

.8

.2

(a) SDI Only

0

5

10
15
Weeks of Leave

20

25

0

2
Weeks of Leave

4

0

.05

Fraction

.1

.15

(c) Total (SDI+PFL)

0

5

10
15
Weeks of Leave

20

25

Notes: These figures plot the distributions of leave duration for women with pre-claim earnings within a $5,000 bandwidth
surrounding the kink point.

36

6

Figure 7: Permutation Tests
(a) Log Leave Duration
.00002
Coefficient/95% CI
-.00001
0
.00001
-6000

-4000

-2000

0
Placebo Kink

2000

4000

-.00002

-.00002

Coefficient/95% CI
-.00001
0
.00001

.00002

(b) Employed, 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim

6000

-6000

0
Placebo Kink

2000

4000

6000

4000

6000

.00002
Coefficient/95% CI
-.00001
0
.00001
-6000

-4000

-2000

0
Placebo Kink

2000

4000

-.00002

Coefficient/95% CI
-.00001
0
.00001
-.00002

-2000

(d) ∆ Log Earnings

.00002

(c) Same Firm (if Employed)

-4000

6000

-6000

-4000

-2000

0
Placebo Kink

2000

-.00002

Coefficient/95% CI
-.00001
0
.00001

.00002

(e) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim

-6000

-4000

-2000

0
Placebo Kink

2000

4000

6000

Notes: These figures show the coefficients (as dark gray lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (as light gray lines) from
placebo RK specifications with a placebo kink specified in terms of distance from the true kink point (i.e., the true kink point
is at 0 on the x−axis). To estimate the placebo RK specifications, we use a sample of women making their first bonding
claims with base period earnings within a $40,000 window of the true kink point, and estimate placebo RK models for each
outcome, using a $4,000 bandwidth surrounding each placebo kink point. All regressions include year×quarter and
week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects, as in the main specifications without individual-level controls.

37

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Age
Firm Size 1-49
Firm Size 50-99
Firm Size 100-499
Firm Size 500+
Weekly Benefit Amount ($2014)
Base Period Earnings ($2014)
Health Industry
Total Leave Duration
Employed 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim
Same Firm 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim (cond.)
Employed 3 Qtrs. Post-Claim
Same Firm 3 Qtrs. Post-Claim (cond.)
Employed 4 Qtrs. Post-Claim
Same Firm 4 Qtrs. Post-Claim (cond.)
Change in Log Earnings
Subsequent Claim 12 Qtrs. Post-Claim
Observations

2500

5000

7500

10000

32.80
(4.10)
0.19
(0.39)
0.08
(0.26)
0.20
(0.40)
0.53
(0.50)
975.29
(110.50)
24158.72
(1774.89)
0.33
(0.47)
11.94
(4.22)
0.88
(0.33)
0.88
(0.33)
0.86
(0.35)
0.84
(0.37)
0.85
(0.36)
0.80
(0.40)
-0.10
(0.46)
0.23
(0.42)

32.69
(4.12)
0.19
(0.39)
0.08
(0.27)
0.21
(0.40)
0.52
(0.50)
932.99
(127.10)
23460.08
(3217.20)
0.32
(0.47)
11.95
(4.23)
0.87
(0.33)
0.88
(0.33)
0.86
(0.35)
0.83
(0.37)
0.85
(0.36)
0.80
(0.40)
-0.10
(0.48)
0.23
(0.42)

32.53
(4.20)
0.20
(0.40)
0.08
(0.27)
0.21
(0.41)
0.51
(0.50)
878.18
(154.74)
22311.82
(4615.00)
0.30
(0.46)
11.95
(4.22)
0.87
(0.34)
0.87
(0.33)
0.85
(0.36)
0.83
(0.37)
0.84
(0.37)
0.79
(0.40)
-0.10
(0.48)
0.22
(0.41)

32.20
(4.34)
0.21
(0.41)
0.08
(0.27)
0.21
(0.41)
0.50
(0.50)
807.50
(188.66)
20624.44
(5905.67)
0.28
(0.45)
11.97
(4.23)
0.86
(0.35)
0.87
(0.34)
0.84
(0.37)
0.83
(0.38)
0.83
(0.38)
0.79
(0.41)
-0.10
(0.49)
0.20
(0.40)

50,802

104,016

164,163

240,541

Notes: This table presents the means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of some of the key variables for women making
their first PFL bonding claims during 2005-2014 with base period earnings within the bandwidths listed at the top of each
column. We make the following sample restrictions: (1) We only include women who are aged 20-44 at the time of the first
bonding claim; (2) We drop women employed in industries in which employees are least likely to be subject to the SDI tax—
private household workers, elementary and secondary school teachers, and public administration; (3) We drop women with zero
total earnings in the base period quarters.

38

Online Appendix — Not for Publication

A

Appendix Figures and Tables
Appendix Figure A1: Covariates Around the Earnings Threshold
(a) Age

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

4000

32

5000

32.5

Mean Age

Mean Firm Size
6000
7000

33

8000

33.5

9000

(b) Firm Size

5000

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

5000

100

Number in Health Industry
200
300
400

500

(c) Health Industry

-5000

-2500
0
2500
Base period quarterly earnings, normalized

5000

Notes: The x−axis plots normalized base period quarterly earnings (relative to the earnings threshold in each year) in bins, using $100
bins. In sub-figures (a) and (b), the y−axis plots the mean of the covariate in each bin. In sub-figure (c), the y−axis plots the count of
women in the health industry in each bin.

39

Appendix Figure A2: RK Estimates for Main Outcomes Using Different Specifications, Using Benefit
Amount in Levels
(a) Log Leave Duration

(b) Employed, 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim

Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 17032

Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 4392

Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 7492

Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 6890

CCT LL
bw = 2662

CCT LL
bw = 2153

CCT LQ
bw = 3931

CCT LQ
bw = 3070

CCT LL No Reg
bw = 5783

CCT LL No Reg
bw = 2382

CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 8633

CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 6246
-.02

-.01

0

No Covariates

.01

.02

-.04

No Covariates

(c) Same Firm (if Employed)
Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 8331

Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 4321

Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 5172

CCT LL
bw = 1569

CCT LL
bw = 1767

CCT LQ
bw = 2973

CCT LQ
bw = 3524

CCT LL No Reg
bw = 1815

CCT LL No Reg
bw = 3717

CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 6314

CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 4991
0

.02
No Covariates

.04

.06

0

.02

Covariates

(d) ∆ Log Earnings

Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 2176

-.02

-.02

Covariates

.08

-.08

Covariates

-.06

-.04
No Covariates

-.02

0

.02

Covariates

(e) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim
Fuzzy IK LL
bw = 5912
Fuzzy IK LQ
bw = 6410
CCT LL
bw = 1994
CCT LQ
bw = 3862
CCT LL No Reg
bw = 3466
CCT LQ No Reg
bw = 5442
-.02

0
No Covariates

.02

.04

.06

Covariates

Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals (as horizontal bars) from different RK specifications, estimated
separately with and without individual-level controls. The coefficients and standard errors are for the effect of a $100 increase in the
WBA. See notes under Figure 3 for more details about the outcomes. All regressions include year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the
claim fixed effects. The specifications with individual controls include the following variables: indicators for employee age categories
(20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44), dummies for pre-claim employer industry (NAICS industry groups), and dummies for employer size
(1-49, 50-99, 100-499, 500+). The specification models are: (1) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local linear polynomials, (2) fuzzy IK bandwidth
with local quadratic polynomials, (3) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local linear polynomials, (4) CCT bandwidth with
regularization and local quadratic polynomials, (5) CCT bandwidth40
without regularization and with local linear polynomials, and (6)
CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local quadratic polynomials. The optimal bandwidths from each specification are listed.

Appendix Figure A3: Timing of Effects on Employment, Return to Firm, and Subsequent Bonding
Claims
(b) Same Firm (if Employed)

-.2

-.15

-.1

0

Fuzzy IK LL Estimate
.2
.4

Fuzzy IK LL Estimate
-.05
0
.05

.6

.1

(a) Employment

2 Quarters
Post-Claim

3 Quarters
Post-Claim

4 Quarters
Post-Claim

5 Quarters
Post-Claim

2 Quarters
Post-Claim

3 Quarters
Post-Claim

4 Quarters
Post-Claim

5 Quarters
Post-Claim

-.1

0

Fuzzy IK LL Estimate
.1
.2

.3

(c) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim (Cumulative)

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals (as vertical bars) from separate regression models that use the
fuzzy IK with a local linear polynomial specification. As outcomes, sub-figures (a) and (b) use indicators for employment and
employment in the pre-claim firm (conditional on any employment) in quarters 2 through 5 post-claim, as listed on the x−axis.
Sub-figure (c) uses indicators for any subsequent bonding claim by the quarter listed on the x−axis. All regressions include year×quarter
and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects.

41

Appendix Figure A4: RK Estimates for Main Outcomes Using Different Bandwidths: 2005-2010
Only
(b) Employed, 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim

-.3

-.4

Log Leave Duration
-.2
0

Employed 2 Qtrs Post-Claim
-.2
-.1
0

.1

.2

(a) Log Leave Duration

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

2500

Bandwidth

7500

10000

(d) ∆ Log Earnings

-.4

-.1

Change in Log Earnings
-.2
0
.2

Same Firm 2 Qtrs Post-Claim (cond.)
0
.1
.2
.3

.4

.4

(c) Same Firm (if Employed)

5000

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

-.2

Subsequent Claim 12 Qtrs Post-Claim
-.1
0
.1
.2

.3

(e) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

Notes: These figures show the coefficients (as dark gray triangles) and 95 percent confidence intervals (as light gray triangles) from RK
specifications that use different bandwidths in increments of $500 of normalized quarterly base period earnings (denoted on the x−axis).
The sample is limited to claims made in 2005-2010 only. All regressions include year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed
effects.

42

Appendix Figure A5: RK Estimates for Main Outcomes Using Different Bandwidths: Drop Information Industry
(b) Employed, 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim

-.2

-.2

-.1

Log Leave Duration
0
.1

Employed 2 Qtrs Post-Claim
-.1
0

.2

.1

(a) Log Leave Duration

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

2500

Bandwidth

7500

10000

(d) ∆ Log Earnings

-.4

0

Change in Log Earnings
-.2
0
.2

Same Firm 2 Qtrs Post-Claim (cond.)
.1
.2
.3

.4

.4

(c) Same Firm (if Employed)

5000

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

-.2

Subsequent Claim 12 Qtrs Post-Claim
-.1
0
.1
.2

.3

(e) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

Notes: These figures show the coefficients (as dark gray triangles) and 95 percent confidence intervals (as light gray triangles) from RK
specifications that use different bandwidths in increments of $500 of normalized quarterly base period earnings (denoted on the x−axis).
We drop women employed in the Information industry (NAICS group 51). All regressions include year×quarter and week-of-quarter of
the claim fixed effects.

43

Appendix Figure A6: RK Estimates for Main Outcomes Using Different Bandwidths: Firms with
<1,000 Employees Only

-.4

-.2

0

Log Leave Duration
.2
.4

Employed 2 Qtrs Post-Claim
-.2
0

.2

(b) Employed, 2 Qtrs. Post-Claim

.6

(a) Log Leave Duration

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

2500

Bandwidth

7500

10000

-.6

-.2

-.4

Change in Log Earnings
-.2
0

.2

Same Firm 2 Qtrs Post-Claim (cond.)
0
.2
.4

.4

(d) ∆ Log Earnings

.6

(c) Same Firm (if Employed)

5000

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

-.4

Subsequent Claim 12 Qtrs Post-Claim
-.2
0
.2

.4

(e) Any Subsequent Bonding Claim

2500

5000

Bandwidth

7500

10000

Notes: These figures show the coefficients (as dark gray triangles) and 95 percent confidence intervals (as light gray triangles) from RK
specifications that use different bandwidths in increments of $500 of normalized quarterly base period earnings (denoted on the x−axis).
The sample is limited to claims made by women in firms with fewer than 1,000 employees only. All regressions include year×quarter and
week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects.

44

Appendix Table A1: Descriptive Statistics in ACS Data
2500

5000

7500

10000

Mother’s age

34.14
(4.103)

33.96
(4.077)

33.78
(4.179)

33.38
(4.321)

Mother is
non-Hispanic white

0.471
(0.499)

0.476
(0.500)

0.466
(0.499)

0.458
(0.498)

Mother is
non-Hispanic black

0.0360
(0.186)

0.0359
(0.186)

0.0418
(0.200)

0.0455
(0.208)

Mother is Hispanic

0.110
(0.313)

0.121
(0.326)

0.137
(0.344)

0.172
(0.377)

Mother is married

0.929
(0.257)

0.914
(0.280)

0.902
(0.297)

0.878
(0.327)

93742.2
(82422.3)

90712.1
(83893.3)

86742.1
(82695.2)

81028.4
(79378.1)

931

1,846

2,938

4,171

Spousal annual
earnings ($2014)
Observations

Notes: This table uses data from the 2005-2014 American Communities Survey (ACS) and presents means and standard deviations (in
parentheses) of characteristics of mothers who are comparable to our main analysis sample of female bonding claimants in the EDD data.
We limit to mothers of children under age 1 in California and make restrictions similar to those that we make in the EDD data: (1) We
only include women who are aged 20-44; (2) We drop women employed in industries in which employees are least likely to be subject to the
SDI tax—private household workers, elementary and secondary school teachers, and public administration; (3) We drop women with zero
reported earnings in the previous year. We use each woman’s prior year earnings to calculate her average quarterly earnings (by dividing
by four), and then use that to find her place in the prior year’s benefit schedule (and assign her to the appropriate kink point). We report
statistics for women with earnings in the bandwidths listed at the top of each column. All statistics are weighted using ACS person weights.

45

46

-5.850
0.0320

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105

-5.668
0.0311
8690.2
6797.8
2.396
197691

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105
Main Bandwidth
Pilot Bandwidth
Dep. Var Mean
N
-4.104
0.151
7565.3
6148.1
2.396
165856

-0.00172
(0.0198)

-4.131
0.159

0.0153
(0.0192)

(2)
Fuzzy IK LQ

-4.714
0.181
2664.4
5351.9
2.394
54150

-0.0117
(0.109)

-4.887
0.192

-0.00322
(0.106)

(3)
CCT LL

-4.578
0.400
3923.4
6316.7
2.395
80687

-0.00354
(0.0612)

-4.661
0.421

0.00788
(0.0597)

(4)
CCT LQ

-5.060
0.0580
5731.8
7821.4
2.396
120751

-0.0204
(0.0323)

-5.203
0.0604

-0.00445
(0.0315)

(5)
CCT LL, No Reg

-4.156
0.121
8632.5
9381.2
2.396
195915

0.00478
(0.0156)

-4.162
0.127

0.0178
(0.0151)

(6)
CCT LQ, No Reg

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel and column is from a separate regression, using the natural log of total leave duration as the outcome. The WBA is expressed
as the natural log of $2014 dollars. The top panel only includes year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects and no individual controls, while the
bottom panel includes the following controls: indicators for employee age categories (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44), dummies for pre-claim employer industry (NAICS
industry groups), and dummies for employer size (1-49, 50-99, 100-499, 500+). The specifications are: (1) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local linear polynomials, (2) fuzzy
IK bandwidth with local quadratic polynomials, (3) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local linear polynomials, (4) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local
quadratic polynomials, (5) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local linear polynomials, and (6) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local
quadratic polynomials. We also report the first stage coefficients and standard errors, the dependent variable means, and the main and pilot bandwidths. The pilot
bandwidth is used in the bias estimation part of the main bandwidth selection procedure. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

-0.00152
(0.0156)

Log WBA ($2014)

B. With Individual Controls

0.0118
(0.0151)

Log WBA ($2014)

A. No Individual Controls

(1)
Fuzzy IK LL

Appendix Table A2: RK Estimates of the Effects of PFL Benefits on Log Leave Duration

47

-4.868
0.114

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105

-4.712
0.108
3810.2
5226.5
0.876
74929

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105
Main Bandwidth
Pilot Bandwidth
Dep. Var Mean
N
-4.311
0.218
5911.8
6462.5
0.871
119900

-0.00388
(0.0224)

-4.361
0.229

0.0261
(0.0220)

(2)
Fuzzy IK LQ

-4.787
0.254
2153.1
4908.2
0.876
41946

-0.128
(0.107)

-4.963
0.271

-0.0932
(0.104)

(3)
CCT LL

-5.328
0.585
3070.2
4817.7
0.876
59981

-0.0969
(0.0645)

-5.486
0.614

-0.0842
(0.0635)

(4)
CCT LQ

-4.845
0.224
2381.5
5182.6
0.875
46432

-0.0753
(0.0908)

-4.950
0.237

-0.0530
(0.0901)

(5)
CCT LL, No Reg

-4.303
0.201
6246.1
5758.3
0.870
127450

0.0129
(0.0205)

-4.334
0.212

0.0426∗∗
(0.0202)

(6)
CCT LQ, No Reg

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel and column is from a separate regression, using an indicator for employment in quarter 2 post-claim as the outcome. The WBA is
expressed as the natural log of $2014 dollars. The top panel only includes year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects and no individual controls, while
the bottom panel includes the following controls: indicators for employee age categories (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44), dummies for pre-claim employer industry
(NAICS industry groups), and dummies for employer size (1-49, 50-99, 100-499, 500+). The specifications are: (1) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local linear polynomials,
(2) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local quadratic polynomials, (3) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local linear polynomials, (4) CCT bandwidth with regularization
and local quadratic polynomials, (5) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local linear polynomials, and (6) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with
local quadratic polynomials. We also report the first stage coefficients and standard errors, the dependent variable means, and the main and pilot bandwidths. The pilot
bandwidth is used in the bias estimation part of the main bandwidth selection procedure. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

-0.0678
(0.0463)

Log WBA ($2014)

B. With Individual Controls

-0.0536
(0.0454)

Log WBA ($2014)

A. No Individual Controls

(1)
Fuzzy IK LL

Appendix Table A3: RK Estimates of the Effects of PFL Benefits on Employment in Quarter 2 Post-Claim

48

-5.021
0.320

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105

-4.827
0.302
2041.1
3626.8
0.880
34799

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105
Main Bandwidth
Pilot Bandwidth
Dep. Var Mean
N
-4.182
0.429
4044.9
6181.7
0.876
69821

0.116∗∗∗
(0.0448)

-4.485
0.454

0.125∗∗∗
(0.0439)

(2)
Fuzzy IK LQ

-4.566
0.427
1568.7
3390.3
0.883
26707

0.155
(0.188)

-4.692
0.450

0.170
(0.185)

(3)
CCT LL

-5.470
0.669
2972.5
4654.1
0.877
50857

0.255∗∗∗
(0.0742)

-5.600
0.706

0.262∗∗∗
(0.0714)

(4)
CCT LQ

-4.769
0.354
1815.3
3609.2
0.880
30924

0.394∗∗∗
(0.148)

-4.866
0.371

0.416∗∗∗
(0.147)

(5)
CCT LL, No Reg

-4.218
0.216
6314.2
12454.9
0.875
112124

0.0284
(0.0214)

-4.242
0.228

0.0401∗
(0.0209)

(6)
CCT LQ, No Reg

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel and column is from a separate regression, using an indicator for employment in the pre-claim firm in quarter 2 post-claim (conditional
on any employment in that quarter) as the outcome. The WBA is expressed as the natural log of $2014 dollars. The top panel only includes year×quarter and week-ofquarter of the claim fixed effects and no individual controls, while the bottom panel includes the following controls: indicators for employee age categories (20-24, 25-29,
30-34, 35-39, 40-44), dummies for pre-claim employer industry (NAICS industry groups), and dummies for employer size (1-49, 50-99, 100-499, 500+). The specifications
are: (1) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local linear polynomials, (2) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local quadratic polynomials, (3) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local
linear polynomials, (4) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local quadratic polynomials, (5) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local linear polynomials,
and (6) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local quadratic polynomials. We also report the first stage coefficients and standard errors, the dependent variable
means, and the main and pilot bandwidths. The pilot bandwidth is used in the bias estimation part of the main bandwidth selection procedure. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

0.321∗∗∗
(0.122)

Log WBA ($2014)

B. With Individual Controls

0.328∗∗∗
(0.118)

Log WBA ($2014)

A. No Individual Controls

(1)
Fuzzy IK LL

Appendix Table A4: RK Estimates of the Effects of PFL Benefits on Employment in Pre-Claim Firm (Conditional on Any
Employment) in Quarter 2 Post-Claim

49

-5.843
0.0392

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105

-5.641
0.0380
8558.8
4575.6
-0.103
143938

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105
Main Bandwidth
Pilot Bandwidth
Dep. Var Mean
N
-3.950
0.321
5056.8
6546.6
-0.102
79307

-0.0622
(0.0469)

-4.265
0.340

-0.0586
(0.0462)

(2)
Fuzzy IK LQ

-4.842
0.399
1767.0
3565.5
-0.100
27210

-0.230
(0.222)

-4.889
0.418

-0.210
(0.221)

(3)
CCT LL

-5.129
0.555
3523.6
5874.1
-0.103
54633

0.0346
(0.0906)

-5.522
0.587

0.0464
(0.0882)

(4)
CCT LQ

-4.552
0.129
3717.2
4354.7
-0.103
57685

0.0268
(0.0819)

-4.733
0.136

0.0371
(0.0792)

(5)
CCT LL, No Reg

-3.993
0.328
4991.4
6776.6
-0.102
78234

-0.0694
(0.0480)

-4.249
0.347

-0.0641
(0.0472)

(6)
CCT LQ, No Reg

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel and column is from a separate regression, using the change in log earnings from quarters 2-5 before the claim to quarters 2-5 after
the claim. The WBA is expressed as the natural log of $2014 dollars. The top panel only includes year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects and
no individual controls, while the bottom panel includes the following controls: indicators for employee age categories (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44), dummies for
pre-claim employer industry (NAICS industry groups), and dummies for employer size (1-49, 50-99, 100-499, 500+). The specifications are: (1) fuzzy IK bandwidth
with local linear polynomials, (2) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local quadratic polynomials, (3) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local linear polynomials, (4) CCT
bandwidth with regularization and local quadratic polynomials, (5) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local linear polynomials, and (6) CCT bandwidth
without regularization and with local quadratic polynomials. We also report the first stage coefficients and standard errors, the dependent variable means, and the main
and pilot bandwidths. The pilot bandwidth is used in the bias estimation part of the main bandwidth selection procedure. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

-0.0398∗∗
(0.0191)

Log WBA ($2014)

B. With Individual Controls

-0.0166
(0.0184)

Log WBA ($2014)

A. No Individual Controls

(1)
Fuzzy IK LL

Appendix Table A5: RK Estimates of the Effects of PFL Benefits on Change in Log Earnings (Qtrs. 2-5 Post vs. 2-5
Pre-Claim)

50

-6.078
0.0368

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105

-5.895
0.0359
8775.0
5919.6
0.210
152885

First Stage Est x 105
First Stage S.E. x 105
Main Bandwidth
Pilot Bandwidth
Dep. Var Mean
N
-4.316
0.217
6555.2
7057.1
0.221
106065

0.141∗∗∗
(0.0259)

-4.305
0.229

0.162∗∗∗
(0.0255)

(2)
Fuzzy IK LQ

-4.944
0.333
1993.8
4031.7
0.235
30620

0.113
(0.167)

-5.014
0.350

0.152
(0.168)

(3)
CCT LL

-4.454
0.495
3862.1
6134.7
0.232
59889

0.0753
(0.0633)

-4.516
0.523

0.0954
(0.0623)

(4)
CCT LQ

-4.662
0.139
3466.3
4926.5
0.232
53582

0.116
(0.0776)

-4.768
0.146

0.139∗
(0.0773)

(5)
CCT LL, No Reg

-4.273
0.289
5441.7
7248.6
0.226
86093

0.129∗∗∗
(0.0355)

-4.330
0.305

0.151∗∗∗
(0.0352)

(6)
CCT LQ, No Reg

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel and column is from a separate regression, using an indicator for any subsequent bonding claim in the 12 quarters following the first
claim as the outcome. The WBA is expressed as the natural log of $2014 dollars. The top panel only includes year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects
and no individual controls, while the bottom panel includes the following controls: indicators for employee age categories (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44), dummies
for pre-claim employer industry (NAICS industry groups), and dummies for employer size (1-49, 50-99, 100-499, 500+). The specifications are: (1) fuzzy IK bandwidth
with local linear polynomials, (2) fuzzy IK bandwidth with local quadratic polynomials, (3) CCT bandwidth with regularization and local linear polynomials, (4) CCT
bandwidth with regularization and local quadratic polynomials, (5) CCT bandwidth without regularization and with local linear polynomials, and (6) CCT bandwidth
without regularization and with local quadratic polynomials. We also report the first stage coefficients and standard errors, the dependent variable means, and the main
and pilot bandwidths. The pilot bandwidth is used in the bias estimation part of the main bandwidth selection procedure. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

0.117∗∗∗
(0.0154)

Log WBA ($2014)

B. With Individual Controls

0.130∗∗∗
(0.0152)

Log WBA ($2014)

A. No Individual Controls

(1)
Fuzzy IK LL

Appendix Table A6: RK Estimates of the Effects of PFL Benefits on Any Subsequent Bonding Claim in 12 Quarters
Post-Claim

51

(2)
Emp. 2 Qtrs Post-Claim

0.0243∗∗∗
(0.00593)

-0.0497∗∗∗
(0.00376)

240,541

N

231,308

-0.0495∗∗∗
(0.00377)

197,778

0.188∗∗∗
(0.00635)

0.188∗∗∗
(0.00632)

(3)
Same Firm (if Emp.)

178,030

0.150∗∗∗
(0.00838)

0.150∗∗∗
(0.00836)

(4)
∆ Log Earn.

184,979

0.0793∗∗∗
(0.00436)

0.0798∗∗∗
(0.00435)

(5)
Subs. Bond.

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel and column is from a separate regression. See notes under Figure 3 for more details about the outcomes. All regressions include
$1,000 earnings bin fixed effects, as well as year×quarter and week-of-quarter of the claim fixed effects. The specifications in Panel B also include linear trends interacted
with earnings bin indicators. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

0.0232∗∗∗
(0.00594)

Log WBA ($2014)

B. With Earnings-Bin-Specific Linear Time Trends

Log WBA ($2014)

A. No Earnings-Bin-Specific Linear Time Trends

(1)
Log Duration

Appendix Table A7: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Effects of PFL Benefits on Main Outcomes

