                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        FOREIGN SAFE ASSET DEMAND AND THE DOLLAR EXCHANGE RATE

                                         Zhengyang Jiang
                                       Arvind Krishnamurthy
                                           Hanno Lustig

                                        Working Paper 24439
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24439


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2018




We thank Chloe Peng and Ziqing Wang for excellent research assistance. We also thank Mark Aguiar,
Mike Chernov, Magnus Dahlquist, Wenxin Du (discussant), Greg Duee, Charles Engel, Emmanuel
Farhi, Maury Obstfeld (discussant), Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (discussant), Ben Hébert, Zhiguo He
(discussant), Oleg Itskhoki, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, Alexi Savov, Jesse Schreger (discussant),
Lukas Schmid (discussant), Dongho Song (discussant), Jeremy Stein, Adrien Verdelhan and Stanley
Zin for helpful discussions, and seminar participants at the BIS, Carnegie Mellon, Chicago Booth,
Columbia, Harvard Business School, Northwestern Kellogg, New York Fed, NYU, Ohio State, San
Francisco Fed, Stanford, UT-Austin and UC-Boulder as well as the participants at CESifo Area Conference,
the NBER SI IFM 2018, Vienna Symposium on Foreign Exchange Markets, the NBER Fall AP 2018,
the 2019 inaugural David Backus conference on macro-nance, the 2019 Toulouse/CBL conference,
and the 2019 AEA for their comments. We have read the Journal of Finance disclosure policy and
have no conicts of interest to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Zhengyang Jiang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Safe Asset Demand and the Dollar Exchange Rate
Zhengyang Jiang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig
NBER Working Paper No. 24439
March 2018, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. G15

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a theory that links the U.S. dollar’s valuation in FX markets to the convenience yield
that foreign investors derive from holding U.S. safe assets. We show that this convenience yield
can be inferred from the Treasury basis: the yield gap between U.S. government and currency-
hedged foreign government bonds. Consistent with the theory, a widening of the basis coincides
with an immediate appreciation and a subsequent depreciation of the dollar. Our results lend
empirical support to models which impute a special role to the U.S. as the world’s provider of
safe assets and the dollar, the world’s reserve currency.


Zhengyang Jiang                                 Hanno Lustig
Kellogg School of Management                    Stanford Graduate School of Business
Northwestern University                         655 Knight Way
2211 Campus Drive                               Stanford, CA 94305
Evanston, IL 60610                              and NBER
zhengyang.jiang@kellogg.northwestern.edu        hlustig@stanford.edu

Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
akris@stanford.edu
   In the post-war era, the U.S. has been the world’s most favored supplier

of safe assets. Investors forgo a sizeable return, the convenience yield, to own

these assets (see Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, for example).

Moreover, during episodes of global financial instability, there is a flight to the

safety of U.S. Treasury bonds as the convenience yield on Treasurys rises. At

the same time, the dollar appreciates in foreign currency markets. Our paper

develops a theory that explains these stylized facts. In our new convenience yield

theory of exchange rates, the dollar’s valuation reflects the current and future

convenience yields that foreign investors derive from the ownership of U.S. safe

assets. We find that the convenience yields earned by foreign investors on U.S.

Treasurys are large and account for a sizeable share of the variation in the dollar

exchange rate. On average, foreign investors earn an extra convenience yield of

2% on Treasury holdings; 90% of this yield is directly attributable to their dollar

denomination. Thus, our study sheds light on how the U.S.’ role as the world’s

safe asset supplier, analyzed by Gourinchas and Rey (2007b); Caballero et al.

(2008); Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2009); Maggiori (2017); He et al. (2019);

Gopinath and Stein (2018), has shaped the dynamics of the dollar exchange

rate.

   Our paper explores the response of the dollar exchange rate when foreign

investors impute a higher convenience yield to U.S. safe assets, such as U.S.

Treasurys, than U.S. investors. In equilibrium, foreign investors should receive

a lower return in their own currencies on holding U.S. safe assets than U.S.

investors. To produce lower expected returns on U.S. safe assets in foreign

currency, the dollar has to appreciate today and, going forward, depreciate in

expectation to deliver a lower expected return to foreign investors. We derive

a novel expression for the dollar exchange rate as the expected value of all

future interest rate differences and convenience yields less the value of all future

currency risk premia, extending the work by Campbell and Clarida (1987);

Clarida and Gali (1994); Froot and Ramadorai (2005). Our theory predicts that

a country’s exchange rate will appreciate whenever foreign investors increase


                                         3
their valuation of the current and future convenience properties of that country’s

safe assets.

    To develop a measure of the unobserved convenience yield on U.S. safe as-

sets derived by foreign investors, we focus on U.S. Treasury bonds as the safest

among the set of U.S. safe assets. U.S. Treasury bonds are known to offer liquid-

ity and safety services to investors which results in lower equilibrium returns to

investors from holding such bonds (see Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen,

2012; Greenwood et al., 2015). In our model, the foreign convenience yield is

proportional to the Treasury basis, the difference in yields between the dollar

yield on short-term U.S. Treasury bonds and short-term foreign government

bonds, currency-hedged, into U.S. dollars. Even in the absence of frictions,

covered interest rate parity (henceforth CIP) cannot hold for Treasurys when

investors derive convenience yields from cash positions in these securities.

    We measure this wedge using data on spot exchange rates, forward exchange

rates, and pairs of government bond yields in a panel of G10 countries that

starts in 1988. We supplement our analysis with a dataset for the U.S/U.K.

cross that begins in 1970.1 The U.S. Treasury basis is generally negative and

widens during global financial crises. These negative bases are pervasive even

before the 2007—2009 global financial crisis.

    On average, foreigners earn at least an additional 2% convenience yield on

U.S. Treasurys according to our estimates. Around 90% of the extra convenience

yield is attributable to the dollar exposure rather than the safety/liquidity of

Treasurys. If safe and liquid U.S Treasurys were not issued in dollars, they

would carry a convenience yield of about 0.2% more than the average non-US

G10 government bond. Thus, investors particularly value safe and liquid payoffs

that are denominated in dollars. Our findings imply that dollar-Libor deposits

as well as other safe dollar-denominated assets are good substitutes for U.S.

Treasurys and also carry a convenience yield.

   1 Results   for this dataset are reported in Section H of the Appendix and are broadly
consistent with the results reported in the main text.



                                              4
   Exchange rates seem only weakly correlated with the macro-economic and

financial variables that ought to drive exchange rate variation (see, e.g., Froot

and Rogoff, 1995; Frankel and Rose, 1995, on the exchange rate disconnect

puzzle). Our work helps to resolve the exchange rate disconnect puzzle. Using

simple univariate regressions, we show that innovations in the U.S. Treasury

basis account for 17% of the variation in the spot dollar exchange rate, with

the right sign: a decrease in the basis coincides with an appreciation of the

dollar. Moreover, a decrease in the basis today predicts a future depreciation of

the dollar at longer horizons. We find a much weaker relation between foreign

Treasury bases and the exchange rates of the corresponding currencies. For

example, a widening of the U.K. Treasury basis does not lead to a significant

appreciation of the pound against other currencies. Our result lends support to

the proposition that the U.S. and the U.S. dollar occupy a unique position in

the international monetary system.

   Complete market models of exchange rates fall short when confronted with

the data. Real exchange rates do not co-vary with macroeconomic quantities

in the right way (see Backus and Smith, 1993; Kollmann, 1995). Real exchange

rates do not vary counter-cyclically, and real exchange rates are not volatile

enough when confronted with the evidence from asset prices (Brandt et al.,

2006). Convenience yields introduce a wedge into the foreign investors’ Euler

equation. Adopting a preference-free approach, Lustig and Verdelhan (2019)

demonstrate that incomplete markets models without these wedges cannot si-

multaneously address the U.I.P. violations, the exchange rate disconnect, i.e.

the countercyclical variation, and the exchange rate volatility puzzles, while It-

skhoki and Mukhin (2017) show that models with such a wedge can address the

exchange rate disconnect puzzle. Our work identifies convenience yields as a

key wedge between the real exchange rates and the difference in the log pricing

kernels that can quantitatively help to resolve this disconnect.

   In our VAR analysis, we find that a one standard deviation positive shock

to the convenience yield widens the annualized Treasury basis by 20 bps, and


                                        5
results in a 3% appreciation in the dollar over the next 2 quarters. Subsequently,

there is a gradual reversal over the next two to three years as the high conve-

nience yield leads to a negative excess return on owning the U.S. dollar. Using

our new convenience-yield valuation equation for the exchange rate, we imple-

ment a Campbell-Shiller-style decomposition of exchange rate innovations into

a cash flow component which tracks interest rate differences, a discount rate

component which tracks currency risk premia, and, finally, a convenience yield

component. The convenience yield channel is quantitatively important: under

our benchmark calibration in which around 90% of the Treasury’s convenience

yield is attributable to the dollar exposure, the convenience yield accounts for

between 16% and 28% of the variation in the quarterly exchange rate. In Froot

and Ramadorai (2005)’s decomposition, the convenience yield component would

have been absorbed by the discount rate component.

   The paper proceeds as follows. Section II sets out the stylized facts regarding

the U.S. Treasury basis. Section III lays out the convenience yield theory of

exchange rates. Section IV takes the theory to data. Section V decomposes

the dollar exchange rate variation into a convenience yield, an interest rate and

a risk premium component. Section VI concludes. The figures and tables are

printed at the end of the paper. The proofs and the state space representation

are in the appendix. The separate online appendix provides further derivations

of the theory, additional empirical evidence, and details our data sources.



                      I.    Related Literature

   Our results lend empirical support to theories of the U.S. as the provider

of world safe assets. There is ample empirical evidence that non-U.S. borrow-

ers tilt the denomination of their borrowings (loans, deposits, bonds) especially

towards the U.S. dollar (see Shin, 2012; Brauning and Ivashina, 2017; Bruno

and Shin, 2017, on bank borrowing, and corporate bond borrowing respec-

tively). Moreover, foreign investors tilt their portfolio towards owning U.S.



                                        6
dollar-denominated corporate bonds when they invest in bonds denominated

outside their home currencies (see Maggiori et al., 2020a). This quantity evi-

dence does not identify whether demand or supply factors are the main drivers

of the dollar bias in credit markets . Our evidence from sovereign bond markets

supports a demand-based explanation. The Treasury dollar basis is typically

negative and reductions in the basis appreciate the dollar, suggesting that for-

eign investors’ special demand for dollar-denominated assets lowers their ex-

pected returns.

    There is a separate literature on the special role of the U.S. dollar and U.S.

asset markets in the world economy. Gourinchas and Rey (2007a); Pierre-Olivier

et al. (2011); Maggiori (2017) focus on the “exorbitant privilege” of the U.S.

that drives low rates of return on U.S. dollar assets. In their analysis, the U.S.

provides insurance to the rest of the world, while Gopinath (2015) highlights

the dominant role of the dollar as an invoicing currency. Lustig et al. (2014)

present evidence that a global dollar factor drives currency returns around the

world. Our results underscore that there is something special about the dollar

but does not directly speak to the evidence of this literature.

    Our empirical approach is directly related to four other recent papers. First,

Du et al. (2018a) also study the Treasury basis, but for a different purpose.

They note that the U.S. Treasury basis is negative for short-maturity bonds,

suggesting that short-maturity bonds carry a convenience yield. They delve into

the term-structure of the basis, noting that the basis for long-maturity bonds

has been positive recently. We use the basis to infer a convenience yield, but

our main interest is in showing that the basis has explanatory power for the

dollar exchange rate.2

    Second, Valchev (2020) shows that the quantity of outstanding U.S. Treasury

bonds helps to explain the return on the dollar. Valchev (2020) builds an open-

economy model to relate the quantity of U.S. Treasury bonds to the convenience

   2 An   abridged version of the theory in this paper as well as results similar to that presented
in Table 3 are published in Jiang et al. (2018).



                                                 7
yield on Treasury bonds and the failure of uncovered interest parity. We show

that the existence of a foreign convenience yield for U.S. Treasury bonds causes

both uncovered interest parity and covered interest parity to fail. Moreover,

we show that variation in the convenience yields as measured by the dollar

basis explains a sizeable portion of the variation in the dollar exchange rate. In

closely related work, Koijen and Yogo (2020) estimate a global demand system

for assets (short-term bonds, long term bonds and equities) in which exchange

rates help to clear assets markets. Downward sloping demand for sovereign

bonds is consistent with convenience yields. They find that latent demand

shocks play an important role in accounting for exchange rate variation.

   Third, there is a recent literature that explores the failure of LIBOR covered

interest rate parity (see Ivashina et al., 2015; Du et al., 2018b). A common

conclusion from this literature is the LIBOR-based CIP fails in part because

of financial constraints faced by banks. Our results reinforce this conclusion,

and we add to it by showing that LIBOR CIP fails when there is both foreign

demand for dollar-LIBOR assets and financial constraints faced by banks in

supplying dollar-denominated LIBOR deposits. When these constraints bind,

the LIBOR basis reflects the foreign demand for dollar-denominated safe assets

and will help to explain movements in the dollar exchange rate. Our empirical

evidence is consistent with this LIBOR mechanism.

   Finally, in work subsequent to ours, Engel and Wu (2018) analyze non-

dollar currency pairs, and report evidence that CIP violations in sovereign bond

markets for non-dollar pairs have significant explanatory power for bilateral

exchange rates. In our sample, we find this relation to be much weaker for other

currencies when we exclude the dollar from all bilateral pairs.



   II.     The U.S. Treasury Basis: Stylized Facts

   Our paper relates movements in the value of the dollar exchange rate to the

demand for dollar safe assets. The key metric for this demand for dollar safe



                                        8
assets is the U.S. Treasury basis. This section defines the Treasury basis and

presents some stylized facts on the movement of the basis. The next sections

present theory to tie the basis to the demand for dollar safe assets.

   We define the U.S. Treasury basis as the difference between the yield on a

cash position in U.S. Treasurys yt$ and the synthetic dollar yield constructed

from a cash position in a foreign government bond, which earns a yield yt∗ in

foreign currency, that is hedged back into dollars:


                         xTt reas ≡ yt$ + (ft1 − st ) − yt∗ .                (1)


Here st denotes the log of the nominal exchange rate in units of foreign cur-

rency per dollar and ft1 denotes the log of the forward exchange rate. xTt reas

measures the violation of CIP constructed from U.S. Treasury and foreign gov-

ernment bond yields. A negative U.S. Treasury basis means that the U.S. Trea-

surys are expensive relative to their foreign counterpart. We also construct the

LIBOR basis (xLIBOR
              t     ) using LIBOR rates. There is a recent literature exam-

ining the failure of the LIBOR CIP condition (see Ivashina et al. (2015); Du

et al. (2018b)). Our Treasury basis measure is closely related to the LIBOR

CIP deviation. That deviation is constructed using LIBOR rates for home and

foreign countries while our basis measure is the same deviation but constructed

using government bond yields for home and foreign countries. We discuss the

relation between the Treasury basis and the LIBOR basis fully in Section B in

the Appendix.

   We develop and use two datasets, a panel of countries that spans 1988-2017

and a longer single time series from 1970 to 2016 for the United States/United

Kingdom pair. The shorter panel is based on quarterly data from 10 devel-

oped economies. The countries are Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, New

Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United States, and United Kingdom.

The sample starts in 1988Q1 and ends in 2017Q2. However, the panel is un-

balanced, with data for only a few countries at the start of the sample. In



                                          9
order to ensure results from Treasury basis and results from Libor basis are

comparable, we only include the country/quarter observations if both Treasury

basis and Libor basis are available. Because New Zealand’s 12-month Treasury

yield is available from 1987 whereas its 12-month Libor rate is available from

1996, and Sweden’s 12-month Treasury yield is available from 1984 whereas its

12-month Libor rate is available from 1991, we leave out some observations in

which Treasury basis is available but Libor basis is not. We have confirmed our

main empirical results are robust in the sample that contains these additional

observations of Treasury basis. We also present results using the Treasury ba-

sis measurement for bonds with maturities greater than 1 year from Du et al.

(2018a). Their sample is shorter but includes longer maturity bonds.

   Our data comprises the bilateral exchange rates with respect to the U.S.

dollar, 12-month bilateral forward foreign exchange contract prices, and 12-

month government bond yields and LIBOR rates in all 10 countries. We use

actual rather than fitted yields for government bonds whenever possible. The

Bloomberg yield data used by Du et al. (2018a) is from a fitted yield curve,

which can induce measurement errors. The main exception is the 2001:9—

2008:5 period when the U.S. stopped issuing 12-month bills. We convert the

daily data to quarterly frequencies using end-of-quarter observations on the same

day for bond yields, interest rates, forward rates and exchange rates. There are

some quarters for which all of the data are not available on the last day of the

quarter, in which case we find a date earlier in the quarter, but as close to the

end-of-quarter as possible, when all data are available. The Data Appendix in

the separate online appendix contains information about data sources.

   We construct the Treasury and LIBOR basis using the 12-month yields and

forwards for each currency following (1). In each quarter, we construct the mean

basis across all the countries in the panel for that quarter. Because the panel is

unbalanced, we construct country-level changes in the basis first, and then take

the cross-country average to arrive at the change in the basis. We denote the

cross-sectional mean basis in the panel as xTt reas . Similarly, we use y ∗t − yt$ to


                                         10
denote the cross-sectional average of yield differences, and st denotes the equally

weighted cross-sectional average of the log of bilateral exchange rates against

the dollar. For each of these cross-sectional averages, we employ the same set

of countries that are in the sample at time t.
                             50
                                                                                            Treasury Mean
                                                                                            Treasury Median
                                                                                            Libor Mean
                                                                                            Libor Median

                              0
             basis points




                             -50




                            -100




                            -150
                                    1990   1993   1995   1998   2001   2004   2006   2009    2012   2015

                                   Figure 1. U.S. LIBOR and Treasury Bases

U.S. LIBOR and Treasury basis in basis points from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2. The maturity is one
year. We plot the cross-sectional mean and median for each of the bases.



   Figure 1 plots these series. The dotted line is the mean LIBOR basis of the

U.S. dollar against the basket of currencies. The pre-crisis spikes in the average

LIBOR basis are driven by idiosyncrasies of LIBOR rates in Sweden (currency

crisis) in 1992 and Japan in 1995 (note the difference between the mean and

median LIBOR basis in 1992 and 1995). The LIBOR basis is close to zero for

most of the sample and turns negative and volatile beginning in 2007. These

stylized facts about the LIBOR basis are known from the work of Du et al.

(2018b).

   The solid line is the mean Treasury basis. Unlike the LIBOR basis, the

Treasury basis has always been negative and volatile. Table I reports the time-

series moments of the Treasury basis, the Libor basis, the 12M (12-month)

Treasury yield difference and the 12M forward discount. The average mean

Treasury basis is −22 bps per annum, which means that foreign investors are


                                                                11
willing to give up 22 bps per annum more for holding currency-hedged U.S.

Treasurys than their own bonds. The standard deviation of the mean Treasury

basis is 23 bps per quarter. In contrast, the average LIBOR basis is −6 bps.

Section A of the Appendix consider the U.S./U.K. Treasury basis over a longer

sample and finds similar dynamics.

Table I. Summary Statistics of Cross-sectional Mean Basis and Interest Rate
Difference

Table reports summary statistics in percentage points for the 12M Treasury dollar basis
xT reas , the Libor dollar basis xLibor , the 12M yield spread y $ − y ∗ , and the 12M forward
discount f − s in logs. Table reports time-series averages, time-series standard deviations and
correlations. Numbers reported are time-series moments of the cross-sectional means of the
unbalanced Panel. The countries are Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Nor-
way, Sweden, Switzerland, United States, and United Kingdom. The sample starts in 1988Q1
and ends in 2017Q2. For each of these cross-sectional averages, we employ the same set of
countries that are in the sample at time t.

                                 xT reas   xLibor y$ − y∗         f −s
                              Panel A: 1988Q1—2017Q2
                          mean    −0.22    −0.06   −0.74          −0.52
                          stdev     0.23     0.17    1.68          1.75
                           skew   −1.22    −3.04   −1.14          −0.89

                         xT reas      1.00    0.40   −0.24        −0.36
                          xLibor      0.40    1.00    0.37         0.30
                     y U.S. − y ∗   −0.24     0.37    1.00         0.99
                                Panel B: 1988Q1—2007Q4
                           mean     −0.22    −0.03   −0.76        −0.53
                           stdev      0.24    0.14    1.98         2.06
                            skew    −0.82    −4.51   −1.01        −0.79

                         xT reas      1.00    0.33   −0.29        −0.40
                          xLibor      0.33    1.00    0.46         0.40
                     y U.S. − y ∗   −0.29     0.46    1.00         0.99
                                Panel C: 2008Q1—2017Q2
                           mean     −0.21    −0.14   −0.70        −0.49
                           stdev      0.22    0.20    0.69         0.72
                            skew    −2.31    −1.84    0.54         0.59

                         xT reas      1.00      0.62       0.00   −0.30
                          xLibor      0.62      1.00       0.42    0.22
                     y U.S. − y ∗     0.00      0.42       1.00    0.95



    When LIBOR CIP holds, the Treasury basis is simply the difference between

the U.S. Treasury-LIBOR spread and its foreign counterpart:

                                                              
                     xTt reas = yt$ − yt$,Libor − yt∗ − yt∗,Libor .                        (2)


Before the financial crisis, when the LIBOR basis was close to zero (−3 bps),


                                              12
the Treasury basis (−22 bps) is mostly due to this differential in the Treasury-

LIBOR spreads. The U.S. LIBOR-Treasury spread is 23 bps larger than its for-

eign counterpart. During and after the crisis, this U.S. LIBOR-Treasury spread

is only 7 bps per annum higher than the foreign one, while the average LIBOR

basis widens to −14 bps per annum. Over the entire sample, the Treasury and

LIBOR basis have a correlation of 0.40. This correlation is largely driven by

the post-crisis relation where the correlation 0.62. Finally, the Treasury basis

is negatively correlated with the U.S.-foreign Treasury yield difference and the

forward discount.

             Table II. The Treasury Basis and Interest Rate Spreads

We regress the quarterly average Treasury basis, xT reas , on a number of U.S. money market
spreads and the U.S. to foreign government bond interest rate differential. The spreads and
interest rate differential are constructed as the quarterly average of the indicated series. Data
is from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2 for the regressions with 118 observations and 2001Q4 to 2017Q2
for the regressions with 63 observations. OLS standard errors in parentheses. One, two and
three stars denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.


                                 (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)
U.S. 6-month OIS−T-bill          0.03
                                (0.17)
U.S. 6-month LIBOR−OIS                    −0.38∗∗∗                                −0.44∗∗∗
                                          (0.04)                                   (0.03)
U.S. 6-month LIBOR−T-bill                              −0.43∗∗∗                                 −0.42∗∗∗
                                                       (0.05)                                    (0.05)
y$ − y∗                                                              −0.03∗∗∗     −0.08∗∗∗      −0.02∗∗
                                                                     (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
Observations                     63         63          118           118           63              118
R2                             0.0004      0.62         0.39          0.06         0.77             0.41



    Table II provides some statistics on the covariates of the Treasury basis.

In the first column, we regress the basis on the OIS-T-bill spread which is a

measure of the liquidity premium on Treasury bonds. Note that the basis is

negative on average (see Figure 1). There is little relation between the basis

and OIS-Tbill. The second column instead uses the spread between LIBOR and

OIS. This spread is strongly negatively related to the basis and the R2 of the

regression is 62%. When the LIBOR-OIS spread rises, as in a flight-to-quality,

the basis goes more negative. Note that OIS data is only available since 2001.

Column (3) reports the correlation with the LIBOR-Tbill spread which we can


                                               13
construct to the start of our sample in 1988. There is a strong negative relation

between the spread and the basis, and we learn from columns (1) and (2) that

the relation is likely due to the LIBOR-OIS component of this spread (note also

that the coefficient on LIBOR-OIS is quite similar to the coefficient on LIBOR-

T-bill). Column (4) includes the spread between U.S. interest rates and the

mean foreign interest rate. When U.S. rates are high relative to foreign rates,

the basis is more negative. We have run specifications where we include both

U.S. and foreign interest rates, and subject to the caveat that these rates do

move together, the correlation seems to be driven by the U.S. interest rate and

not the foreign rate. Column (5) and (6) include both the LIBOR spread and

the U.S. to world interest rate differential. The explanatory power for the basis

is largely driven by the LIBOR spread. To see this, compare the R2 in columns

(5) and (6) to those in columns (3) and (4).

   During episodes of global financial instability, there is a flight to the safety

of U.S. Treasury bonds which increases their convenience yield (see Krishna-

murthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, for example). During these episodes, the

wedge between U.S. and foreign currency hedged Treasury yields rises. Figure

1 illustrates this pattern for the 2008 financial crisis. The dollar appreciates by

about 30% over this period. The hypothesis of this paper is that the increase in

the convenience yield on U.S. Treasury bonds assigned by foreign investors will

also be reflected in an appreciation of the U.S. dollar. The spot exchange rate of

a safe asset currency will reflect the cumulative value of all future convenience

yields.



          III. A Theory of Spot Exchange Rates,
            Forward Exchange Rates and Convenience
                       Yields on Bonds

   This section develops a theory of spot and forward exchange rates and con-

venience yields. There are two countries, foreign (∗) and the U.S. ($), each

with its own currency. We use St to denote the nominal exchange rate in units


                                        14
of foreign currency per dollar, so that an increase in St corresponds to an ap-

preciation of the U.S. dollar. There are domestic (foreign) nominal default-free

government bonds denominated in dollars (in foreign currency). We derive bond

and exchange rate pricing conditions that are implied by no-arbitrage.

     We focus on the pricing of government bonds as the assets that produce

convenience yields. As we will make clear, our theory is about the pricing

of all U.S. dollar-denominated safe assets, not just U.S. Treasury bonds, but

our empirical work is largely about the measured convenience yields on U.S.

Treasury bonds. As a result, the expressions we derive for U.S. Treasury bonds

will guide our empirical work.


A.     Convenience yields and exchange rates

     We use yt∗ to denote the nominal yield on a one-period risk-free zero-coupon

bond in foreign currency. Likewise, yt$ denotes the nominal yield on a one-period

risk-free zero-coupon Treasury bond in dollars. The stochastic discount factor

(SDF) of the foreign investor is denoted Mt∗ , while that of the U.S. investor

is denoted Mt$ . We use λi,j
                         t   to denote the convenience yield of investors in

country j for bonds issued by the government in country i. Foreign investors

price foreign bonds denominated in foreign currency, and the foreign investor’s

Euler equation is given by:

                                ∗
                                       ∗,∗
                           ∗
                       Et Mt+1 eyt = e−λt ,       λ∗,∗
                                                   t   ≥ 0.                   (3)


The expression on the left side of the equation is standard. On the right side, we

allow foreign investors to derive a convenience yield, λ∗,∗
                                                        t , on their domestic bond

holdings. λ∗,∗
           t   is asset-specific and hence cannot be folded into the stochastic

discount factor. Our model abstracts away from the fact that the value of

Treasury bonds is ultimately derived from the government’s budget constraint.

Chernov et al. (2020); Jiang (2019a,b); Jiang et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2019)

study how the government budget affects currency returns and bond valuation.



                                        15
   Foreign investors can also invest in U.S. Treasurys. To do so, they convert
                                            1
local currency to U.S. dollars to receive   St   dollars, invest in U.S. Treasurys, and

then convert the proceeds back to local currency at date t + 1 at St+1 . Foreign

investors in U.S. Treasurys derive a convenience yield, λ$,∗
                                                         t , on their Treasury

bond holdings:

                                   
                         ∗ St+1 yt$        $,∗
                     Et Mt+1    e     = e−λt ,            λ$,∗
                                                           t   ≥ 0.                (4)
                             St

   Suppose the convenience yield λ$,∗
                                  t   rises, lowering the right side of equation

(4). Then, the required return on the investment in U.S. Treasury bonds (the

left side of the equation) falls; either the expected rate of dollar appreciation

declines or the yield yt$ declines, or both.

   Next, we use these pricing conditions to derive an expression linking the

exchange rate and the convenience yield. We assume that m∗t = log Mt∗ and
              St+1
∆st+1 = log    St    are conditionally normal. Then, the Euler equation for the

foreign bond in (3) can be rewritten as,

                              1
                     Et m∗t+1 + vart m∗t+1 + yt∗ + λ∗,∗
                                        
                                                    t   = 0,                       (5)
                               2

and the Euler equation for the U.S. bond in (4) as,

          1                        1
 Et m∗t+1 + vart m∗t+1 +Et [∆st+1 ]+ vart [∆st+1 ]+yt$ +λ$,∗  ∗
                    
                                                         t −RPt = 0. (6)
           2                        2

RPt∗ = −covt m∗t+1 , ∆st+1 is the risk premium the foreign investor requires
                          

for the exchange rate risk when investing in U.S. bonds. We combine these two

expressions to find:

LEMMA 1: The expected return in levels on a long position in dollars earned

by a foreign investor is decreasing in the convenience yield gap:

                                1
                                                                 ∗,∗
         Et [∆st+1 ] + yt$ − yt∗ + vart [∆st+1 ] = RPt∗ − (λ$,∗
                                                            t − λt ).              (7)
                                  2



                                         16
The left hand side is the excess return earned by a foreign investor from investing

in the U.S. bond relative to the foreign bond. This is the return on the reverse

carry trade, given that U.S. yields are typically lower than foreign yields. On the

right hand side, the first term is the familiar currency risk premium demanded

by a foreign investor going long U.S. Treasurys in dollars. The second term is

the convenience yield attached by foreign investors to U.S. Treasurys minus the

convenience yield foreign investors derive from their holdings of their own bonds

(“convenience yield gap”). A positive convenience yield gap, λ$,∗
                                                              t   − λ∗,∗
                                                                     t   > 0,

lowers the required return on the reverse carry trade, i.e., the return to investing

in U.S. Treasury bonds. Even in the absence of priced currency risk, RPt∗ = 0,

uncovered interest parity fails when the convenience yield gap is greater than

zero.


B.      U.S. demand for foreign bonds

     Since U.S. investors have access to foreign bond markets, there is another

pair of Euler equations to consider. An increase in the foreign convenience yield

imputed to U.S. Treasurys implies an expected deprecation of the dollar. For

a U.S. investor, buying foreign bonds when the dollar is expected to depreciate

produces a high carry return. The U.S. investor’s Euler equation when investing

in the foreign bond is:

                                              
                                      St yt∗            ∗,$
                     Et        $
                              Mt+1        e        = e−λt ,      λ∗,$
                                                                  t   ≥ 0.      (8)
                                     St+1

We also assume that U.S. investors derive a convenience yield when investing

in U.S. Treasurys:

                                   $
                                          $,$
                              $
                          Et Mt+1 eyt = e−λt ,                λ$,$
                                                               t   ≥ 0.         (9)


An increase in the U.S. investor’s convenience yield lowers U.S. Treasury bond

yields, holding the SDF fixed: yt$ = ρ$t − λ$,$        $              $
                                                                         
                                            t , where ρt = − log Et Mt+1 . We




                                               17
assume log-normality and rewrite these equations to derive an expression for

the carry trade return,

                                    1                              ∗,$
             yt∗ − yt$ − Et [∆st+1 ] + vart [∆st+1 ] = RPt$ + (λ$,$
                                                                t − λt ).    (10)
                                      2

where, RPt$ = −covt m$t+1 , −∆st+1 is the risk premium the U.S. investor
                                  

requires for the exchange rate risk when investing in foreign bonds (i.e. the risk

premium attached to the dollar appreciating).

   Finally, we combine (7) and (10) to derive a cross-country restriction on the

convenience yields imputed to Treasurys and the currency risk premia,


                             ∗,∗          ∗,$
                      (λ$,∗          $,$          $     ∗
                        t − λt ) − (λt − λt ) = rpt + rpt ,                  (11)


where we use rp$t = RPt$ − 12 vart [∆st+1 ] and rp∗t = RPt∗ − 12 vart [∆st+1 ] to

denote the log currency risk premia.

LEMMA 2: Under the assumption that the log currency risk premia are sym-

metric, rp$t = −rp∗t , foreign and domestic investors agree on the relative conve-

nience of Treasurys vs. foreign bonds:


                                   ∗,∗          ∗,$
                            (λ$,∗          $,$
                              t − λt ) = (λt − λt ).                         (12)


   We will develop our model for this symmetric case because it easiest to

exposit. Under the symmetry assumption, the convenience yield gaps between

foreign and domestic bonds are the same for either foreign or U.S. investors,

and it is this gap that enters exchange rate determination. We can deviate from

symmetry in log currency risk premia and relax equation (12); however, this

comes at the cost of additional complexity that we do not think adds to the

analysis. We pursue this approach more systematically in related work (see,

e.g. Jiang et al., 2020a,b).




                                         18
C.     Exchange rates, Interest Rates and Convenience yields

     Next, we explore the implications of our theory for the level of the exchange

rate. By forward iteration on (7), the level of exchange rates can be stated

as a function of the interest rate differences, the currency risk premia and the

future convenience yields (see Froot and Ramadorai, 2005, for a version without

convenience yields). Campbell and Clarida (1987); Clarida and Gali (1994)

developed an early version of this decomposition that imposed U.I.P.

LEMMA 3: The level of the nominal exchange can be written as:

         ∞                            ∞                           ∞
                      − λ∗,∗
         X                            X                           X
st =   Et     (λ$,∗
                t+τ      t+τ ) + Et
                                            $
                                          (yt+τ      ∗
                                                  − yt+τ ) − Et          rp∗t+τ + Et [ lim st+T ].
                                                                                     T →∞
          τ =0                        τ =0                        τ =0
                                                                                             (13)

     The term Et [limτ →∞ st+τ ] is constant only if the nominal exchange rate is

stationary.

     The exchange rate level is determined by yield differences, the convenience

yields, and the currency risk premia. This is an extension of Froot and Ramado-

rai (2005)’s expression for the level of exchange rates. The first term involves

the sum of expected convenience yields λ$,∗
                                        t+τ earned by foreign investors on their

holdings of U.S. Treasurys in excess of the convenience yields λ∗,∗
                                                                t+τ earned on

their own bonds. The second term involves the sum of bond yield differences.

Note that the convenience yield earned by U.S. investors on their holdings of
                                               $
U.S. Treasurys lowers the U.S. Treasury yield yt+τ and hence lowers the second

term. This expression implies that an increase in the expected future conve-

nience yields earned by foreigners relative to those earned by U.S. investors

should cause the dollar to appreciate today.

     To clarify this latter point regarding convenience yields of foreign investors

relative to U.S. investors, we rewrite (13) as the sum of the convenience yield dif-

ferentials, the fundamental yield differences, stripped of the convenience yields,




                                              19
and the risk premia:

          ∞
          X                                   ∞
                                              X                                ∞
                                                                               X
st = Et          (λ$,∗
                   t+τ   −   λ$,$
                              t+τ )   +   Et     (ρ$t+τ   −   ρ∗t+τ )   − Et          rp∗t+τ + Et [ lim st+τ ].
                                                                                                  τ →∞
          τ =0                               τ =0                              τ =0
                                                                                                          (14)

where ρ$t = − log Et Mt+1
                      $
                          = yt$ + λ$,$
                                          
                                   t   is the fundamental (no convenience

effect) bond yield in dollars, and likewise for foreign. Expression (14) clarifies

that the exchange rate responds only to the difference in convenience yields

on U.S. Treasurys earned by foreigners and by domestic investors. When the

foreign investors’ convenience yields on Treasurys increases relative to the U.S.

convenience yields, then the dollar appreciates.

   Thus far we have not derived a process for the exchange rate. We begin by

noting that when markets are complete, the unique exchange rate process that

is consistent with absence of arbitrage opportunities is,


                                          ∆st+1 = m$t+1 − m∗t+1 .                                         (15)


See for example Backus et al. (2001). When markets are incomplete, an ex-

change rate process that satisfies all of four of the Euler equations (two investors

in two bonds) is:


                         ∆st+1 = m$t+1 − m∗t+1 + ηt+1 + λ$,$  $,∗
                                                         t − λt                                           (16)


where ηt+1 is an incomplete markets wedge that satisfies restrictions to enforce

the Euler equations for bond investors (Lustig and Verdelhan, 2019). This

expression also underscores that markets must be incomplete in our convenience

yield theory. If markets were complete, ηt+1 = 0 are zero in all states of the

world and the convenience yield gap, λ$,$  $,∗
                                      t − λt , must be zero. We can derive

an expression for st by forward substitution (16), and after taking expectations,

we recover the expression in (13). Section B of the Appendix contains a detailed

derivation behind these statements.

   Next, we derive expressions for the real exchange rate, which is likely to be


                                                      20
stationary regardless of the macroeconomic environment. We denote the log

of the foreign and domestic price levels as p∗t and p$t , respectively. The real

exchange rate is,

                                    qt = st + p$t − p∗t .                               (17)


We substitute the real exchange rate expression, (17), into the earlier expressions

for nominal exchange rates and rewrite to find the following result.

LEMMA 4:         The level of the real exchange rate can be written as:

          ∞                         ∞                         ∞
                       ∗,∗
          X                         X                         X
qt = Et       (λ$,∗
                t+τ − λt+τ ) + Et
                                          $
                                        (rt+τ    ∗
                                              − rt+τ ) − Et          rp∗t+τ + Et [ lim qt+T ]
                                                                                T →∞
          τ =0                      τ =0                      τ =0
                                                                                        (18)

where rt$ and rt∗ are the real interest rates, i.e., yt$ − Et [∆p$t+1 ] is the real dollar

interest rate.

     The last term, q̄ = Et [limτ →∞ qt+τ ], is constant if the real exchange rate is

stationary.

     The first component measures the impact of variation in the convenience

yield earned by foreign investors from holding U.S. Treasurys on the real ex-

change rate. The second component measures real yield differences, which the

effects of convenience yields earned by U.S. investors. The last component

measures risk premia. In Section V of this paper, we estimate each of these

components.


D.     The Treasury basis, Convenience Yields, and Dollarness

     The key variable in our theory is λ$,∗
                                        t   − λ∗,∗
                                               t , the extra convenience yield

earned by foreign investors on their holdings of U.S. Treasurys in excess of the

foreign government bond. This object can be inferred from the Treasury basis.

To do so, we consider the foreign investor’s Euler equation for an investment in

a foreign government bond that is swapped into dollars via the forward market.

The investors owns a bundle of a safe foreign government bond, providing a con-

venience yield λ∗,∗
                t , and a forward position. Together, these produce a synthetic



                                             21
“Treasury” that is not as safe and liquid as the cash position in U.S. Treasurys,

because the synthetic position involves some bank counter-party risk and the

foreign bond is not as liquid as the U.S. Treasury bonds. Thus, we posit that

the synthetic position provides a convenience yield between that of the foreign

government bond and U.S. Treasurys:

                                 
                    ∗ St+1 St yt∗        ∗,∗ ∗  $,∗ ∗,∗
                Et Mt+1        e    = e−λt −β (λt −λt ) .                   (19)
                        St Ft1

Here Ft1 denotes the one-period forward exchange rate, in foreign currency per

dollar, and β ∗ , with 0 < β ∗ < 1, denotes the fraction of convenience yield on

the cash position in the foreign bond hedged into dollars relative to the U.S.

Treasury investment. We will estimate this fraction in our empirical work. If

β ∗ = 0, then the “dollarness” created by adding the forward position to the

foreign government bond provides no incremental convenience benefits to the

foreign investor. In this case, both U.S. Treasury bonds and foreign government

bonds are valued for their liquidity and safety properties in their respective

currencies. If β ∗ = 1, then the “dollarness” provided by the hedge converts the

foreign government bond to the equivalent of a U.S. Treasury. In this case, we

learn that investors particularly value safe and liquid bonds whose payoffs are

denominated in dollars.

   We can use (19) along with the foreign investor’s Euler equation for the

U.S Treasury bond, (4), to find an expression for the unobserved U.S. Treasury

convenience yield gap.

LEMMA 5: The foreign convenience yield gap on U.S. Treasury bonds is pro-

portional to the Treasury basis:


                                                                   ∗,∗
            xTt reas ≡ yt$ + (ft1 − st ) − yt∗ = −(1 − β ∗ )(λ$,∗
                                                              t − λt ).     (20)


   This lemma is the key to our empirical work as it provides a measure of the

convenience yields that drives our theory.



                                        22
     We can also consider the basis from from the standpoint of the U.S. investor.

Suppose the U.S. investor invests in the foreign bond swapped into dollars,

and receives a convenience yield equal to λ∗,$  $ $,$   ∗,$
                                           t + β (λt − λt ). Here again β
                                                                          $


measures the fraction of convenience gained, relative to the U.S. Treasury bond,

by converting the foreign government bond into a dollar payoff. The basis can

be shown to be equal to,


                                                           ∗,$
                              xTt reas = −(1 − β $ )(λ$,$
                                                      t − λt ),



which is equal to (20) when β $ = β ∗ , given the symmetry restriction in (12).3


E.     Summary

     We arrive at five key implications of our theory relating the Treasury basis

to the dollar exchange rate. We will test each of these in the data.

PROPOSITION 1: Treasury basis and the dollar

     1. The level of the nominal exchange can be written as:

                      ∞                  ∞                        ∞
                     X    xTt+τ
                             reas       X
                                                      ∗
                                                                 X
        st = −Et                 ∗
                                   + Et     (y $
                                              t+τ − y t+τ ) − Et      rp∗t+τ + Et [ lim st+T ].
                     τ =0
                          1 −  β        τ =0                     τ =0
                                                                                   T →∞

                                                                                          (21)

     2. The level of the real exchange can be written as:

                      ∞                  ∞                       ∞
                     X    xTt+τ
                             reas       X
                                                      ∗
                                                                X
        qt = −Et                 ∗
                                   + Et     (r $
                                              t+τ − rt+τ ) − Et      rp∗t+τ + Et [ lim qt+T ].
                     τ =0
                          1 −  β        τ =0                    τ =0
                                                                                  T →∞

                                                                                         (22)

        where Et [limτ →∞ qt+τ ] is constant under the assumption that the real

        exchange rate is stationary. The terms rt$ and rt∗ are the real interest

        rates, i.e., yt$ − Et [∆p$t+1 ] is the real dollar interest rate.

     3. The expected log excess return to a foreign investor of a long position in

     3 The   observation that Treasury-based CIP violations may be driven by convenience yields
was pointed out by Adrien Verdelhan in a discussion at the Macro Finance Society (2017).



                                                23
     Treasury bonds is increasing in the risk premium and the Treasury basis:

                                                           1
                    Et [∆st+1 ] + yt$ − yt∗ = rp∗t +            xT reas .          (23)
                                                          1 − β∗ t


  4. The expected log return to a foreign investor of going long the dollar via

     the forward contract is:

                                                         β∗
                  Et [∆st+1 ] − (ft1 − st ) = rp∗t +         xT reas .             (24)
                                                       1 − β∗ t


  5. The change in the nominal exchange rate can be decomposed as ∆st+1 =

     (Et+1 − Et ) st+1 + Et [∆st+1 ] where the innovation is given by:

                                               ∞                             ∞
                                              X    xTt+τ
                                                      reas                  X
                                                                                  $      ∗
     (Et+1 − Et ) st+1   = − (Et+1 − Et )                 ∗
                                                            + (E t+1 − Et )     (yt+τ − yt+τ )
                                              τ =1
                                                   1 −  β                   τ =1
                                           ∞
                                           X
                         − (Et+1 − Et )           rp∗t+τ + (Et+1 − Et ) lim st+T .        (25)
                                                                         T →∞
                                           τ =1




   IV.      Joint Dynamics of the Dollar Exchange
               Rate, the Treasury Basis, and the
                      Convenience Yield

   Next, we explore the empirical implications of our theory. We begin by

showing that innovations to the Treasury basis covary with innovations in the

nominal dollar exchange rate, consistent with Result 5 of Proposition 1. We

also show that the basis predicts future returns to a foreign investor going long

Treasury bonds relative to foreign bonds, consistent with Result 3 of Proposition

1. We then show that our results are more broadly about dollar safe assets,

relate our results to the violation of LIBOR-based covered interest parity, and

show that our results are strongest for the dollar and do not extend to other

currencies to the same extent.




                                         24
A.     Variation in the Treasury Basis and the Dollar

     We start from the expression for exchange rate innovations (5) in Propo-

sition 1. We run a regression of exchange rate innovations on innovations to

the basis, controlling for news about future interest rate differences and cur-

rency risk premia, to estimate the effect of convenience yield news on the

value of the dollar. Innovations to the basis measure shocks to the demand

for safe dollars.4 This regression does not require exchange rate stationarity.

After controlling for discount rate and interest rate news, we get consistent

estimates of the slope coefficient β ∗ provided that the covariance between the

news about convenience yields and the long-run exchange rate tends to zero:
                       PT                               
limT →∞ Cov (Et − Et−1 ) τ =0 xTt+τ
                                 reas
                                      , (Et − Et−1 ) st+T = 0. If exchange

rates are stationary, this condition is trivially satisfied.

     We construct quarterly AR(1) innovations in the Treasury basis by regressing

xTt reas − xTt−1
              reas
                   on xTt−1
                         reas      $
                              and yt−1 − y ∗t−1 and computing the residual, ∆xTt reas .

We then regress the contemporaneous quarterly change in the spot exchange

rate, ∆st ≡ st − st−1 , on this innovation. Note that we have verified the

robustness of the results reported here to the case where the innovation ∆xTt reas

is the simple change in xTt reas rather than the AR(1) innovation. The results

are reported in the Separate Online Appendix. We simply use the change in the

log exchange rate as the innovation.

     Table III reports the results. From columns (1), (3), (5), (6) and (8) in

Panel A, we see that the innovation in the Treasury basis strongly correlates

with changes in the exchange rate. In the context of the well-known exchange

rate disconnect puzzle (Froot and Rogoff, 1995; Frankel and Rose, 1995), the

R2 s are quite high. Our regressors account in panel A for 17% to 43% of the

variation in the dollar’s rate of appreciation. The sign is negative as predicted

by Proposition 1. The point estimates increase in absolute value in the post-

crisis, as does the explanatory power. From column (1), we see that a 10 bps

     4 We   cannot rule out that these include shocks to the demand for dollars that are subse-
quently invested in safe assets.



                                               25
decrease in the basis (or an increase in the foreign convenience yield) below its

mean coincides with a 1.02% appreciation of the U.S. dollar.

   The regression estimates provide a way to estimate β ∗ which is the incre-

mental convenience yield attached to safe and liquid dollar payoffs relative to

foreign-currency safe and liquid payoffs. We assume that the annual basis fol-

lows an AR(1) with coefficient φa . From (5) in Proposition 1, it follows that

the innovation to the log exchange rate reflects the revision in the forecast of

the basis at t:

                                               ∞                    ∞
                       (Et − Et−1 )xt         X
                                                           ∗
                                                                   X
 (Et −Et−1 )st = −                        +Et     (y $
                                                    t+τ −yt+τ )−Et      rp∗t+τ +s̄. (26)
                      (1 − φa )(1 − β ∗ )     τ =0                 τ =0


The basis is mean-reverting with a quarterly AR(1) coefficient of φ = 0.47.

Then, from (26) the sum of expected future increases in the 12-month basis in
                                                                          1
response to a 10 bp rise in the 12-month basis today is 10 ×           1−0.474   = 10.5.

In order to rationalize the 1.02% appreciation in the exchange rate, we need a

value of β ∗ of 1 −   10.5
                      102    = 0.90, suggesting that much of the convenience yield

attached to U.S. Treasury bonds derives from its attribute as a safe and liquid

dollar payoff. Put differently, if U.S. Treasurys were issued in foreign currency,

their convenience yields would be substantially lower.

   Column (3) of Table III includes the contemporaneous and the lagged inno-

vation to the basis. This specification increases the R2 to 25%. The explanatory

power of the lag is certainly not consistent with our rational expectations model,

but it is the signature of delayed adjustment in the exchange rate to shocks to

the basis. Time-series momentum has been shown to be a common phenomenon

in many asset markets, including currency markets (see Moskowitz et al., 2012),

although there is no commonly agreed upon explanation for such phenomena.

The delayed adjustment lends support to the notion of expectational errors on

the part of currency market investors. Section D of the Appendix develops a

model of sticky expectations in currency markets that replicates the momentum

evidence. Froot and Thaler (1990); Gourinchas and Tornell (2004); Bacchetta



                                           26
Table III. Average Treasury Basis and the USD Spot Nominal Exchange Rate

The dependent variable is the quarterly change in the log of the spot USD exchange rate
against a basket. In panel A, the independent variables are the innovation in the average
Treasury basis, ∆xT reas , as log yield (i.e. 50 basis points is 0.005), the lagged value of
the innovation, the innovation in the LIBOR basis, and the innovation in the U.S.-to-foreign
Treasury yield differential. Panel B includes the quarterly change in the VIX (in percentage
unit). Data is quarterly. The constant term is omitted. OLS standard errors in parentheses.
One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.


                                                Panel A: Benchmark Results
                                     1988Q1−2017Q2                       1988Q1−2007Q4      2008Q1−2017Q2
                   (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)     (8)       (9)
∆xT reas         −10.20∗∗∗             −10.23∗∗∗               −9.81∗∗∗    −8.48∗∗∗        −14.93∗∗∗
                  (2.09)                 (1.98)                (1.73)      (2.62)           (3.20)
∆x̄LIBOR                     −2.85                                                   4.63            −13.51∗∗∗
                              (3.09)                                                (4.22)            (4.05)
Lag ∆xT reas                            −6.92∗∗∗               −6.47∗∗∗
                                         (1.97)                (1.73)
∆(y $ − ȳ ∗ )                                        3.76∗∗∗   3.57∗∗∗
                                                     (0.71)    (0.60)
Observations      117        117      116          117       116          80        80          37     37
R2                0.17       0.01     0.25         0.20      0.43        0.12      0.02        0.38   0.24
                                                Panel B: Control for VIX
                                     1988Q1−2017Q2                       1988Q1−2007Q4     2008Q1−2017Q2
                   (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)     (7)     (8)       (9)
∆xT reas          −9.62∗∗∗              −9.22∗∗∗               −9.66∗∗∗   −7.10∗∗         −10.44∗∗∗
                  (2.40)                 (2.31)                 (1.94)     (3.14)          (3.35)
∆x̄LIBOR                     −1.89                                                  5.19            −8.07∗∗
                              (3.09)                                               (4.10)            (3.94)
Lag ∆xT reas                            −7.06∗∗∗               −4.33∗∗
                                         (2.28)                 (1.95)
∆(y $ − ȳ ∗ )                                       4.71∗∗∗     4.48∗∗∗
                                                    (0.73)      (0.66)
∆vix               0.05        0.09       0.06       0.12∗∗      0.08     −0.12   −0.13     0.21∗∗∗   0.26∗∗∗
                  (0.07)     (0.07)      (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.05)     (0.10)  (0.10)  (0.08)    (0.08)
Observations      109        109      109          109       109          72        72          37     37
R2                0.15       0.02     0.22         0.29      0.46        0.09      0.05        0.50   0.42




                                              27
and Van Wincoop (2005) have argued that expectational errors are behind the

failure of uncovered interest rate parity in currency markets.

   Column (4) of the table includes the innovation in the interest rate differen-

tial, y $ − y ∗ , constructed by taking an equal-weighted average of the one-year

Treasury yields. We see that increases in this interest rate spread has signifi-

cant explanatory power in our sample. A rise in the U.S. rate relative to foreign

appreciates the currency, which is what textbook models of exchange rate deter-

mination will predict (and is what equation (13) predicts). Note that a decrease

in the convenience yields earned by U.S. investors will increase the U.S. Trea-

sury yield y $ , and cause the dollar to appreciate. We include this covariate

in column (5) along with the basis innovation. The R2 rises to 43% and the

coefficient estimates and standard errors are nearly unchanged. This is because

the basis innovation and interest rate innovation are nearly uncorrelated in this

sample (note: the levels are negatively correlated).

   These results are largely robust to controlling for changes in the VIX, a com-

monly used measure of the quantity of risk in global equity markets. These re-

sults are reported in Panel B. The baseline coefficient estimate decreases slightly

to −9.62. Following the same logic, we need a value of β ∗ of 1 − 10.5
                                                                  96.2 = 0.89. In

the post-crisis sample, controlling for VIX brings the coefficient estimates back

in line with the pre-crisis estimates. The point estimate decreases from −14.93

to −10.44.

   Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) estimate that the convenience

yield on U.S. Treasury bonds relative to AAA rated corporate bonds averages

0.75%. They interpret the 0.75% in terms of the liquidity services and extra

safety of Treasury bonds relative to corporate bonds. We estimate that for-
                                                          1
eigners earn an extra convenience yield between 1.96% ( 0.112 × 0.22) and 2.09%
    1
( 0.105 × 0.22) per annum on dollar Treasury bonds relative to foreign-currency

government bonds. Since β ∗ is around 0.9, we additionally learn that much of

this convenience benefit derives from the fact that the U.S. Treasury bond is a

liquid and safe dollar payoff.


                                        28
    Another approach to estimating the average convenience yield is to evaluate

the spread between the real long-run returns earned by foreign investors on U.S.

Treasurys and domestic bonds:


                               λ$,∗ − λ∗,∗ = −(R$,∗ − R∗,∗ ).


In the short run, the dollar exchange rate adjusts in response to changes in the

convenience yields. If real exchange rates are stationary, then there is no long-

run currency adjustment and the long-horizon currency risk premium disappears

from (13) (see Backus et al., 2018; Lustig et al., 2019). Hence, this spread reveals

the (average) extra convenience yields earned by foreign investors when buying

Treasurys.

    Our convenience yield estimates implies that real returns earned by foreign

investors on Treasurys need to be about 2% lower than the returns earned on

foreign bonds to maintain a stationary exchange rate.5 The Treasury Inter-

national Capital (TIC) system records the purchases of Treasurys by foreign

investors. We use the TIC system data to compute the dollar-weighted returns

realized by foreign investors: The dollar-weighted return is the internal rate of

return realized on the cash flows invested by foreign investors. We assume that

investors are fully invested in the Bloomberg Barclays Treasury Index. Between

1980 and 2019, private foreign investors earned a dollar-weighted real return

on their Treasury purchases of 2.77%, expressed in real dollars. In comparison,

foreign investors earned a dollar-weighted real return of 4.66% on their holdings

of foreign bonds.


                 R∗,∗ − R$,∗ = 4.66% − 2.77% = 1.89% = λ$,∗ − λ∗,∗ .


The 1.89% gap is a direct estimate of the long-run difference in convenience

   5 Our   result is qualitatively in line with the savings glut hypothesis (see, e.g., Caballero
et al., 2008; Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2008) and the low r-star discussion (see Laubach
and Williams, 2003, 2016; Holston et al., 2017).



                                               29
yields (λ$,∗ − λ$,$ ). Foreign investors buy U.S. Treasurys when Treasurys are

expensive, consistent with our hypothesis that foreigners have a special demand

for U.S. dollar safe assets. This estimate is quantitatively in line with the

estimates we backed out of the Treasury basis and FX markets.


B.     LIBOR and Treasury Bases

     Columns (2), (7), and (9) of Table III shows that the LIBOR basis has

explanatory power in the post-crisis sample. This result has been documented

in prior work by Avdjiev et al. (2019). We note that the LIBOR basis has no

explanatory power in the pre-crisis sample, and moreover has less explanatory

power for the dollar than the Treasury basis. Furthermore, Du et al. (2018b)

document that the LIBOR basis was near zero pre-crisis and has often been

significantly different than zero post-crisis. They show that the movements in

the LIBOR basis are closely connected to frictions in financial intermediation

that hamper arbitrage activities. We next discuss these results and connect

them to our safe asset theory. Section B of the Appendix develops a model

of the supply of dollar-denominated LIBOR deposits. Suppose that foreign

investors derive a convenience yield on both dollar Treasury bonds and other

dollar safe assets, including bank deposits paying LIBOR, consistent with our

estimate of β ∗ near 0.9. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) present

evidence that there is a convenience yield on both U.S. Treasury bonds and

other near-riskless private bonds such as U.S. bank deposits. Some investors

view near-riskless private bonds as partial substitutes for Treasury bonds.

     This being the case, we expect an increase in foreign demand for Treasurys to

drive down the foreign return to holding Treasurys, that is to induce a widening

of the Treasury basis, and drive down the foreign return to holding dollar LIBOR

bank deposits. In particular, consider the LIBOR basis, which is the spread

between dollar LIBOR deposits and a foreign LIBOR deposit swapped into

dollars,
                                                          
                  xLIBOR
                   t     ≡ yt$,LIBOR + ft1 − st − yt∗,LIBOR .                 (27)


                                        30
All else equal, an increase in foreign demand for dollar safe assets will drive down

yt$,LIBOR and widen the LIBOR basis. However, this widening of the LIBOR

basis presents a riskless profit opportunity for a bank that funds itself in both

dollars and foreign currency. In particular, faced with a widening LIBOR basis,

a bank can increase its supply of dollar deposits by one dollar, swap the one

dollar into foreign currency so that its currency risk remains unchanged and

strictly increase its profits by xLIBOR
                                  t     .

   In the pre-crisis period, banks were active on this margin and hence the

LIBOR basis is zero, consistent with the analysis of Du et al. (2018b). The

LIBOR basis did not reflect foreign safe asset demand. Effectively, quantities

rather than prices adjusted to accommodate any shifts in safe-asset demand.

In the post-crisis period, regulatory constraints on banks limit the capacity of

banks to conduct the arbitrage, as Du et al. (2018b) emphasize. In this case, the

LIBOR basis opens up. Prices adjust because quantities cannot. The LIBOR

basis now reflects both safe asset demand and banks’ regulatory constraints.

In our explanation, the LIBOR basis widens because of both “demand” – a

willingness on the part of one set of agents to overpay for dollar deposits – and

“supply” – a limited capacity of other agents to supply these dollar deposits.

Other recent papers similarly cite both a demand factor and limited supply

factor as driving the LIBOR basis (see Ivashina et al., 2015).

   Our analysis explains why the LIBOR basis comoves with the Treasury basis

in the post-crisis period, as is evident from Figure 1 and why the LIBOR basis

explains movements in the dollar exchange rate post-crisis. In short, when bank

regulatory constraints restrict their arbitrage activities, the LIBOR basis reflects

movements in λ$,∗
              t . This raises the question of why the Treasury basis persists,

given that the Treasury is unconstrained and could issue more Treasurys, similar

to what banks do in LIBOR markets prior to the crisis. The answer must be

that the Treasury, unlike unconstrained banks, chooses not to exploit this basis,

because it has other objectives in managing the government debt portfolio. For

example, as in the analysis of Farhi and Maggiori (2018), the U.S. Treasury may


                                        31
seek to earn monopoly rents on in its provision of convenience-yielding Treasury

bonds.


C.     Term Structure of Treasury Bases

     Thus far we have focused exclusively on the 1Y Treasury basis, but there is

additional information contained in the term structure of Treasury bases about

convenience yields. We compute the average G10 Treasury basis for each tenor,

1Y, 2Y, 3Y, 5Y, 7Y, and 10Y, by averaging across countries in a similar manner

as we have described. The 1Y basis is from our data, and the rest is from Du

et al. (2018a). To reduce the dimension of the Treasury bases constructed by

Du et al. (2018a), we carry out a principal component analysis (PCA) on these

Treasury bases. Their data covers a shorter sample than we do and hence we

limit our analysis to the period ranging from 1991Q2 to 2017Q2.

     The results of the PCA are reported in Table IV. Similar to the term struc-

ture of bond yields, the first three PCs of the Treasury bases correspond to a

level, a slope and a curvature basis factor. We can see this from the loadings

on the PCs. These three factors explain 96% of the variation in the Treasury

bases.
                        Table IV. PCA of Treasury Bases

Data is quarterly from 1991Q2 to 2017Q2. Treasury bases with tenors of 1Y, 2Y, 3Y, 5Y,
7Y, and 10Y. Panel A reports the standard deviation and the variance of the PCs. Panel B
reports the loadings of each PC on the bases.


                             Panel A: Summary Statistics
                                              P C1     P C2      P C3
                 Std Dev                      0.41      0.19     0.17
                 % of Variance               69.50    15.14     11.44
                 Cumulative %                69.50    84.64     96.08
                 First-Order Autocorrelation  0.86      0.48     0.79
                                  Panel B: Loadings
                 1Y Basis                      0.30    −0.93   −0.15
                 2Y Basis                      0.43    −0.05    0.41
                 3Y Basis                      0.46     0.09    0.33
                 5Y Basis                      0.51     0.24    0.13
                 7Y Basis                      0.36     0.20   −0.21
                 10Y Basis                     0.35     0.17   −0.80




     Table V reports the results of a regression of the quarterly rate of appreci-

                                          32
ation of the dollar on the innovations in the level factor and the slope factor,

controlling for changes in the interest rate differences. The quarterly innovations

are obtained from an AR(1) model with lagged PC1, lagged PC2 and lagged

Treasury yield differential. A one standard deviation decline in the level of the

bases by 0.41% induces an appreciation of the dollar by 3.78% (9.29 × 0.41).

There is also information in the innovations in the slope factor. If the slope

rises, i.e., short-term bases fall relative to the long-term bases, the dollar ap-

preciates. A rise in the slope may be coincident with a flight to quality which

affects short-term bonds more than long-term bonds. That is, the basis on the 1

year bond may be a better measure of foreign investors’ convenience valuations

than the basis on the long-term bonds.

Table V. Principal Components in Treasury Basis and the USD Spot Nominal
Exchange Rate

The dependent variable is the quarterly change in the log of the spot USD exchange rate
against a basket. Data is quarterly. OLS standard errors in parentheses. One, two and three
stars denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.

                                   1991Q2−2017Q2                           1991Q2−2007Q4       2008Q1−2017Q2
                   (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)     (7)         (8)     (9)
∆P C1            −9.29∗∗∗               −8.19∗∗∗                −5.13∗∗∗   −7.92∗∗ −4.39∗      −7.18∗∗ −3.47
                  (2.06)                (2.13)                  (1.75)      (3.10)  (2.44)      (3.51)  (3.19)
∆P C2                        7.69∗∗∗     4.76∗                   7.09∗∗∗     3.27    5.91∗∗      8.61    9.09∗
                            (2.70)      (2.65)                  (2.14)      (3.25)  (2.52)      (5.82)  (5.01)
∆(y $ − ȳ ∗ )                                       4.86∗∗∗     4.60∗∗∗             4.34∗∗∗            10.57∗∗∗
                                                    (0.66)      (0.60)              (0.64)              (2.94)
Observations     104        104         104         105         104         67          67      37        37
R2               0.17       0.07        0.19        0.35        0.49       0.11        0.48    0.38      0.56




D.      Monetary Policy Shocks and the Basis

     To help us identify the causal effect of shocks to the basis on the dollar

exchange rate, we rely on Federal Funds Rate (FFR) surprises. There is a grow-

ing literature on high-frequency identification, going back to Rudebusch (1998);

Kuttner (2001); Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002); Faust et al. (2004). FOMC an-

nouncements are useful source of variation because the news in these announce-

ments is primarily about short rates. We use Kuttner (2001)’s FFR surprises

as our measure of monetary shocks. There are 96 observations in our sample.


                                            33
We end the sample when the FFR hits the zero lower bound.6

   How does a monetary policy surprise cause a change in the convenience

yield? In Jiang et al. (2020a), we develop a theory that creates a role for

monetary policy in the determination of convenience yields. In that model,

tighter monetary policy induces banks to scale down their balance sheets. Since

banks are important providers of dollar safe assets, the contraction reduces the

supply of dollar safe assets. As a result, demanders of safe assets drive up the

price of these assets leading to an increased convenience yield.

   In the first stage, we regress the change in the first principal component of

the basis on the MP shock. We argue that a contractionary monetary policy

shrinks the supply of liquid and safe assets and widen the basis. The first stage

regressions confirm this effect. These results are reported in the upper panel

in Table VI. We use P C1 as the average basis measure. A 10 bps surprise rate

increase widens the average Treasury basis by more than 5.8 basis points. In

the second stage, we regress the dollar appreciation on the exogenous variation

in the basis induced by the FFR surprise. These results are reported in the

lower panel in Table VI. The exclusion restriction is that shocks to MP do

not covary with the exchange rates, once we control for changes in interest

rates. In terms of the exchange rate decomposition in (21), we assume that

only the future convenience yields and future interest rates respond to FFR

surprises, but not the future currency risk premia. Given that most of the

news on these days is about short rates, that seems like a plausible restriction.

There is one caveat: we include unscheduled announcements, which are more

likely to include the release of news about fundamentals. The second stage slope

coefficients are comparable in magnitude to the OLS estimates in Table III: The

slope coefficients vary between −11.98 and −13.93. A 10 bps widening of the

Treasury bases induces an appreciation of the dollar between 1.20% and 1.39%.

Controlling for changes in VIX decreases the size of these coefficients in absolute

value, but only moderately so.

   6 These   results are also discussed and reported in Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2019).



                                             34
Table VI. Average Treasury Basis and the USD Spot Nominal Exchange Rate
Around FOMC Announcements

Regression of change in dollar exchange rate on change in basis induced by the FOMC shock
(2nd stage regression), controlling for the change in interest rate differences (top panel) and
change in VIX (bottom panel). The change in the basis is the change in the 1st PC (∆P C1 )
of the average Treasury bases across maturities. The interest rate difference is the 1st PC of
the average yield differences across maturities. The sample covers 96 FOMC Announcements
(excluding unscheduled FOMC meetings) between 22 Jan 1997 and 30 Dec 2008. 1st stage
Regression of change in basis on MP shock. We use a 1-day window around the FOMC
announcements.


                                                       1st-Stage
                                                     (1)        (2)
                      Monetary Policy Shock         −0.58     −0.58
                                                    (0.25)    (0.25)
                      Observations                   96         96
                      R2                            0.05       0.05
                                                       2nd-Stage
                                                     (1)        (2)
                      ∆xT reas                     −13.93    −11.98
                                                    (2.71)    (2.89)
                      ∆(y $ − ȳ ∗ )                 0.71      1.00
                                                    (0.55)    (0.57)
                      ∆VIX                                     0.08
                                                              (0.05)
                      Observations                   96         96
                      R2                            0.25       0.27




                                              35
     Based on these results, a more precisely identified estimate of the fraction β ∗
                 10.5
is given by 1 − 119.8 = 0.91. Hence, a better estimate of the average convenience
                                                         1
yield earned by foreign investors is 2.51% per annum ( 1−0.91 × 0.22).


E.     The Treasury Basis and Dollar Safe Asset Demand

     Our theory posits that a specific form of capital flows consisting of flows into

safe dollar assets drives the value of the U.S. dollar. This section discusses how

our evidence supports this interpretation.

     First, note that we construct the basis from the safest asset, the U.S. Trea-

sury bond, and document a relation between this basis and the dollar. Second,

we have shown that the LIBOR basis also helps explain movements in the dollar

post-crisis, consistent with the broad dollar safe asset demand theory. Third,

we have shown that β ∗ is around 0.90 indicating that safe foreign government

bonds when swapped into dollars carry a convenience yield. Fourth, we com-

pute a KfW bond basis in section A of the separate Online Appendix. KfW is a

German issuer whose bonds are backed by the German government, so that they

are near default free. KfW issues bonds in different currencies allowing us to

compute the basis for the bonds of the same issuer, i.e., holding safety fixed, in

different currencies. We compute the basis for KfW bonds using one-year yields

on these bonds for Australia, Euro, UK, and Switzerland against the U.S.. The

KfW and the Treasury bases have roughly the same magnitude and track each

other closely. This evidence shows that foreign investors’ demand is for all safe

assets denominated in U.S. dollars.

     Lastly, we perform a placebo test of dollar safe asset demand. We repeat

the univariate regression of Table III, column (1), but using other non-U.S.

countries as the base country. In Table VII, we use a different base country,

and we calculate the equally weighted cross-sectional average of exchange rates

and Treasury basis of other non-U.S. countries against this base country’s cur-

rency. In the top panel, we report the coefficient of the regression of nominal

exchange rate movement on the Treasury basis innovation. For other countries


                                          36
the regression coefficients are largely statistically insignificant and/or the R2 are

considerably lower than the U.S. regressions. That is, the negative association

between the exchange rate movement and Treasury basis is a phenomenon that

is particularly strong for the U.S. where we posit that these safe asset demand

effects should be most pronounced. In Panel B of the table we include both

the innovation in the basis and the change in interest rate differences. Now the

regression R2 rise uniformly. Additionally, more of the currencies exhibit the

negative relation between bases and exchange rates. In the last panel, we re-

port a univariate regression with only changes in interest rate differences. From

comparing the regression R2 s in Panels B and C we can see that only in the

case of the dollar does the basis add substantial explanatory power. The Euro

shares some of the U.S. Dollar patterns, but to a much lesser extent.


F.    Predictability of Exchange Rates and Excess Returns

     We next turn to Result 3 of Proposition 1, which can be read as a forecast-

ing regression. A more negative xt (i.e. a higher convenience yield) today is

associated with a higher dollar exchange rate today, which induces an expected

depreciation in the future. For the forecast horizon k, we define the annualized

log excess return as rxt→t+k = k4 ∆st→t+k + yt→t+k
                                                $
                                                      − y ∗t→t+k . Note that the
                                                                

LHS of equation (23), reproduced below,

                                               1
                  Et [∆st+1 ] + yt$ − yt∗ =         xT reas + rp∗t ,
                                              1 − β∗ t

is akin to the return on the reverse currency carry trade. It involves going

long the U.S. Treasury bond, funded by borrowing at the rate of the foreign

government bond. The carry trade return has a risk premium term (RP ), and

following the literature, a proxy for this risk premium is the interest rate differ-

ential across the countries. Thus we include the mean Treasury yield differential
  $
         − y ∗t→t+k as a control in our regression. As we have shown in Table
                   
 yt→t+k

III, there is a slow adjustment to basis shocks. So, we use the average Trea-



                                         37
Table VII. Explain Exchange Rate Movement Using Treasury Basis Innovation
in Different Countries.

We regress the exchange rate movement on concurrent Treasury basis innovation and change
in the Treasury yield. A higher exchange rate means a stronger base currency. For each non-
U.S. country, we exclude the U.S. when we calculate its average Treasury basis and average
exchange rate movement against other non-U.S. countries. One, two and three stars denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level. We use DEM as stand-in for EUR prior
to the creation of the Euro.


                                    Panel A: Univariate Regressions
                    (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)    (7)   (8)    (9)      (10)
                    USD     AUD      CAD     EUR       JPY      NZD NOK SEK         CHF       GBP
Innov xT reas    −10.20∗∗∗ 0.19    2.06 −6.21           4.31    −3.97∗∗ 0.24−0.80 1.94         2.45
                  (2.09)   (3.48) (1.67) (3.81)        (4.86)    (1.90) (0.96)(0.85) (1.50)   (2.38)
Observations        117      70        94     79        88       52     109 105      109       79
R2                  0.17    0.000     0.02   0.03      0.01     0.08   0.001 0.01    0.02     0.01
                                    Panel B: Bivariate Regressions
                    (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)    (7)   (8)    (9)      (10)
                    USD     AUD      CAD     EUR       JPY      NZD NOK SEK         CHF       GBP
Innov xT reas    −9.79∗∗∗ −2.76    2.13 −8.71∗∗    3.70  −4.75∗∗ 0.38−1.85∗ 3.21∗∗ −0.61
                  (1.81)   (3.22) (1.70) (3.68)   (4.49)  (1.97) (0.95)(1.09) (1.55) (2.32)
Change in IR Diff 3.80∗∗∗ 6.23∗∗∗ 0.26    4.41∗∗∗ 6.87∗∗∗ 1.62 1.11∗ 0.88 −1.65∗∗ 4.62∗∗∗
                  (0.61)   (1.51) (0.82) (1.38)   (1.72)  (1.16) (0.62)(0.58) (0.66) (1.19)
Observations        117       70       94     79        88       52    109 105       109       79
R2                  0.38     0.20     0.02   0.15      0.17     0.12   0.03 0.03     0.07     0.18
                                     Panel C: IR Differential Only
                    (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)    (7)   (8)    (9)      (10)
                    USD     AUD      CAD     EUR       JPY      NZD NOK SEK         CHF       GBP
Change in IR Diff    3.92∗∗∗ 5.94∗∗∗ 0.12   3.72∗∗∗ 6.92∗∗∗ 1.17 1.09∗ 0.25 −1.21∗             4.51∗∗∗
                    (0.68)   (1.47) (0.81) (1.39)   (1.71)  (1.04) (0.62)(0.46) (0.63)        (1.11)
Observations        117       70      94      79        88       70    109 105       109       79
R2                  0.22     0.19    0.000   0.09      0.16     0.02   0.03 0.003    0.03     0.18




                                             38
sury basis xTt−1
              reas
                   lagged by 1 quarter as the main explanatory variable. The

regression equation is


           rxt→t+k = αk + βxk xTt−1
                                 reas
                                      + βyk (yt→t+k
                                              $
                                                    − y ∗t→t+k ) + kt+k


   Our theory suggests that the coefficient βx should be positive. We run this re-

gression using quarterly data, but compute the returns on the LHS as 3-months,

1-year, 2-year, and 3-year returns. Because there is overlap in the observations,

we compute heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation adjusted standard errors.

   Table VIII reports the results obtained when forecasting the annualized ex-

cess returns on a long position in the dollar. Overall the results are in line

with our theory: a more negative basis (i.e. higher convenience yields) predicts

lower returns on the carry trade. However, we should note that the statistical

significance of the results is weak, and the results of this section should be seen

as a consistency check of our theory. The sample for a forecasting regression is

relatively short, and even the known forecaster of currency returns, the interest

rate differential, has limited power in this sample.

   Panel A reports the regression results for the entire sample. The slope

coefficient on the average basis βxk varies from −1.46 at the 3-month horizon to

4.44 at the 3-year horizon. The long-horizon estimates are an accurate reflection

of the basis effect after stripping away the short-run momentum effect we have

documented whereby the exchange rate adjusts slowly to changes in the basis.

The effects are economically significant. A one-standard-deviation basis shock

of 23 bps raises the expected excess return by 1.02% per annum over the next

three years. These regressors jointly explain about 14% of the variation in excess

returns at the 3-year horizon. The basis is not a persistent predictor, and the

Stambaugh (1999) bias is likely small. Further, there is no strong mechanical

relation between the forecasting horizon and the R2 .

   Panel B and C of Table VIII report the regression results for the pre- and

post-crisis sample. The momentum effect is only present prior to the crisis.



                                        39
       Table VIII. Forecasting Currency Excess Returns in Panel Data

The dependent variable is the annualized nominal excess return (in logs) rxft→t+k
                                                                               x
                                                                                      on a long
position in U.S. Treasuries and a short position (equal-weighted) in all foreign bonds with
maturities of k quarters. The independent variables are the average Treasury basis xT reas
                                                                   $
lagged by 1 quarter, and the nominal Treasury yield difference (yt→t+k   − y ∗t→t+k ) with ma-
turities of k quarters. Data is quarterly from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2. We omit the constant, and
report Newey-West standard errors with lags equal to the length of the forecast horizon k.
One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.


                                Panel A: 1988Q1—2017Q2
                               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                           3 months         1 year          2 years         3 years
     Lag x   T reas
                             −1.46            4.15             4.41            4.44∗
                              (5.89)         (6.42)           (3.19)          (2.30)
      $
     yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k         0.47           0.83             1.72            1.59
                              (0.92)         (1.04)           (1.13)          (1.02)
     Observations              117           117              117             115
     R2                       0.004          0.03             0.13            0.14
                                Panel B: 1988Q1—2007Q4
                               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                           3 months         1 year          2 years         3 years
             T reas
     Lag x                  −10.00          −2.38            −0.42             3.59
                             (6.25)         (7.64)           (2.96)           (2.58)
      $
     yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k        0.64           0.69             1.64             2.42∗∗
                             (0.91)         (1.06)           (1.24)           (0.96)
     Observations              80             80               80              80
     R2                       0.04           0.03             0.15            0.30
                                Panel C: 2008Q1—2017Q2
                               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                           3 months         1 year          2 years         3 years
                                                    ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
     Lag x   T reas
                              16.47          19.81           16.00            10.04∗∗∗
                             (10.27)         (6.32)          (3.33)           (1.83)
      $
     yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k       −5.52∗           0.52            1.41             1.28
                              (3.10)         (0.91)          (0.96)           (1.01)
     Observations              37             37               37              35
     R2                       0.13           0.29             0.40            0.34




                                              40
In the post-crisis sample, the slope coefficients on the basis are all positive. At

the 3-year horizon, the coefficient is 10.04: A one-standard-deviation basis shock

raises the expected excess return by 2.31% per annum over the next three years.

Consistent with the findings of Lilley et al. (2019), we note that there is much

more predictability after the crisis. In the post-crisis sample, these regressors

jointly explain about 34% of the joint variation in excess returns at the 3-year

horizon.

     The return predictability is mostly driven by the exchange rate component

of returns. Table A.9 in Section C of the Appendix report predictability results

for exchange rate changes rather than excess returns. There is solid statistical

evidence that the average Treasury basis forecasts changes in exchange rates: the

slope coefficient estimate is 5.17, implying that the dollar appreciates by 1.19%

per annum over the next 3 years following one-standard-deviation widening of

average Treasury basis.

     In Section H of the Appendix, we construct a longer sample for the U.S.-

U.K. Treasury basis (the sample starts 1970Q1 and ends in 2016Q2), and we

run the same battery of statistical tests. The results are broadly in line with

the results obtained on the shorter sample for the G-10 currencies.


G.     Term Structure and Excess Returns

     We next investigate whether other maturities of the basis have forecasting

power for excess returns on the reverse carry trade. We summarize the other

maturities using the principal component of the term structure and use these

to forecast excess returns. As before, we lag these principal components by one

period.

     Panel A of Table IX reports the predictability results for the entire sample.

When the bases widen across all tenors, this leads to lower excess returns at all

horizons, with results that are statistically stronger at longer horizons. A one

standard deviation widening of P C1 by 41 bps leads to a 2.92% (2.01%) per

annum reduction in the excess return at the two-year (three-year) horizon. The


                                        41
second principal component, the slope factor P C2 , has much less information

for returns than the level factor. The coefficient on P C2 is positive but only

statistically different than zero at the 3-month horizon. From our theory, the

coefficient on the slope should be negative. That is, we find in Table V that

increases in slope lead to a contemporaneous appreciation of the dollar. We thus

should expect that increases in slope predict a future depreciation of the dollar.

The results do not accord with this prediction. The positive coefficient at the

3-month horizon may be another manifestation of the momentum phenomenon.

Panels B and C of Table IX report the results for the pre- and post-crisis sub-

samples. The results are stronger in the post-crisis sample consistent with earlier

results.

   A significant finding from this PC analysis is that there is considerable infor-

mation in the entire term structure of the bases. We note the high R2 in Table

IX compared to that of Table VIII. The principal components explain signifi-

cant variation in excess returns, rising to 30% at the 3-year horizon, compared

to 14% at the 3-year horizon in Table VIII.



V.         Reduced-Form VAR and Impulse Response
                         Functions

   We run a VAR with three variables: the basis, the real interest rate difference

it−1 = dt−1 − πtU S + πt∗ , and the log of the real exchange rate qt :

                                                      
                            zt0 =       xt   it   qt       .


   We estimate following the first-order VAR for zt :


                              zt = Γ0 + Γ1 zt−1 + at ,


where Γ0 is a 3-dimensional vector, Γ1 is a 3 × 3 matrix and at is a sequence of

white noise random vector with mean zero and variance covariance matrix Σ.



                                             42
Table IX. Forecasting Currency Excess Returns using Principal Components

The dependent variable is the annualized nominal excess return (in logs) rxft→t+k
                                                                               x
                                                                                      on a long
position in U.S. Treasuries and a short position (equal-weighted) in all foreign bonds with
                                                                   $
maturities of k quarters. The nominal Treasury yield difference (yt→t+k  − y ∗t→t+k ) also have
maturities of k quarters, averaged across the same set of foreign countries. Data is quarterly
from 1991Q2 to 2017Q2. We omit the constant. Heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
adjusted standard errors in parentheses; we use the Newey-West estimator with number of
lags equal to the overlap in returns. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.


                               Panel A: 1988Q1—2017Q2
                               (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)
                            3 months         1 year         2 years         3 years
                                                                     ∗∗
     Lag P C1                   3.41           5.41            7.11            4.90∗
                               (5.08)         (4.79)          (3.21)          (2.67)
     Lag P C2                  10.91∗          4.18            1.67            0.34
                               (6.50)         (7.82)          (5.36)          (3.82)
      $
     yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k          0.38           0.83            2.57∗∗          2.48∗∗∗
                               (1.43)         (1.46)          (1.15)          (0.94)
     Observations              104            104             104             102
     R2                        0.02           0.05            0.29            0.30
                               Panel B: 1988Q1—2007Q4
                               (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)
                            3 months         1 year         2 years         3 years
     Lag P C1                 −2.38          −0.13             5.40           4.78
                               (4.35)        (6.81)           (4.50)         (3.90)
     Lag P C2                 20.80∗∗∗       11.91             4.18          −2.69
                               (6.73)        (8.90)           (5.28)         (2.14)
      $
     yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k          0.44          0.32             2.81∗∗         4.04∗∗∗
                               (1.53)        (1.74)           (1.35)         (1.55)
     Observations               67             67              67              67
     R2                        0.09           0.06            0.29            0.50
                               Panel C: 2008Q1—2017Q2
                               (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)
                            3 months         1 year         2 years         3 years
                                      ∗∗             ∗∗              ∗∗∗
     Lag P C1                  16.16         11.28           11.60            9.90∗∗∗
                               (7.87)        (4.81)          (1.75)          (1.94)
     Lag P C2                  17.56         −2.48            4.42∗∗          7.86∗
                              (15.03)        (8.19)          (2.15)          (4.02)
      $
     yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k        −8.34∗∗∗       −1.23           −0.68           −1.29
                               (3.07)        (1.44)          (1.16)          (1.15)
     Observations               37             37              37              35
     R2                        0.17           0.34            0.57            0.63




                                              43
A.     Estimation

     We estimate the VAR system using quarterly data. In order to convert the

1-year Treasury basis to an equivalent 3-month Treasury basis, we scale the

1-year Treasury basis and interest rate differentials. Section F of the Appendix

contains the details.

     We identified the VAR(1) as the optimal specification using the BIC. This

specification assumes that the log of the real U.S. dollar index is stationary,

which seems to be case in this sample period. We order the VAR so that shocks

to the basis affect all variables contemporaneously, shocks to the interest rate

affect the exchange rate and the interest rate differential but not the basis, and

shocks to the exchange rate only affect itself. This ordering implies that nomi-

nal and real exchange rates can respond instantaneously to all of the structural

shocks. As we discuss, the evidence from the VAR provides support for in-

terpreting our regression evidence causally: shocks to convenience yields drive

movements in the exchange rate.
                                                0.10




                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                   Yield Differential (%)
                         Treasury Basis (%)
                                                0.05




                                                                                                            0.2
                                                0.00




                                                                                                            0.0
                                                −0.05




                                                                                                            −0.2




                                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40
                                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter
                                                4




                                                                                                            4
                         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                                   FX Excess Return (%)
                                                2




                                                                                                            2
                                                0




                                                                                                            0
                                                −2




                                                                                                            −2
                                                −4




                                                                                                            −4




                                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40
                                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter




         Figure 2. Dynamic Response to Treasury Basis Shocks: Panel.
The red line plots the impulse response of a one-standard-deviation orthogonalized shock to
the average Treasury basis on the basis (top left panel), the real interest rate differential (top
right panel), the log real spot exchange rate (bottom left panel), and the quarterly log excess
return on a long position in dollars (bottom right panel). The units for the y-axis are in
percentage points. The grey areas indicates 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors were
generated using 10,000 Monte Carlo hsimulations. The i VAR is estimated using a sample from
1988Q1 to 2017Q2. The ordering is xt , rt$ − r∗t , qt .




                                                                               44
   Figure 2 plots the impulse response from orthogonalized shocks to the basis.

The top left panel plots the dynamic behavior of the basis (in units of percent-

age points), the top right panel plots the dynamic behavior of the interest rate

difference (in percentage points), and the bottom left panel plots the behavior of

the exchange rate (in percentage points). The dynamics in the figure are consis-

tent with the regression evidence from the Tables. An increase in the annualized

Treasury basis of 0.2% (quarterly basis of 0.1% in figure) depreciates the real

exchange rate contemporaneously by about 3% over two quarters. The finding

that the depreciation persists over 2 quarters is consistent with the time-series

momentum effect discussed earlier. Thus, the exchange rate exhibits classic

Dornbusch (1976) overshooting behavior. Then there is a gradual reversal over

the next 5 years; the effect on the level of the dollar gradually dissipates. There

is no statistically discernible effect of the basis on the interest rate differential.

Finally, the bottom right panel plots the quarterly log excess return on a long

position in dollars, rxt = qt − qt−1 + it−1 . Initially, the quarterly excess re-

turn drops, but after the first 2 quarters, it is higher than average for the next

15 to 18 quarters, consistent with higher expected returns on long positions in

Treasurys.

   Once we add the basis shock, U.I.P. roughly holds for the dollar against this

panel of currencies. Figure 3 plots the response to the interest rate shocks. The

dollar appreciates in real terms in the same quarter by more than 100 basis

points in response to a 100 bps increase in the U.S. yields above the foreign

yields. The bottom right panel of the figure plots the excess return on the

currency, and we see that this return is zero after the first quarter indicating

that U.I.P. holds once we account for shocks to the basis. As pointed out by

Engel (2016), the deviations from U.I.P. in the univariate time series regressions

are larger for the dollar. Our results indicate that these deviations may be

largely due to variation in the convenience yield on dollar safe assets.

   Figure 4 reports all of the impulse responses. The panel in the lower right

corner plots the variance decomposition of the exchange rate against the horizon.


                                         45
Basis shocks account for a large fraction of the exchange rate forecast error

variance, especially at longer horizons. At the one-quarter horizon, basis shocks

account for around 20% of the forecast error variance; this fraction increases to

35% at longer horizons. In contrast, the interest rate shocks account for less

than 25% at all horizons. While the initial impact of a one-standard deviation

interest rate shock on the dollar is similar to that of a one-standard deviation

basis shock (roughly 2%), its effect builds up more gradually..

    Importantly, the results are not sensitive to switching the order of the basis

and interest rate differential, indicating that we can plausibly interpret the

relation between the basis and exchange rate causally: A shock to convenience

yields moves both the basis and the exchange rate. We say this because we have

allowed for other known determinants of the exchange rate, relative price levels

and relative interest rates, and yet recover the same relation between the basis

and the exchange rate. These results are reported in Section F of the Appendix.
                                                0.10




                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                   Yield Differential (%)
                         Treasury Basis (%)
                                                0.05




                                                                                                            0.2
                                                0.00




                                                                                                            0.0
                                                −0.05




                                                                                                            −0.2




                                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40
                                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter
                                                4




                                                                                                            4
                         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                                   FX Excess Return (%)
                                                2




                                                                                                            2
                                                0




                                                                                                            0
                                                −2




                                                                                                            −2
                                                −4




                                                                                                            −4




                                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40
                                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter




          Figure 3. Dynamic Response to Interest Rate Shocks: Panel.
The red line plots the impulse response of a one-standard-deviation orthogonalized shock to
the yield difference on the basis (top left panel), the real interest rate differential (top right
panel), the log real spot exchange rate (bottom left panel), and the quarterly log excess return
on a long position in dollars (bottom right panel). The units for the y-axis are in percentage
points. The grey areas indicates 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors were generated
using 10,000 Monte Carlohsimulations. The  i VAR is estimated using a sample from 1988Q1 to
2017Q2. The ordering is xt , rt$ − r∗t , qt .




                                                                               46
                                                   Basis Shocks                                                                                                                             Rate Shocks
                                0.10




                                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                                                                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                   Yield Differential (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yield Differential (%)
         Treasury Basis (%)




                                                                                                                                            Treasury Basis (%)
                                0.05




                                                                                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                0.00




                                                                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                −0.05




                                                                                                                                                                   −0.05
                                                                                            −0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.2
                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40                                                 0       10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30        40
                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter                                                                      Quarter                                                    Quarter
                                4




                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                            FX Exchange Rate (%)
                                                                   FX Excess Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           FX Excess Return (%)
                                2




                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                0




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                −2




                                                                                            −2




                                                                                                                                                                   −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −2
                                −4




                                                                                            −4




                                                                                                                                                                   −4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −4
                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40                                                 0       10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30        40
                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter                                                                      Quarter                                                    Quarter



                                                      FX Shocks                                                                                                                           Var. Decomp.
                                0.10




                                                                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                                                      0.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Basis
                                                                   Yield Differential (%)
         Treasury Basis (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RDiff
                                0.05




                                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FX
                                                                                                                                                                      0.6
                                0.00




                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                   fraction of variance
                                −0.05




                                                                                            −0.2




                                                                                                                                                                      0.4




                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40
                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                4




                                                                                            4
         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                   FX Excess Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                2




                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                0




                                                                                            0
                                −2




                                                                                            −2




                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                −4




                                                                                            −4




                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40
                                                                                                                                                                                0               10                         20                   30               40
                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                time




                                                              Figure 4. Panel Impulse Responses.

The red line plots the impulse response of an orthogonalized one-standard-deviation shock
on the basis (top left panel), the real interest rate differential (top right panel), the log real
spot exchange rate (bottom left panel), and the quarterly log excess return on a long position
in dollars (bottom right panel). The units for the y-axis are in percentage points. The grey
areas indicates 95% confidence
                             h intervals. The i VAR is estimated using a sample from 1988Q1
to 2017Q2. The ordering is xt , rt$ − r∗t , qt .




                                                                                                                              47
B.     Campbell-Shiller Decomposition

     The log of the currency excess return is given by rxt = qt − qt−1 + it−1 .

By Proposition 1.3, the realized risk premium component of the log currency

excess return is the realized log excess return minus the convenience yield: rpt =
            1
rxt −     1−β ∗   × xt−1 . As a result, we can add an equation for the risk premium

component of the log excess return to the VAR, and we end up with the following

first-order VAR:
                                                                                                    
                                                    1
    rpt               γ0             0   Γ3,1 −   1−β ∗    Γ3,2 + 1   Γ3,3 − 1        rpt−1           a3,t
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
 xt        Γ0,1           0               Γ1,1          Γ1,2       Γ1,3       xt−1       a1,t       
          =              +                                                                +             (28)
                                                                                                    
                                                                                
 it        Γ0,2           0               Γ2,1          Γ2,2       Γ2,3       it−1       a2,t
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                    
  qt          Γ0,3             0               Γ3,1          Γ3,2       Γ3,3         qt−1         a3,t


    Accordingly, we can define the state as the vector of demeaned variables:
                       
yt0 = rp˜ t x̃t ĩt q̃t . yt is a VAR process of order 1:


                                          yt = Ψ1 yt−1 + ut ,


where Ψ1 is the 4×4 matrix defined in (28) and ut is the 4×1 vector of residuals

defined above. Following Campbell and Shiller (1988), we can define the news

about discount rates, news about cash flows and news about convenience yields:

                                            
                                    X∞
     NDR,t        =   (Et − Et−1 )    rpt+j  = e01 Ψ1 (I − Ψ1 )−1 ut ,
                                         j=1
                                           
                                    X∞
     NCF,t        =   (Et − Et−1 )    it+j  = e03 (I − Ψ1 )−1 ut ,
                                         j=0
                                                           
                                    ∞
                                   X               1                 1
     NCY,t        = −(Et − Et−1 )                     xt+j  = −       e0 (I − Ψ1 )−1 ut .
                                          j=0
                                                1 − β∗            1 − β∗ 2


These components satisfy the following identity:


                               NCY,t     = −NCF,t + NDR,t + e01 ut .


                                                      48
    We need an estimate of β ∗ to decompose the FX news. We use the estimate

of β ∗ = 0.90 from the monetary policy shock analysis of Section D. We also

estimate β ∗ under the VAR system following the procedure described in Section

F of the Appendix, and obtain a similar estimate of β ∗ = 0.91.
                                             0.2
                                                                                                     Log Real FX Innovation
                                                                                                     CY
                                            0.15


                                             0.1
                       in logs (demeaned)




                                            0.05


                                               0


                                            -0.05


                                             -0.1


                                            -0.15


                                             -0.2
                                                    1990   1993   1995   1998   2001   2004   2006     2009    2012   2015



                     Figure 5. News about Convenience Yields

Plots quarterly news about convenience yields NCY,t against quarterly news about about
exchange rates e01 ut for
                        h the Panel. VAR
                                      i is estimated using a sample from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2.
The VAR(1) includes xt , rt$ − r∗t , qt . β ∗ is 0.9. Shaded areas include the ERM crisis, the
Gulf war, the Russian default and LTCM crisis and the recent global financial crisis.


    Figure 5 plots the dollar’s news about convenience yields against the news

about the dollar exchange rate. The light-shaded areas include the ERM crisis,

the Gulf war, the Russian default and LTCM crisis and the recent global finan-

cial crisis. Most of the variation in CY news arises during periods of increased

global uncertainty and during crises. During global crisis episodes, the CY news

induces an appreciation of the USD during global financial crises, when global

investors seek the safety of the USD safe assets. During the recent crisis, CY

news induced an appreciation of 5% of the USD. However, these effects are

largely transitory, given that the basis quickly reverts back to its mean.

    While the convenience yield component is clearly tied to global crises, the

cash flow and discount rate news seem more related to the U.S. business cycle.

Figure 6 plots the cash flow news against the news about the dollar exchange

rate. The dark-shaded areas indicate NBER recessions. The cash flow news

component of the dollar is clearly counter-cyclical. At the start of NBER re-

cessions, US yields decline relative to foreign yields, thus contributing to a

                                                                                49
                                             0.2
                                                                                                     Log Real FX Innovation
                                                                                                     CF
                                            0.15


                                             0.1




                       in logs (demeaned)
                                            0.05


                                               0


                                            -0.05


                                             -0.1


                                            -0.15


                                             -0.2
                                                    1990   1993   1995   1998   2001   2004   2006     2009    2012   2015



    Figure 6. News about Cash Flows and Change in Real Exchange Rate

Plots quarterly news about convenience yields NCY,t against quarterly news about about
exchange rates e01 ut for
                       h the Panel. VAR
                                     i is estimated using a sample from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2.
The VAR(1) includes xt , rt$ − r∗t , qt . β ∗ is 0.9. The shaded areas include NBER recessions.



weakening of the dollar. Finally, Figure 7 plots the discount rate news, which is

pro-cyclical. At the start of NBER recessions, the risk premium on the dollar

declines, contributing to a strengthening of the dollar. The DR news is only

weakly correlated with the dollar innovations.
                                             0.2
                                                                                                     Log Real FX Innovation
                                                                                                     RP
                                            0.15


                                             0.1
                       in logs (demeaned)




                                            0.05


                                               0


                                            -0.05


                                             -0.1


                                            -0.15


                                             -0.2
                                                    1990   1993   1995   1998   2001   2004   2006     2009    2012   2015



   Figure 7. News about Risk Premia and Change in Real Exchange Rate

Plots quarterly news about convenience yields NCY,t against quarterly news about about
exchange rates e01 ut for
                       h the Panel. VAR
                                     i is estimated using a sample from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2.
The VAR(1) includes xt , rt$ − r∗t , qt . β ∗ is 0.9. The shaded areas include NBER recessions.



    Table X presents the variance decomposition of quarterly dollar exchange

rate innovations for the panel of countries. When β ∗ = 0.90, the convenience

yield news (CY ) accounts for 16% of the variance in quarterly exchange rates.

Interest rate news (CF ) accounts for a similar share of the variance, while risk



                                                                                50
premium news (DR) accounts for a sizable component of 110%. These results

are sensitive to the exact value of β ∗ . When β ∗ = 0.875, the CY news accounts

for only 10% of exchange rate innovations, while if β ∗ = 0.95, the CY news

accounts for 63% of innovations. The ratio of the convenience yield to the

observed basis,       1
                    1−β ∗ ,   is highly sensitive to β ∗ .

     Table X. News Decomposition of Real Exchange Rates Innovations

The table reports the decomposition of quarterly innovations in log of average USD real
exchange rate in the Panel for different values of  ∗
                                                h β . The VARiis estimated using a sample
from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2. The VAR(1) includes x3m          $     ∗
                                                   t , rt − r t , q t .


 β∗      var(CY )      var(CF )      var(DR)     2cov(CY, CF )   −2cov(CY, DR)   −2cov(CF ,DR)
 0.95        0.63          0.17          1.62             0.36           −1.35           −0.43
 0.925       0.28          0.17          1.24             0.24           −0.62           −0.31
 0.9         0.16          0.17          1.10             0.18           −0.36           −0.25
 0.875       0.10          0.17          1.04             0.14           −0.24           −0.22




                                  VI.       Conclusion

   We present a theory of exchange rates which departs from existing theories

by imputing a central role to international flows in Treasury debt and related

dollar safe asset markets in exchange rate determination. In our theory, the

spot exchange rate of a safe asset currency will reflect the cumulative value of

all future convenience yields that are earned by foreign investors on safe assets

denominated in that currency. The empirical evidence strongly supports the

theory. Our results shed light on two important topics in international finance.

First, we help to resolve the exchange rate disconnect puzzle by demonstrating

that shocks to the demand for dollar-denominated safe assets drive a sizeable

portion of the variation in the dollar exchange rate. Second, we provide strong

empirical support for recent theories regarding safe assets and the central role

of the U.S. in the international monetary system.




                                                51
                           REFERENCES

Amador, Manuel, Javier Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, and Fabrizio Perri, 2020, Ex-

  change rate policies at the zero lower bound, The Review of Economic Studies

  87, 1605–1645.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Wenxin Du, Catherine Koch, and Hyun Song Shin, 2019, The

  dollar, bank leverage, and deviations from covered interest parity, American

  Economic Review: Insights 1, 193–208.

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric Van Wincoop, 2005, Rational inattention: A

  solution to the forward discount puzzle .

Bach, Christopher, 1972, Us balance-of-payments problems and policies in 1971,

  Review .

Backus, David, Nina Boyarchenko, and Mikhail Chernov, 2018, Term structures

  of asset prices and returns, Journal of Financial Economics 129, 1–23.

Backus, David, Silverio Foresi, and Chris Telmer, 2001, Affine models of cur-

  rency pricing: Accounting for the forward premium anomaly, Journal of Fi-

  nance 56, 279–304.

Backus, David K, and Gregor W Smith, 1993, Consumption and real exchange

  rates in dynamic economies with non-traded goods, Journal of International

  Economics 35, 297–316.

Brandt, Michael W, John H Cochrane, and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2006, Interna-

  tional risk sharing is better than you think, or exchange rates are too smooth,

  Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 671–698.

Brauning, Falk, and Victoria Ivashina, 2017, Monetary policy and global bank-

  ing .

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin, 2017, Global dollar credit and carry

  trades: a firm-level analysis, The Review of Financial Studies 30, 703–749.


                                       52
Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008, An

  equilibrium model of “global imbalances” and low interest rates, American

  Economic Review 98, 358–93.

Caballero, Ricardo J, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008, Collective risk manage-

  ment in a flight to quality episode, The Journal of Finance 63, 2195–2230.

Caballero, Ricardo J, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2009, Global imbalances and

  financial fragility, American Economic Review 99, 584–88.

Campbell, John Y, and Richard H Clarida, 1987, The dollar and real interest

  rates, in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, volume 27,

  103–139, Elsevier.

Campbell, John Y, and Robert J Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and ex-

  pectations of future dividends and discount factors, The Review of Financial

  Studies 1, 195–228.

Chernov, Mikhail, Lukas Schmid, and Andres Schneider, 2020, A macrofinance

  view of u.s. sovereign cds premiums, The Journal of Finance 75, 2809–2844.

Clarida, Richard, and Jordi Gali, 1994, Sources of real exchange-rate fluctua-

  tions: How important are nominal shocks?, in Carnegie-Rochester Conference

  Series on Public Policy, volume 41, 1–56, Elsevier.

Cochrane, John H, and Monika Piazzesi, 2002, The fed and interest rates-a

  high-frequency identification, American Economic Review 92, 90–95.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1976, Expectations and exchange rate dynamics, Journal

  of Political Economy 84, 1161–1176.

Du, Wenxin, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger, 2018a, The us treasury premium,

  Journal of International Economics 112, 167–181.

Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2018b, Deviations from

  covered interest rate parity, The Journal of Finance 73, 915–957.


                                      53
Engel, Charles, and Steve Pak Yeung Wu, 2018, Liquidity and exchange rates:

  An empirical investigation .

Evans, Martin DD, and Richard K Lyons, 2002, Order flow and exchange rate

  dynamics, Journal of Political Economy 110, 170–180.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Matteo Maggiori, 2018, A model of the international

  monetary system, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 295–355.

Faust, Jon, Eric T Swanson, and Jonathan H Wright, 2004, Identifying vars

  based on high frequency futures data, Journal of Monetary Economics 51,

  1107–1131.

Frankel, Jeffrey A, and Andrew K Rose, 1995, Empirical research on nominal

  exchange rates, Handbook of International Economics 3, 1689–1729.

Froot, Kenneth A, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2005, Currency returns, intrinsic

  value, and institutional-investor flows, The Journal of Finance 60, 1535–1566.

Froot, Kenneth A, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, Perspectives on ppp and long-run

  real exchange rates, Handbook of International Economics 3, 1647–1688.

Froot, Kenneth A, and Richard H Thaler, 1990, Anomalies: foreign exchange,

  Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, 179–192.

Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori, 2015, International liquidity and ex-

  change rate dynamics, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1369–1420.

Gopinath, Gita, 2015, The international price system .

Gopinath, Gita, and Jeremy C Stein, 2018, Banking, trade, and the making of

  a dominant currency .

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey, 2007a, From world banker to world

  venture capitalist: Us external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege, in

  G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, 11–66 (Uni-

  versity of Chicago Press).

                                      54
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey, 2007b, International financial ad-

  justment, Journal of Political Economy 115, 665–703.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Aaron Tornell, 2004, Exchange rate puzzles and

  distorted beliefs, Journal of International Economics 64, 303–333.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G Hanson, and Jeremy C Stein, 2015, A

  comparative-advantage approach to government debt maturity, The Journal

  of Finance 70, 1683–1722.

He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, 2019, A model

  of safe asset determination, American Economic Review 109, 1230–62.

Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C Williams, 2017, Measuring

  the natural rate of interest: International trends and determinants, Journal

  of International Economics 108, S59–S75.

Itskhoki, Oleg, and Dmitry Mukhin, 2017, Exchange rate disconnect in general

  equilibrium .

Ivashina, Victoria, David S Scharfstein, and Jeremy C Stein, 2015, Dollar fund-

  ing and the lending behavior of global banks, The Quarterly Journal of Eco-

  nomics 130, 1241–1281.

Jiang, Zhengyang, 2019a, Fiscal cyclicality and currency risk premia .

Jiang, Zhengyang, 2019b, Us fiscal cycle and the dollar .

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, 2018, Foreign safe

  asset demand for us treasurys and the dollar, in AEA Papers and Proceedings,

  volume 108, 537–41.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, 2020a, Dollar

  safety and the global financial cycle .

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno N Lustig, 2020b, Beyond

  incomplete spanning: Convenience yields and exchange rate disconnect .

                                       55
Jiang, Zhengyang, Hanno Lustig, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Mindy Z Xi-

  aolan, 2019, The U.S. public debt valuation puzzle.

Koijen, Ralph SJ, and Motohiro Yogo, 2020, Exchange rates and asset prices in

  a global demand system .

Kollmann, Robert, 1995, Consumption, real exchange rates and the structure

  of international asset markets, Journal of International Money and Finance

  14, 191–211.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Hanno N Lustig, 2019, Mind the gap in sovereign

  debt markets: The us treasury basis and the dollar risk factor, in 2019 Jackson

  Hole Economic Symposium.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The aggregate

  demand for treasury debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233–267.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2015, The impact of

  treasury supply on financial sector lending and stability, Journal of Financial

  Economics 118, 571–600.

Kuttner, Kenneth N, 2001, Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evi-

  dence from the fed funds futures market, Journal of Monetary Economics 47,

  523–544.

Laubach, Thomas, and John C Williams, 2003, Measuring the natural rate of

  interest, Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 1063–1070.

Laubach, Thomas, and John C Williams, 2016, Measuring the natural rate of

  interest redux, Business Economics 51, 57–67.

Lilley, Andrew, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, 2019, Ex-

  change rate reconnect .

Liu, Yang, Lukas Schmid, and Amir Yaron, 2019, The risks of safe assets .




                                       56
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2014, Countercyclical

  currency risk premia, Journal of Financial Economics 111, 527–553.

Lustig, Hanno, Andreas Stathopoulos, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2019, The term

  structure of currency carry trade risk premia, American Economic Review

  109, 4142–77.

Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2019, Does incomplete spanning in in-

  ternational financial markets help to explain exchange rates?, American Eco-

  nomic Review 109, 2208–44.

Maggiori, Matteo, 2017, Financial intermediation, international risk sharing,

  and reserve currencies, American Economic Review 107, 3038–71.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, 2020a, International cur-

  rencies and capital allocation, Journal of Political Economy 128, 2019–2066.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, 2020b, International cur-

  rencies and capital allocation, Journal of Political Economy 128, 2019–2066.

Mankiw, N Gregory, and Ricardo Reis, 2002, Sticky information versus sticky

  prices: a proposal to replace the new keynesian phillips curve, The Quarterly

  Journal of Economics 117, 1295–1328.

Moskowitz, Tobias J, Yao Hua Ooi, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2012, Time series

  momentum, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 228–250.

Pierre-Olivier, Govillot-Nicolas Gourinchas, Helene Rey, and Nicolas Govillot,

  2011, Exorbitant privilege and exorbitant duty .

Reis, Ricardo, 2006, Inattentive consumers, Journal of Monetary Economics 53,

  1761–1800.

Rudebusch, Glenn D, 1998, Do measures of monetary policy in a var make

  sense?, International Economic Review 907–931.




                                      57
Shin, Hyun Song, 2012, Global banking glut and loan risk premium, IMF Eco-

  nomic Review 60, 155–192.

Stambaugh, Robert F, 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Eco-

  nomics 54, 375–421.

Valchev, Rosen, 2020, Bond convenience yields and exchange rate dynamics,

  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12, 124–66.




                                    58
Separate Online Appendix
   1. Section A lists the data sources.

   2. Section B develops the theory of convenience yields and exchange rates in complete and
      incomplete markets, and a model of the LIBOR basis and its relation to the Treasury
      basis.

   3. Section C estimates long run returns on safe assets earned by foreign investors.

   4. Section D develops the model with sticky expectations.

   5. Section E develops alternative measures of the Treasury basis.

   6. Section F discusses VAR identification.

   7. Section G discusses robustness.

   8. Section H discusses the UK/US evidence.




                    Appendix A.                  Data Sources
    We start by discussing the Panel Dataset. For the FX data, before December 1996, we
use the Barclays Bank source from Datastream. After December 1996, we use World Markets
Reuters (WMR) from Datastream. The Datastream codes for the spot rates and 12M for-
ward rates are: BBGBPSP, BBGBPYF, BBAUDSP, BBAUDYF, BBCADSP, BBCADYF,
BBDEMSP, BBDEMYF, BBJPYSP, BBJPYYF, BNZDSP, BBNZDYF, BBNOKSP, BB-
NOKYF, BBSEKSP, BBSEKYF, BBCHFSP, BBCHFYF, AUSTDOL, UKAUDYF, CN-
DOLLR, UKCADYF, DMARKER, UKDEMYF, JAPAYEN, UKJPYYF, NZDOLLR,
UKNZDYF, NORKRON, UKNOKYF, SWEKRON, UKSEKYF, SWISSFR, UKCHFYF,
UKDOLLR, UKUSDYF.
    For the Government Bond Yields (see Table A.2), most country-maturities pairs only use
one source, except if there are gaps. If there are gaps, we use all the data from the first
source wherever available, as indicated in the Table, and then fill in any gaps for some year


               Table A.1. Country Composition of Unbalanced Panel

      Country        Maturity    Source                                               Ranges
 ’Australia’           12        All      199912   -   201707
 ’Canada’              12        All      199312   -   201707
 ’Germany’             12        All      199707   -   201707
 ’Japan’               12        All      199504   -   201707
 ’New Zealand’         12        All      199603   -   200905   201006 - 201212   201310 - 201412   201606 - 201707
 ’Norway’              12        All      199001   -   199611   199701 - 201707
 ’Sweden’              12        All      199103   -   199611   199701 - 201304   201306 - 201707
 ’Switzerland’         12        All      198801   -   201707
 ’United Kingdom’      12        All      199707   -   201707
 ’United States’       12        All      198801   -   201707




                                             1
                Table A.2. Sources for Government Bond Yields

 Country              Maturity   Months                                              Mnemonic
 Australia                  12   Bloomberg                                      GTAUD1Y Govt
 Canada                     12   Bank of Canada (Datastream)                    CNTBB1Y
 Germany                    12   Bloomberg                                      GTDEM1Y Govt
 Japan                      12   Bloomberg                                      GTJPY1Y Govt
 New Zealand                12   Bloomberg                                  1   GTNZD1Y Govt
 New Zealand                12   Reserve Bank of New Zealand (Datastream)   2   NZGBY1Y
 Norway                     12   Oslo Bors                                      ST3X
 Sweden                     12   Sveriges Riksbank (from Researchers)       2
 Sweden                     12   Sveriges Riksbank (website)                1
 Switzerland                12   Swiss National Bank
 United Kingdom             12   Bloomberg                                      GTGBP1Y Govt
 United States              12   Bloomberg                                  1   GB12 Govt
 United States              12   FRED                                       2


              The numbers indicate which source takes precedence.


month using the second data source (indicated by ’2’). For LIBORs (see Table A.3), we use
the BBA-ICE LIBOR when available. Coverage is good for Germany, Japan, Switzerland,
UK, and U.S.. For other countries, we then use other interbank survey rates (BBSW, CDOR,
NIBOR, STIBOR) to fill in any gaps. We then use deposit rates (Bank Bill, NKD, SKD) for
any remaining gaps.

                            Table A.3. Sources for LIBOR

 Country              Maturity   Source                                Mnemonic
 Australia                  12   Bank Bill (Bloomberg)                 ADBB12M Curncy
 Australia                  12   Bank Bill Swap (Bloomberg)            BBSW1Y Index/BBSW1MD Index
 Canada                     12   CDOR (Bloomberg)                      CDOR12 Index
 Australia                  12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBAUD12
 New Zealand                12   Bank Bill (Bloomberg)                 NDBB12M Curncy
 Canada                     12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBCAD12
 Germany                    12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBDEM12
 Japan                      12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBJPY12
 New Zealand                12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBNZD12
 Norway                     12   NIBOR (Bloomberg)                     NIBOR12M Index
 Norway                     12   Norwegian Krone Deposit (Bloomberg)   NKDR1 Curncy
 Sweden                     12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBSEK12
 Sweden                     12   STIBOR (Bloomberg)                    STIB1Y Index
 Sweden                     12   Swedish Krona Deposit (Bloomberg)     SKDR1 Curncy
 Switzerland                12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBCHF12
 United Kingdom             12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBGBP12
 United States              12   BBA-ICE LIBOR (Datastream)            BBUSD12




                                              2
    Our second dataset covers the U.S./U.K. cross. This data begins much earlier, in 1970Q1
and ends in 2016Q2. The daily data quality is poor, with many missing values and implausible
spikes in the constructed basis from one day to the next. To overcome these measurement
issues, we take the average of the available data for a given quarter as the observation for that
quarter. We construct the Treasury basis in the same manner as described earlier. We rely
on Global Financial Data as the main data source.

                    Table A.4. Sources for U.S.-UK Time Series

                                      Source    Mnemomic          Range
                  Spot FX              GFD      GBP U SD          1960 − 2017
                  3M Forward           GFD      GBP U SD3D        1960 − 2017
                  12M Forward          GFD      GBP U SD12D       1960 − 2017
                  3M T-bill UK         GFD      IT GBR3D          1960 − 2017
                  1Y Note UK           GFD      IGGBR1D           1979 − 2017
                  1Y Note U.S.        FRED      DT B1Y R          1960 − 2017
                  1Y Zero-Coupon        BoE                       1970 − 1979


(GFD is Global Financial Data. FRED is the Federal Reserve Economic Database at the
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis. BoE is the Bank of England.)


    Figure A.1 plots the resulting series. LIBOR rates do not exist back to 1971. The
average U.S./U.K. Treasury basis is 0.84 bps per annum. On average, U.K. investors are
close to indifferent between holding U.S. Treasurys on a currency-hedged basis and holding
gilts. However, the standard deviation is 48 bps. per quarter. For comparison the figure also
plots the mean basis from the cross-country panel. The two series track each other closely
for the period where they overlap, but the U.S./U.K. basis is consistently higher than the
panel basis. This result suggests that UK bonds also have a convenience yield, which is
sometimes larger than that of U.S. bonds particularly in the 1970s, during which the basis
is volatile and frequently positive. Suffering a balance-of-payments deficit in the early 1970s,
the Nixon administration decided to suspend convertibility of the dollar into gold in 1973
and effectively ended the Bretton-Woods system. This action led to considerable uncertainty
in the international monetary system, with some observers noting that foreigners became
unwilling to continue to hold the dollar assets necessary to finance the balance-of-payments
deficit (see Bach (1972) and Farhi and Maggiori (2018)). Additionally, the U.K. suffered a
balance-of-payments crisis in 1976, turning to the IMF for a large loan. These reductions in
asset demand, first for U.S. and then for U.K. bonds, are apparent in the figure: the basis
turns positive in 1973 before subsequently turning negative in 1976.




                                               3
                                      250
                                                                                                     UK-US
                                      200                                                            Panel

                                      150

                                      100

                                       50
                       basis points




                                        0

                                      -50

                                      -100

                                      -150

                                      -200

                                      -250
                                             1971   1976   1982   1987   1993   1998   2004   2009    2015



                    Figure A.1. U.S./U.K. Treasury Basis

U.S./U.K. Treasury basis from 1970Q1 to 2017Q2 and the mean Treasury basis across the
panel of countries, in basis points. The maturity is one year.




                                                                         4
     Appendix B.                    Theory of Convenience Yields

                                              and Exchange Rates
     This section explores two issues: (i) what happens in a complete markets environment to
exchange rates when investors derive convenience yields, and (ii) an analysis of the role of the
banking sector in LIBOR markets.



A.       Convenience Yields in Complete Markets
     We follow the approach of Backus et al. (2001). Consider the Euler equations (3) and (8)
for the U.S. and foreign investor when investing in an asset with no convenience yield. To
satisfy these Euler equations, we conjecture an exchange rate process that satisfies, Mt$ SSt    =
                                                                                           t+1

Mt∗ .   This guess, as can easily be verified, satisfies the Euler equations for a no-convenience
yield asset. If financial markets are complete, then this is the unique exchange rate process
that is consistent with the absence of arbitrage opportunities. Using lower case letters to
denote logs, and log-linearizing this expression, we find:


                                      ∆st+1      =       m$t − m∗t .                        (B1)


Next consider the pair of Euler equations, (4) and (9), which apply to investments in the U.S.
bond that gives a convenience yield. We conjecture an exchange rate process that satisfies,

                                          $,∗   St+1         $,$
                                    Mt∗ eλt          = Mt$ eλt .
                                                 St

After taking logs, we find:

                                                                
                            ∆st+1    =     m$t − m∗t + λ$,$
                                                        t   − λ$,∗
                                                               t                            (B2)


It is evident that (B1) and (B2) cannot both be satisfied in an equilibrium unless λ$,∗
                                                                                    t   = λ$,$
                                                                                           t .

But note that in this case, convenience yields have no impact on exchange rates.



B.       Convenience Yields in Incomplete Markets
     To develop a full-fledged exchange rate model, we conjecture that the exchange rate
process satisfies:
                                St+1
                                        $
                                       Mt+1 exp(λ$,$
                                                 t )
                                     =               exp(ηt+1 ),
                                 St     ∗
                                       Mt+1 exp(λ$,∗
                                                 t )

where ηt+1 represents an incomplete markets stochastic wedge. When markets are complete,
ηt+1 = 0 in all states of the world, and the U.S. and foreign bond investor’s Euler equations
for Treasurys are automatically satisfied. In addition, we assume that the wedges and the
pricing kernels are jointly log-normal.



                                                     5
      The change in the log exchange rate can be stated as follows: ∆st+1 = ηt+1 + m$t+1 −
m∗t+1 − λ$,∗
         t   + λ$,$
                t . We impose the symmetry restriction on the convenience yields stated in

(12).

PROPOSITION 2: When the exchange rate change is ∆st+1 = ηt+1 + m$t+1 − m∗t+1 − λ$,∗
                                                                                t +
                          ∗,$
λ$,$       $,$
 t , and (λt   − λ$,∗
                  t ) = (λt   − λ∗,∗
                                 t ), the wedges ηt+1 have to satisfy:

                                                                  1
                           covt m$t+1 , ηt+1       =   −Et (ηt+1 ) −  vart (ηt+1 ) ,
                                                                    2
                                                                    1
                           covt m∗t+1 , ηt+1
                                               
                                                   =   −Et (ηt+1 ) + vart (ηt+1 ) .
                                                                    2

The variance of the exchange rate is given by: vart (∆st+1 ) = vart (mt+1 ) + vart (m∗t+1 ) −
2covt (mt+1 , m∗t+1 ) − vart (ηt+1 ).

      The incomplete market wedges have to satisfy restrictions to enforce the Euler equations
for bond market investors (see Backus and Smith, 1993; Lustig and Verdelhan, 2019). That
accounts for the covariance restrictions. Given the symmetry condition we impose on the
convenience yields, the moment conditions for the incomplete markets wedges do not depend
on the convenience yields.

COROLLARY 1: The expected excess return in logs on a long position in dollars is given by:


                        Et [rxF X      $    ∗                   ∗    $,∗
                              t+1 ] ≡ yt − yt + Et (∆st+1 ) = rpt − λt   + λ∗,∗
                                                                            t ,

                    h                         i
                1
where rp∗t =            vart m∗t+1 − vart m$t+1 + Et (ηt+1 ).
                                  
                2


    If the foreign investor is risk-neutral, then the expected excess return in logs on a long
                                                                                         
                                                   $    ∗                     1        $
position in dollars is given by: Et [rxF   X
                                         t+1 ] ≡ yt − yt + Et (∆st+1 ) = − 2 vart mt+1 +

Et (ηt+1 ) − λ$,∗
              t   + λ∗,∗
                     t .


COROLLARY 2: The expected excess return in levels on a long position in dollars is given
by:

                                     1
                                       vart (∆st+1 ) = RPt∗ − λ$,∗
                yt$ − yt∗ + Et (∆st+1 ) +                        t  + λ∗,∗
                                                                         t ,
                                     2
                                              
where RPt∗ = vart (m∗t+1 ) − covt m∗t+1 , m$t+1 + Et (ηt+1 ) − 12 vart (ηt+1 ).

      If the foreign investor is risk-neutral, the expected excess return in levels on a long position
                                                                        ∗,∗
in dollars is given by: yt$ −yt∗ +Et (∆st+1 )+ 12 vart (∆st+1 ) = −λ$,∗
                                                                    t +λt . Uncovered Interest

Rate Parity (U.I.P.) fails even though the foreign investor is risk-neutral. The deviation from
U.I.P. is governed by the convenience yields.

COROLLARY 3: The expected excess return in levels on a long position in foreign currency




                                                       6
is given by:

                                     1
                                       vart (∆st+1 ) = RPt$ + λ$,$
                  yt∗ − yt$ − Et (∆st+1 ) +                      t  − λ∗,$
                                                                         t ,
                                     2
                                              
where RPt$ = vart (m$t+1 ) − covt m∗t+1 , m$t+1 − Et (ηt+1 ) − 12 vart (ηt+1 ).

     Starting from this expression, we can compute the expected return of a US investor in
logs by subtracting 1/2 of the variance:

                                                                        1
                                                                                                ∗,$
yt∗ −yt$ −Et (∆st+1 ) = vart (mt+1 )−covt m∗t+1 , m$t+1 +covt m$t+1 , ηt+1 − vart (∆st+1 )+λ$,$
                                                                                            t −λt .
                                                                            2

Plug in the expression for the volatility of the changes in the spot rate to obtain: yt∗ − yt$ −
Et (∆st+1 ) = −rp∗t + λ$,$
                       t   − λ∗,$                                               $,$
                              t . This is consistent with corollary 1, because λt   − λ∗,$
                                                                                       t   =
−(λ∗,∗
   t   − λ$,∗
          t ).


COROLLARY 4: The incomplete markets exchange rate process given by


                             ∆st+1 = m$t+1 − m∗t+1 + ηt+1 + λ$,$
                                                             t   − λ$,∗
                                                                    t ,                                     (B3)


implies that:
           ∞                              ∞                            ∞
                         ∗,∗
                (λ$,∗
           X                              X                            X
                                                       ∗
 st = Et          t+τ − λt+τ ) + Et
                                                $
                                              (yt+τ − yt+τ ) − Et             rp∗t+τ + Et [ lim   st+T +1 ]. (B4)
                                                                                          T →∞
           τ =0                           τ =0                         τ =0




C.     Convenience yields on LIBOR deposits, the LIBOR basis, and
       the Treasury basis
     In U.S. data, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) observe that there is a con-
venience yield on both Treasury bonds and other near-riskless private bonds such as bank
deposits. They moreover show that some investors view near-riskless private bonds as partial
substitutes for Treasury bonds. This section introduces LIBOR bank deposits which also offer
convenience yields, but less so than U.S. Treasurys. That is, as noted earlier, our theory posits
that investors receive convenience utility from U.S. safe assets, a set that includes both U.S.
Treasurys and bank deposits. We first show how to understand the LIBOR basis and safe
asset demand in this case, and then offer another way to understand the Treasury basis.
     Foreign and domestic investors have access to U.S. LIBOR markets, and they satisfy the
following Euler equations:
                                                          
                                                 $,LIBOR               $,LIBOR $,$
                               Et        $
                                        Mt+1 eyt               = e−β          λt
                                                                                                            (B5)
                                              
                             ∗   St+1 y$,LIBOR         ∗,LIBOR $,∗
                         Et Mt+1     e t         = e−β        λt
                                                                                                            (B6)
                                  St

where β ∗,LIBOR < 1 (β $,LIBOR ) denotes the fraction of convenience yield from the LIBOR
bank deposit relative to the Treasury bond derived by foreign (U.S.) investors.



                                                       7
    Next we construct the LIBOR basis in a similar manner as Section D. Suppose a for-
eign investor purchases a foreign LIBOR deposit and swaps the deposit into dollars. This
investment satisfies the investor’s Euler equation:
                                           
                       ∗   St+1 St y∗,LIBOR         ∗,LIBOR−H $,∗
                   Et Mt+1         e t        = e−β          λt
                                                                  .                        (B7)
                            St Ft1

Here Ft1 denotes the one-period forward exchange rate, in foreign currency per dollar, and
β ∗,LIBOR−H λ$,∗
             t   denotes the fraction of convenience yield on the cash position in the foreign
bank deposit hedged into dollars relative to a U.S. Treasury investment. We use equation
(B7) along with the foreign investor’s Euler equation for the dollar LIBOR deposit, to find an
expression for the LIBOR basis:


  xLIBOR
   t     ≡ yt$,LIBOR + (ft1 − st ) − yt∗,LIBOR = −(β ∗,LIBOR − β ∗,LIBOR−H )λ$,∗
                                                                             t .           (B8)


If a synthetically created dollar deposit is as good as a cash dollar deposit for an investor,
the right hand side is zero and the LIBOR basis is zero. From the investor demand-side, a
negative LIBOR basis indicates a preference for the cash deposit compared to the synthetic
deposit.
    We next reconsider the Treasury basis in light of the LIBOR basis:


     xT
      t
        reas
               =   yt$ − yt∗ + ft − st = (yt$ − yt$,LIBOR ) − (yt∗ − yt∗,LIBOR ) + xLIBOR
                                                                                    t     . (B9)


The Treasury basis is the sum of the LIBOR basis and the difference between the two cur-
rency’s Treasury-LIBOR spreads. From the Euler equations for the foreign investment in U.S.
Treasurys and U.S. dollar LIBOR deposits we find that:


                            yt$,LIBOR − yt$ = (1 − β ∗,LIBOR )λ$,∗
                                                               t


We make a parallel assumption that the foreign investor receives a fraction β ∗,LIBOR of the
convenience when investing in the foreign deposit relative to the foreign bond. Thus the
foreign Treasury-LIBOR spread is:


                            yt∗,LIBOR − yt∗ = (1 − β ∗,LIBOR )λ∗,∗
                                                               t


Rewriting the Treasury basis we find that:


                     xT
                      t
                        reas
                             = (1 − β ∗,LIBOR )(λ$,∗
                                                 t   − λ∗,∗    LIBOR
                                                        t ) + xt     .


We conclude that the Treasury basis measures the foreign demand for U.S. safe assets through
both the excess Treasury convenience yield, λ$,∗ $,$
                                             t −λt , as we showed in Section D, and through

movements in the LIBOR basis. We can go one step further by substituting in from the LIBOR




                                               8
basis to find:


        xT
         t
           reas
                  =   (1 − β ∗,LIBOR )(λ$,∗
                                        t   − λ∗,∗
                                               t ) − (β
                                                        ∗,LIBOR
                                                                − β ∗,LIBOR−H )λ$,∗
                                                                                t .

                  =   (1 − β ∗,LIBOR−H )λ$,∗
                                         t   − (1 − β ∗,LIBOR )λ∗,∗
                                                                t


When the cash position is more valiable to investors than the synthetic, β ∗,LIBOR−H <
β ∗,LIBOR , the Treasury basis is effectively enlarged.
    It is useful to compare this derivation of the basis to the one from Section D. We found
that,
                                xT
                                 t
                                   reas
                                        = (1 − β ∗ )(λ$,∗
                                                      t   − λ∗,∗
                                                             t )


Here β ∗ summarized the foreign investor’s preference for the synthetic Treasury bond relative
to the cash Treasury bond. Note that β ∗ does not have to be equal to β ∗,LIBOR . However
they are related in that both reflect dollarness, safety, and synthetic-vs-cash in convenience
valuations.
    We next consider the banks that make the supply-side of the deposit market. Suppose
that xLIBOR
      t     < 0, i.e. investors are willing to pay a premium for a cash dollar LIBOR deposit
compared to the synthetically created deposit. Banks issue foreign and dollar deposits that
pay LIBOR at rates yt∗,LIBOR and yt$,LIBOR . The dollar deposits offer a convenience yield to
investors but not to the banks, so that banks will wish to issue these deposits in equilibrium.
Consider a given bank that has a mix of deposits in both currencies in (dollar-equivalent)
amounts (θ̄tB,$ , θ̄tB,∗ ). We suppose the mix is optimal for the bank given asset/liability man-
agement concerns and the currency mix of the rest of its balance sheet. If bank deposits offer
convenience yields, than banks will create these deposits, and the limit on such deposit creation
will be governed by bank costs in creating the deposits. See the model of Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2015) for one specification of intermediaries doing asset/liability manage-
ment and creating money where the cost is in terms of collateral backing. We have suppressed
the specification of these costs to not stray from our primary analysis which is exchange rate
determination. Think of the optimal mix (θ̄tB,$ , θ̄tB,∗ ) as being driven by these costs.
    Suppose that the bank also trades in the forward market. Clearly if the convenience yield
on the cash dollar deposits rises relative to synthetic foreign deposits, the bank will want to
supply more of these dollar deposits and hedge these using the forward market to maintain
its optimal currency mix. Then the bank chooses θtB , the quantity of this swap, to achieve
deposit mix (θ̄tB,$ + θtB , θ̄tB,∗ − θtB ). If there is greater demand for dollar deposits the bank
will on the margin increase θtB . Suppose the bank solves:

                                                            κ  2
                  max θtB yt∗,LIBOR − (ft − st ) − yt$,LIBOR −   θB .
                   B
                  θt                                           2 t

Here κ is a capital/leverage cost associated with doing the forward and hedging the dollar
deposits. The term yt∗,LIBOR − (ft − st ) − yt$,LIBOR is the funding cost reduction that the


                                                9
bank gets when taking advantage of the dollar convenience yield. The F.O.C. for the bank is,


                         −κθtB    =    yt$,LIBOR − yt∗,LIBOR + (ft − st )

                                  =    xLIBOR
                                        t


where xLIBOR
       t     denotes the LIBOR basis. If yt$,LIBOR is particularly low, e.g., driven by
an increase in demand for dollar deposits, then xLIBOR
                                                 t     will rise and banks will increase the
supply of dollar deposits, θtB , while swapping these dollars deposits back into foreign currency
to keep their exchange rate exposure unaffected. Suppose there are many banks and denote
the aggregate quantity of dollar deposits supplied in equilibrium as ΘB
                                                                      t . Then, the equilibrium

LIBOR basis is given by:
                                        xLIBOR
                                         t     = −κΘB
                                                    t .                                     (B10)

LEMMA 6: The LIBOR basis depends on foreign demand for dollar deposits as follows:
When banks face no capital/leverage costs in doing swaps and κ = 0, the LIBOR basis is
zero and independent of ΘB
                         t . When κ > 0, the LIBOR basis becomes more negative as the

demand for dollar safe assets rises.

In the frictionless case, as κ goes to zero, banks actively trade in the forward to earn the
convenience yield on dollar deposits while not altering their exchange rate exposure. In equi-
librium, the price of the forward will adjust to equalize these margins and the LIBOR CIP
deviation goes to zero. Perhaps surprisingly. the forward price, ft1 , can embed a convenience
yield.
     In an influential recent paper, Du et al. (2018b) document that the LIBOR basis was
near zero pre-crisis and has often been significantly different than zero post-crisis. They
show that the movements in the LIBOR basis are closely connected to frictions in financial
intermediation that prevent arbitrage activities. Other papers have come to similar conclusions
regarding the importance of financial frictions and capital controls (see Ivashina et al., 2015;
Gabaix and Maggiori, 2015; Amador et al., 2020; Itskhoki and Mukhin, 2017). Our lemma
shows, consistent with the findings of Du et al. (2018b), that when κ > 0, LIBOR CIP will
fail. More novel, our theory implies that when κ > 0, xLIBOR
                                                       t     will, like λ$,∗
                                                                         t , reflect foreign

investors’s demand for safe dollar assets. We verify this prediction in the data post-crisis.



D.       Proofs
      Proof of Proposition 2:


         Proof. We start from the domestic investor’s Euler equation for the foreign risk-free
         asset, and the foreign investor’s Euler equation for the domestic risk-free asset respec-




                                                10
  tively:
                                                       
                                        St+1                                      
      $
  Et Mt+1 exp(λ$,$
               t )          =     Et        ∗
                                           Mt+1exp(λ$,∗        $       $,$                    $
                                                    t ) = Et Mt+1 exp(λt ) exp(ηt+1 ) = exp(−yt )
                                           St
                                                       
                                           St
       ∗
           exp(λ∗,∗                   $
                                               exp(λ∗,$       ∗        ∗,∗                      ∗
                                                                                      
   Et Mt+1      t )         =     Et Mt+1           t ) = Et Mt+1 exp(λt ) exp(−ηt+1 ) = exp(−yt )
                                          St+1

  where we have used:

               St+1
                       $
                      Mt+1 exp(λ$,$
                                t )
                                                  $
                                                 Mt+1 exp(λ∗,$
                                                           t )
                    =               exp(ηt+1 ) =               exp(ηt+1 ).
                St     ∗
                      Mt+1      $,∗
                           exp(λt )              Mt+1 exp(λ∗,∗
                                                  ∗
                                                           t )


  By using conditional joint log normality of the foreign SDF and exp(η), the first Euler
  equation implies that:

              1                                                     1                
          $                $                               $                              $
  Et log Mt+1  + vart log Mt+1                    =
                                                Et log Mt+1      + µt,η + vart log Mt+1
                2                                                         2
                                                1                                   $
                                           +      vart (ηt+1 ) + covt (ηt+1 , log Mt+1 ),
                                                2
                                                                
  where µt,η   = Et (ηt+1 ). This implies that covt m$t+1 , ηt+1 = −µt,η − 0.5vart (ηt+1 ).
  We move on to the second equation. The second Euler equation for the domestic
  risk-free asset implies that:

            ∗
                 1          ∗
                                                              ∗
                                                                            1          ∗
                                                                                            
    Et log Mt+1  + vart log Mt+1                  =    Et log Mt+1   − µt,η + vart log Mt+1
                  2                                                          2
                                                                                             ∗
                                                  +    (1/2)vart (ηt+1 ) − covt (ηt+1 , log Mt+1 ).


  This implies that covt m∗t+1 , ηt+1 = −µt,η + 0.5vart (ηt+1 ).
                                     


  To derive an expression for the variance of the exchange rate, we start from the defini-
  tion of log changes in exchange rates: vart (∆st+1 ) = vart (ηt+1 + m$t+1 − m∗t+1 ). This
  can be simplified to:


     vart (∆st+1 )    =    vart (m$t+1 ) + vart (m∗t+1 ) + vart (ηt+1 ) − 2covt (m$t+1 , m∗t+1 )

                      +    2covt (m$t+1 , ηt+1 ) − 2covt (m∗t+1 , ηt+1 ).


  Plug in the covariance expressions above, we obtain


   vart (∆st+1 ) = vart (m$t+1 ) + vart (m∗t+1 ) − 2covt (m$t+1 , m∗t+1 ) − vart (ηt+1 ) .




 Proof of Corollary 1:


  Proof. We use the following Euler equations for the foreign bond, and the domestic




                                                  11
  bond respectively:

                                 1
                        Et m∗t+1 + vart m∗t+1 + yt∗               −λ∗,∗
                                           
                                                             =      t ,
                                  2
                          h     i 1    h     i
                        Et m$t+1 + vart m$t+1 + yt$          =    −λ$,$
                                                                    t .
                                  2

  By plugging these 2 equations into the log expected excess return given by yt$ − yt∗ +
  Et (∆st+1 ), and by using the following expression for the expected rate of appreciation,
  Et ∆st+1 = Et (ηt+1 + m$t+1 − m∗t+1 − λ$,∗        $,$
                                             t + λt ), we obtain an expression for the ex-
                                                            h                       i
  pected excess return in logs: yt$ − yt∗ + Et (∆st+1 ) = 21 vart m∗t+1 − vart m$t+1 −
                                                                       

  λ$,∗
   t   + λ∗,∗
          t   + Et (ηt+1 ) .


 Proof of Corollary 2:


  Proof. From the foreign investor’s Euler equation, it follows that the expected excess
  return in levels is given by:


      Et [rxF X
            t+1 ] + (1/2)vart (∆st+1 )    ≡    yt$ − yt∗ + Et (∆st+1 ) + (1/2)vart (∆st+1 )

                                          =    −covt (m∗t+1 , ∆st+1 ) − λ$,∗
                                                                         t   + λ∗,∗
                                                                                t

                                                                                            
  Next, note that: −covt (m∗t+1 , ∆st+1 ) = −covt m∗t+1 , ηt+1 + m$t+1 − m∗t+1 − λ$,∗
                                                                                  t   + λ$,$
                                                                                         t     .
  This can be worked out to yield the following expression: −covt (m∗t+1 , ∆st+1 ) =
                                   
  vart (m∗t+1 ) − covt m∗t+1 , m$t+1 − covt m∗t+1 , ηt+1 , where covt m∗t+1 , ηt+1 =
                                                                                 

                   1
  −Et (ηt+1 ) +    2
                     vart   (ηt+1 ) The latter follows from the restriction on the wedges
  in Proposition 2.     This can then be worked out to yield the following expression:
                                                                          
  −covt (m∗t+1 , ∆st+1 ) − λ$,∗
                            t   + λ∗,∗
                                   t   = vart (m∗t+1 ) − covt m∗t+1 , m$t+1 + Et (ηt+1 ) −
  1
  2
    vart   (ηt+1 ) − λ$,∗
                      t   + λ∗,∗
                             t .


 Proof of Corollary 3:


  Proof. Similarly, the excess return expected by the US investor on foreign bonds in
  levels is:


     yt∗ − yt$ − Et (∆st+1 ) + (1/2)vart (∆st+1 ) = −covt (m$t+1 , −∆st+1 ) + λ$,$
                                                                               t   − λ∗,$
                                                                                      t

                                                                                            
  Next, note that −covt (m$t+1 , ∆st+1 ) = −covt m$t+1 , −ηt+1 − m$t+1 + m∗t+1 + λ$,∗
                                                                                  t   − λ$,$
                                                                                         t     .

  This can be worked out to yield the following expression: −covt (m$t+1 , ∆st+1 ) =
                                                                             
  vart (m$t+1 ) − covt m∗t+1 , m$t+1 + covt m$t+1 , ηt+1 , where covt m$t+1 , ηt+1 =
  −Et (ηt+1 ) − 12 vart (ηt+1 ) . This follows from the restrictions on the wedges in Proposi-
  tion 2. This can be worked out to yield the following expression: −covt (m$t+1 , ∆st+1 ) =
                                   
  vart (m$t+1 ) − covt m∗t+1 , m$t+1 − Et (ηt+1 ) − 21 vart (ηt+1 ) .




                                              12
     Proof of Corollary 4:


      Proof. We start from the expression for the change in the log exchange rate and we
      re-arrange this to produce: st = −m$t+1 + m∗t+1 − ηt+1 − λ$,$  $,∗
                                                                t + λt   + st+1 . Next, we
      take expectations to get the following expression for the log exchange rate:


                     st = −Et [m$t+1 ] + Et [m∗t+1 ] − Et [ηt+1 ] − λ$,$
                                                                     t   + λ$,∗
                                                                            t   + Et st+1 .


      We use the expression for the yields:

                                                 1
                                Et m∗t+1 = −yt∗ − vart m∗t+1 − λ∗,∗
                                                         
                                                                t .
                                                 2
                                  h     i        1    h     i
                                Et m$t+1 = −yt$ − vart m$t+1 − λ$,$
                                                                t .
                                                 2
      Next, we plug these back into the exchange rate expression to get:

                      1     h     i               1
                 yt$ +  vart m$t+1 + λ$,$ − yt∗ − vart m∗t+1 − λ∗,∗   − Et [ηt+1 ] − λ$,$ + λ$,∗
                                                            
      st    =                         t                           t                   t        t + Et st+1
                      2                           2
                      1     h     i        1
                 yt$ + vart m$t+1 − yt∗ − vart m∗t+1 + λ$,∗    − λ∗,∗
                                                     
            =                                              t      t   − Et [ηt+1 ] + Et st+1 .
                      2                    2

      Next, we can use the following expression for the log currency risk premium: rp∗t =
        h                         i
      1
          vart m∗t+1 − vart m$t+1 + Et (ηt+1 ) , to obtain the following expression for the
                    
      2

      log of the exchange rate:

                                                       
                             st = yt$ − yt∗ + λ$,∗
                                               t   − λ∗,∗
                                                      t     − rp∗t + Et st+1 .


      After repeated substitution, we obtain:
                 ∞                         ∞                         ∞
                              ∗,∗
                     (λ$,∗
                 X                         X                         X
                                                        ∗
       st = Et         t+τ − λt+τ ) + Et
                                                 $
                                               (yt+τ − yt+τ ) − Et          rp∗t+τ + Et [ lim   st+T +1 ].
                                                                                        T →∞
                 τ =0                      τ =0                      τ =0




           Appendix C.                      Long-run Riskless Rate
    In the short run, the dollar exchange rate adjusts in response to changes in the convenience
yields. If real exchange rates are stationary, then there is no long-run currency adjustment.
The currency risk premium disappears from the exchange rate determination equation (see
Backus et al., 2018; Lustig et al., 2019). The spread between the real long-run returns earned
by foreign investors on U.S. Treasurys and domestic bonds reveals the (average) extra conve-
nience yields earned by foreign investors when buying Treasurys:


                               λ$,∗ − λ∗,∗ = −(R$,∗ − R∗,∗ ) = 2%.




                                                  13
Using our model, we inferred from the Treasury basis and the response of the dollar exchange
rate that the extra convenience yield earned by foreign investors is around 2%. This implies
that in the long run real returns earned by foreign investors on Treasurys need to be 2%
lower than the returns on foreign bonds to maintain a stationary exchange rate. Our result is
qualitatively in line with the savings glut hypothesis (see, e.g., Caballero et al., 2008; Caballero
and Krishnamurthy, 2008) and the low r-star analysis (see Laubach and Williams, 2003, 2016;
Holston et al., 2017).
    Admittedly, these are large numbers. We take a different, more direct approach to esti-
mating this gap λ$,∗ −λ∗,∗ . We compute this return gap, as explained below, finding estimates
of λ$,∗ − λ∗,∗ between 1.57% and 1.89%. To compute the realized returns, we take the tim-
ing of foreign purchases of Treasurys into account. Foreigners buy Treasurys when they are
expensive.
    The stylized model developed in the paper features a single maturity instrument. The
maturity of the bonds and the holding period was fixed at one year, mainly to simplify the
analysis, the equivalent of one period in the model. We want to compute the convenience yield
that foreign investors derive on their entire portfolio of U.S. Treasurys and T-Bills. Foreign
investors do not simply buy and hold Treasurys until maturity. To develop a precise measure
of the average convenience yield earned by foreign investors on all of their Treasury holdings,
we compute the effective return realized by foreign investors on all of their U.S. Treasury
purchases (R$,∗ ). This return is lower than what is suggested by average U.S. Treasury
yields. To compute the dollar-weighted return R$,∗ , we solve the following standard IRR
equation for R$,∗ :

                                     T
                                        −Net Purchases$,∗     AU MT$,∗
                      −AU M0$,∗ +
                                    X
                                                       t
                                                 $,∗ t
                                                          +              = 0,
                                    t=0
                                          (1 + R )          (1 + R$,∗ )T

where T denotes the holding period. The terminal cash flow AU MT is the market value of
the U.S. (foreign) investor’s Treasury holdings. We set AU M0$,∗ to zero.
    We consider the returns earned by the stand-in foreign investor. This investor’s net
purchases of Treasurys in each quarter Net Purchases$,∗
                                                    t   equals the net purchases of U.S.
Treasurys by all foreign investors. We used the quarterly Flow of Funds data to measure
net purchases of Treasurys by foreign investors. We assume that this foreign investor is fully
invested in the Bloomberg Barclays Treasury Index. The Bloomberg Barclays US Treasury
Index measures US dollar-denominated, fixed-rate, nominal debt issued by the US Treasury.
Treasury bills are excluded by the maturity constraint, but are part of a separate Short
Treasury Index. To develop a benchmark, we also consider the returns earned by the stand-
in U.S. investor buying Treasurys. Each quarter, this investor buys all of the Treasurys
issued by the U.S. Treasury less those Treasurys purchased by foreign investors. This index
is constructed to measure the returns of a stand-in U.S. investor who buys all marketable




                                                14
U.S. Treasurys. We assume that this U.S. investor is fully invested in the Bloomberg Barclays
Treasury Index.

                                 T
                                    −Net Purchases$,$     AU MT$,$
                  −AU M0$,$ +
                                X
                                                   t
                                             $,$ t
                                                      +              = 0.
                                t=0
                                      (1 + R )          (1 + R$,$ )T

The results are reported in Panel A of Table A.5. Foreign investors earn low effective re-
turns on their Treasury holdings. The USD effective return realized by foreign investors
buying Treasurys over 39 years is only 5.27% p.a., well below the buy-and-hold return of
10.07 %.Hence, the yields, the buy-and-hold returns when the holding period is the maturity
of the bond, do not produce good estimates of the foreign investor’s returns. This number
should be compared to the effective return of 7.45% realized by U.S. investors, 2.18% higher
                                                                                     $,∗
than the foreign investor’s return. Foreign investors earn a real effective return (Rreal,P PP )

of only 3.09% expressed in U.S. units of consumption. This is the relevant estimate of the
foreign real return provided that PPP holds in the long run. Foreign investors buy (sell)
Treasurys when U.S. Treasurys are expensive (cheap), i.e. when the convenience yields are
high (low). This number can be compared to the effective return of 4.83% realized by U.S.
investors, 1.74% higher than the foreign investor’s return.
    In Panel B of Table A.5, we assume that the stand-in foreign investor is fully invested
in the WGBI World index ex-U.S to estimate the foreign investor’s realized return on foreign
                       ∗,∗
local currency bonds (Rreal,∗ ). The FTSE World Government Bond Index (WGBI) measures
the performance of fixed-rate, local currency, investment-grade sovereign bonds. The WGBI
is a widely used benchmark that currently includes sovereign debt from over 20 countries,
denominated in a variety of currencies, and has more than 30 years of history available. The
WGBI provides a broad benchmark for the global sovereign fixed income market. WGBI is
a market-cap-weighted index of local currency sovereign debt. The U.S. is excluded. The
stand-in foreign investor simply holds the ‘market for all foreign local currency debt’. Given
the home currency bias in local currency sovereign and corporate debt holdings, this seems
like a reasonable assumption (Maggiori et al., 2020b). The real buy-and-hold return realized
by foreign investors on foreign, local currency bonds is 4.66%.
    If P.P.P. holds in the long run, then the difference between the real returns earned by
foreign investors on U.S. Treasurys and foreign bonds reveals the (average) extra convenience
yields earned by foreign investors when buying Treasurys. As a result, we can get an estimate
of the extra convenience yield on Treasurys by comparing dollar-weighted returns earned by
foreign investors on Treasurys to those earned on foreign bonds:

               ∗,∗           $,∗
              Rreal,P P P − Rreal,P P P = 4.66% − 3.09% = 1.57% = λ
                                                                    $,∗
                                                                        − λ∗,∗ .


Thus, from a different perspective, we estimate the convenience yield to be 1.57% per annum
based on the Flow of Funds data.



                                              15
    Next, we consider the TICS data provided by the U.S. Treasury. Table A.6 uses the
monthly TICS data instead of the quarterly Flow of Funds data. This allows us for more
precise calculations of the returns earned by foreign investors. In addition, we can also look
at private investor flows separately. In panel A, we consider total cross-border lows of U.S.
                                                            $,∗
Treasurys. Foreign investors earn a real effective return (Rreal,P P P ) of only 3.24% (close to

3.09%). However, in Panel B, we exclude the foreign reserve purchases of central banks. The
effective real return decreases to 2.77%. The ‘private’ estimate of the extra foreign convenience
yield is 189 bps:

                ∗,∗           $,∗
               Rreal,P P P − Rreal,P P P = 4.66% − 2.77% = 1.89% = λ
                                                                     $,∗
                                                                         − λ∗,∗ .


    These different approaches to estimating the foreign convenience yield all give numbers
in the same ballpark. This makes us more comfortable with our estimates.7

 Table A.5. Foreign Dollar-weighted Returns on U.S. Treasurys and T-Bills

    Investor Nationality            Dollar     Time    ∆(Time-Dollar)    ∆(US-Foreign)
                                             Panel A: Returns on U.S. Treasurys
              $,∗
    Foreign (RU SD )                5.27%     10.07%        4.80%            2.18%
                     $,∗
    Foreign, Real (Rreal,P PP )     3.09%     6.77%         3.68%            1.74%

           $,$
    U.S. (RU SD )                   7.45%    10.07%          2.62%
                  $,$
    U.S., Real (Rreal,U S)          4.83%     6.75%          1.92%

                                             Panel B: Returns on Foreign Bonds
              ∗,∗
    Foreign (RU SD ) ∗,∗                      7.38%
    Foreign, Real (Rreal,P PP )               4.66%



Note: Sample 1980.Q1-2019.Q3. Quarterly data from the Federal Flow of Funds, Table F.210
‘Treasury Securities’. The dollar-weighted return is the annualized IRR on the cash flows
invested. The terminal cash flow is the market value of the foreign investor’s Treasury holdings.
The time-weighted return or buy-and-hold return is the annualized geometric mean return. In
Panel A, we assume all cash flows are invested in the Barclays Bloomberg U.S. Treasury index.
In Panel B, we assume that the foreign investor is fully invested in the FTSE World WGBI
Ex-U.S. Bond Index; Sample starts only in 1985. The row labeled ‘U.S.’ takes all Treasury
issuance as the cash flows invested, but excludes the Treasurys (T-Bills) purchased by the
ROW from Treasury issuance. The row labeled ‘Foreign’ uses only Treasurys purchased by
foreigners as the cash flows invested; returns expressed in dollars.




   7 Using   the same logic, we could back out the extra convenience yield foreigners earn on
                                       $,$           $,∗
Treasurys compared to U.S. investors: Rreal,P P P − Rreal,P P P = 4.83% − 2.77% = 2.06% =

λ$,∗ − λ$,$ . By combining these 2 calculations, we get that: λ$,$ − λ∗,∗ = 17 bps. Krishna-
murthy and Vissing-Jorgensen estimate an average λ$,$ of 75 bps. This implies that λ∗,∗ is
58 basis points.


                                               16
      Table A.6. Foreign Returns on U.S. Treasurys: Total vs. Private

                                           Dollar    Time    ∆(Time-Dollar)
                                                     Panel A:Total
                       $,∗
             Foreign (RU SD )              5.46%    10.33%        4.87%
                              $,∗
             Foreign, Real (Rreal,P PP )   3.24%    7.00%         3.77%

                                                    Panel B:Private
                       $,∗
             Foreign (RU SD )              4.90%    10.81%        5.91%
                              $,∗
             Foreign, Real (Rreal,P PP )   2.77%    7.05%         4.28%



Note: Sample 1980.M1-2019.M2. Monthly data from the TIC Treasury data on net purchases
of U.S. Treasurys by foreigners. We assume these flows are fully invested in the Barclays
Treasury Bond Index. The dollar-weighted return is the IRR realized on the cash flows
invested by foreign investors. The terminal cash flow is the market value of the foreign
investor’s Treasury holdings. The time-weighted return is the annualized geometric mean.




                                            17
        Appendix D.                     Exchange Rate Model with

                                                 Sticky Expectations
     To accommodate the evidence of time-series momentum in the dollar exchange rate, we
analyze a version of the model in which foreign exchange investors have sticky expectations:
we posit that these investors do not update their expectations each period, but, when they
do, they use the right model, as in Mankiw and Reis (2002). We assume that in any given
period, a fraction (1 − $) of investors update their information set each period. When they
update, they use rational expectations. We use Ft to denote the cross-sectional average of the
sticky information forecasts. Reis (2006) shows that the cross-sectional average forecast of a
variable xt h periods from now is simply given by: Ft xt+h = (1 − $) ∞        j
                                                                      P
                                                                         j=0 $ Et−j xt+h .

     We posit the following autoregressive processes for the convenience yield earned by foreign
investors, the real interest rate difference it = rt$ − rt∗ and the (negative of the) risk premium
rpt = −(RPt∗ − V art (∆qt+1 )):


                                     λ∗t+1   =   γ0 + γ1 λ∗t + ελ
                                                                t+1 ,                          (D1)

                                     it+1    =   ψ0 + ψ1 it + εit+1 ,                          (D2)

                                    rpt+1    =   δ0 + δ1 rpt + εrp
                                                                t+1 .                          (D3)


Next we assume that the equilibrium exchange rate reflects the cross-sectional average across
all investors of their forecasts of the convenience yield earned by foreign investors, interest
rate differences, and risk premium components of equation (22). We show in the appendix
that:

PROPOSITION 3: The log of the real exchange rate can be stated as a function of current
and lagged fundamentals:
                           ∞
                                                                                                 !
                           X     $j γ1j ∗              $j ψ1j                $j δ1j
qt      =   q̄ + (1 − $)                (λt−j − θλ ) +        (it−j − θi ) +        (rpt−j − θrp(D4)
                                                                                                ) .
                           j=0
                                 1 − γ1                1 − ψ1                1 − δ1




     The first term measures the impact of the convenience yields earned by foreign investors
on the real exchange rate. The second term measures the interest rate differences. The U.S.
Treasury yield includes the effect of the U.S. investors’ convenience yields. The last term
comprises the currency risk premia.
     To understand this expression, it is helpful to consider the case of rational expectations.
                                                  1               1             1
As $ → 0, the expression simplifies to qt = q̄+ 1−γ (λ∗t −θλ )+ 1−ψ (it −θi )+ 1−δ (rpt −θrp ),
                                                        1               1              1

which is the equivalent of (12). The terms here correspond to the sum of future convenience
yields earned by foreign investors, the interest rate differentials, and the risk premia, evaluated
under the assumed AR(1) structure. When investors have sticky expectations ($ > 0), the log


                                                  18
of the real exchange rate adjust slowly to new information about convenience yields, interest
rates and risk premia, as captured by the lagged terms in the sum in (D4). The inertia in the
response to basis shocks is essential to match the time-series dynamics of the real exchange
rate.
    We explicitly compute the impulse responses to innovations.

COROLLARY 5: The impulse response function of the real exchange rate qt to innovations
(λ , i , rp ) j periods after impact is given by:

                                     (1 − $j ) j  j j
                                                          
                           (1 − $)
              ϕλ,j    =                       γ1 + $ γ1 − 1     for j = 0, 1, 2, . . . .
                            1 − γ1    1−$
                           (1 − $) (1 − $j ) j  j j
                                                           
               ϕi,j   =                       ψ1 + $ ψ1 − 1      for j = 0, 1, 2, . . . .
                            1 − ψ1    1−$
                           (1 − $) (1 − $j ) j  j j
                                                          
              ϕrp,j   =                       δ + $ δ1 − 1     for j = 0, 1, 2, . . . .
                            1 − δ1    1−$ 1

    In the case of rational expectations $ = 0, the real exchange rate jumps upon impact and
then gradually depreciates. In this case, there is no momentum in realized returns.
    To help us understand the return predictability produced by this model, we derive an
expression for the excess return expected by a rational investor who continuously updates her
expectations:

PROPOSITION 4: In the model with sticky expectations, the log excess return expected by
a rational foreign investor on a long position in U.S. Treasury bonds relative to the foreign
bond is:
                                                                                                                
                                                      γ1                   ψ1                   δ1
Et rxt+1 = Et [∆qt+1 ] + it     =    it + (1 − $)          (λ∗t − θλ ) +        (it − θi ) +        (rpt − θrp )
                                                    1 − γ1               1 − ψ1              1 − δ1
                                                                                              
                                                           λ                i               rp
                                +    (1 − $) ($γ1 − 1)xt + ($ψ1 − 1)yt + ($δ1 − 1)zt .




When all agents have rational expectations $ = 0, this collapses to the standard expression:


                                     Et [∆qt+1 ] + it = RPt∗ − λt .


An increase in λ decreases the expected excess return one-for-one. However, in the sticky
expectations case, returns will be predictable by all three state variables. Indeed, if $ is large
enough, an increase in λ initially increases expected excess returns.

COROLLARY 6: At longer horizons, the rate of appreciation expected by a rational investor
is given by
                                                                                               !
                                 k    γ1k    ∗           ψ1k                 δ1k
  Et (qt+k − qt )     =   (1 − $ )         (λ − θλ ) +        (it − θi ) +        (rpt − θrp )(D5)
                                    1 − γ1 t           1 − ψ1              1 − δ1
                                                                                    
                                                                                  rp
                      +   (1 − $) ($k γ1k − 1)xλ      k k       i       k k
                                               t + ($ ψ1 − 1)yt + ($ δ1 − 1)zt         .



                                                   19
 Proof of Proposition 3:


  Proof. We consider an environment with a continuum of currencies/investor pairs. For
  a foreign investor who had last updated k periods ago, his valuation of the real exchange
  rate can be written as:
                   ∞                         ∞                                   ∞                         
                   X                         X                                  X           1
  qt (k) = Et−k                λ∗t+τ +Et−k            $
                                                    (rt+τ   ∗
                                                          −rt+τ )−Et−k                 ∗
                                                                                     RPt+τ − V ar[∆st+τ +1 ] +q̄.
                   τ =0                      τ =0                               τ =0
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                        (D6)
  where, q̄ = Et [limτ →∞ qt+τ ] is constant under the assumption that the real exchange
  rate is stationary. The terms rt$ and rt∗ are the real interest rates, i.e., yt$ − Et [∆p$t+1 ]
  is the real dollar interest rate.

  We posit that the real dollar exchange rate is equal to the average valuation of the
  real dollar exchange rate across investors. In the case of information stickiness, the
  convenience yield component is given by:
                               ∞                            ∞             ∞
                           "                        #
                                                                                $j γ1j+k (λ∗t−j − θλ ),
                               X                            X             X
                   Ft             (λ∗t+k   − θλ ) =             (1 − $)
                               k=0                          k=0           j=0


  which can be simplified as
                           ∞                                  ∞
                       "                      #
                           X                                  X                      γ1j
                Ft              (λ∗t+k − θλ )           =         ($)j (1 − $)           (λ∗ − θλ ).
                        k=1                                  j=0
                                                                                   1 − γ1 t−j

  By the same token, the aggregate cash flow and risk premium components are given
  by:
                            ∞                                 ∞
                        "                       #
                            X                                 X                      ψ1j
                   Ft            (it+k − θi )           =          ($)j (1 − $)           (it−j − θi ),
                            k=1                               j=0
                                                                                   1 − ψ1
                       ∞                                      ∞
                   "                            #
                       X                                      X                      δ1j
              Ft               (rpt+k − θrp )           =          ($)j (1 − $)           (rpt−j − θrp ).
                       k=1                                    j=0
                                                                                   1 − δ1

  As a result, we end up with the following expression for the log of the real exchange
  rate:
                                   ∞
                                                                                                          !
                                   X       $j γ1j ∗            $j ψ1j                $j δ1j
  qt      =   q̄ + (1 − $)                       (λ   − θλ ) +        (it−j − θi ) +        (rpt−j − θrp ) .
                                   j=0
                                           1 − γ1 t−j          1 − ψ1                1 − δ1




 Proof of Proposition 4:


  Proof. Armed with this expression, we can compute the (rationally) expected change




                                                             20
  in the real exchange given by:
                                              ∞
                                                                                                   !
                                              X         $j γ1j ∗              $j ψ1j
  Et (qt+1 − qt )     =    q̄ + (1 − $)Et                     (λ     − θλ ) +        (it+1−j − θi )
                                             j=0
                                                        1 − γ1 t+1−j          1 − ψ1
                                                                                                                   !
                                             ∞
                                             X       $j γ1j ∗            $j ψ1j                $j δ1j
                      −    q̄ + (1 − $)                   (λ   − θλ ) +        (it−j − θi ) +        (rpt−j − θrp )  .
                                             j=0
                                                     1 − γ1 t−j          1 − ψ1                1 − δ1

  This can be simplified as follows:
                                                                                                    
                                           γ1                   ψ1                  δ1
  Et (qt+1 − qt )     =    (1 − $)              (λ∗t − θλ ) +        (it − θi ) +        (rpt − θrp )
                                         1 − γ1               1 − ψ1              1 − δ1
                                     ∞
                                                                                                                    !
                                     X       $j γ1j − $j−1 γ1j−1 ∗                $j ψ1j − $j−1 ψ1j−1
                      +    (1 − $)                               (λt+1−j − θλ ) +                     (it+1−j − θi )
                                     j=1
                                                    1 − γ1                               1 − ψ1
                                     ∞
                                                                                 !
                                     X       $j δ1j − $j−1 δ1j−1
                      +    (1 − $)                               (rpt+1−j − θrp ) ,
                                     j=1
                                                    1 − δ1

  or, equivalently,



                                                                                                 
                                       γ1                    ψ1                  δ1
  Et (qt+1 − qt )     =    (1 − $)          (λ∗t − θλ ) +         (it − θi ) +        (rpt − θrp )
                                     1 − γ1               1 − ψ1               1 − δ1
                                    ∞                                                                   
                                                  $γ1  − 1                           $ψ1 − 1
                                        ($j γ1j )          (λ∗t−j − θλ ) + ($j ψ1j )
                                   X
                      +    (1 − $)                                                           (it−j − θi )
                                   j=0
                                                  1 − γ1                             1 − ψ1
                                     ∞                                        
                                                         $δ1 − 1
                                             ($j δ1j )
                                     X
                      +    (1 − $)                               (rpt−j − θrp ) .
                                     j=0
                                                         1 − δ1

                                                                                            1
  Using the expression for the new state variables, xλ        λ
                                                     t = $γ1 xt−1 +                       1−γ1
                                                                                               (λ∗t   − θλ ),
  yti = $ψ1 yt−1
             i   +          1
                              (i
                          1−ψ1 t
                                   − θi ),   ztrp   =         rp
                                                         $δ1 zt−1   +    1
                                                                        1−δ1
                                                                             (rpt   − θrp ), we obtain the
  following expression for the (rational) expected rate of appreciation:
                                                                                               
                                      γ1                   ψ1                  δ1
  Et (qt+1 − qt )     =    (1 − $)         (λ∗t − θλ ) +        (it − θi ) +        (rpt − θrp )
                                    1 − γ1               1 − ψ1              1 − δ1
                                                                                  
                      +    (1 − $) ($γ1 − 1)xt + ($ψ1 − 1)yt + ($δ1 − 1)ztrp
                                                λ               i




 Proof of Corollary 6:


  Proof. We can compute the (rationally) expected change in the real exchange given
  by:
                                              ∞
                                                                                                                               !
                                              X       $j γ1j ∗                 $j ψ1j                   $j δ1j
  Et (qt+k − qt )     =    q̄ + (1 − $)Et                    (λt+k−j − θλ ) +         (it+k−j − θi ) +         (rpt+k−j − θrp )
                                              j=0
                                                      1 − γ1                  1 − ψ1                    1 − δ1
                                                                                                                     !
                                             ∞
                                             X       $j γ1j ∗              $j ψ1j                $j δ1j
                      −    q̄ + (1 − $)                    (λ    − θλ ) +        (it−j − θi ) +        (rpt−j − θrp )  .
                                             j=0
                                                     1 − γ1 t−j            1 − ψ1                1 − δ1




                                                    21
This can be simplified as follows:

                                     k−1
                                                                                                          !
                                     X         $j γ1k ∗            $j ψ1k              $j δ1k
Et (qt+k − qt )      =     (1 − $)                    (λt − θλ ) +        (it − θi ) +        (rpt − θrp )
                                     j=0
                                               1 − γ1              1 − ψ1              1 − δ1
                                     ∞
                                                                                                                      !
                                     X         $j γ1j − $j−k γ1j−k ∗                $j ψ1j − $j−k ψ1j−k
                     +     (1 − $)                                 (λt+k−j − θλ ) +                     (it+k−j − θi )
                                     j=k
                                                      1 − γ1                               1 − ψ1
                                     ∞
                                                                                   !
                                     X         $j δ1j − $j−k δ1j−k
                     +     (1 − $)                                 (rpt+k−j − θrp ) ,
                                     j=k
                                                      1 − δ1

or, equivalently,

                                     k−1
                                                                                                                   !
                                     X                   γ1k                  ψ1k                 δ1k
Et (qt+k − qt )      =     (1 − $)          $j                (λ∗t − θλ ) +        (it − θi ) +        (rpt − θrp )
                                     j=0
                                                       1 − γ1               1 − ψ1              1 − δ1
                                     ∞
                                                                                                                        !
                                     X               $j−k γ1j−k − 1 ∗                  k k$
                                                                                            j−k ψ j−k − 1
                     +     (1 − $)            $k γ1k                (λt+k−j − θλ ) + $ ψ1        1
                                                                                                          (it+k−j − θi )
                                     j=k
                                                        1 − γ1                                1 − ψ1
                                     ∞
                                                                                    !
                                     X               $j−k δ1j−k − 1
                     +     (1 − $)            $k δ1k                (rpt+k−j − θrp ) .
                                     j=k
                                                        1 − δ1

                                                                                               1
Using the expression for the new state variables, xλ        λ
                                                   t = $γ1 xt−1 +                            1−γ1
                                                                                                  (λ∗t   − θλ ),
yti   =        i
          $ψ1 yt−1   +     1
                             (i
                         1−ψ1 t
                                  − θi ),   ztrp   =        rp
                                                       $δ1 zt−1   +    1
                                                                      1−δ1
                                                                           (rpt   − θrp ),

we obtain the following expression for the (rational) expected rate of appreciation:
                                                                                                 !
                                       γ1k                  ψ1k                 δ1k
Et (qt+k − qt )      =     (1 − $k )        (λ∗t − θλ ) +        (it − θi ) +        (rpt − θrp )
                                     1 − γ1               1 − ψ1              1 − δ1
                                                                                       
                                                                                     rp
                     +     (1 − $) ($k γ1k − 1)xλ        k k       i       k k
                                                 t + ($ ψ1 − 1)yt + ($ δ1 − 1)zt




                                                       22
      Appendix E.                 Alternative Construction of

                                              Treasury Basis
A.     KFW Bonds
     Figure A.2 plots the basis for KfW bonds. KfW is a German issuer whose bonds are
backed by the German government, so that they are near default free. KfW issues bonds
in different currencies allowing us to compute the basis for the bonds of the same issuer,
i.e., holding safety fixed, in different currencies. We compute the basis for KfW bonds using
one-year yields on these bonds for Australia, Euro, UK, and Switzerland against the U.S..
The yield data is from Bloomberg and corresponds to a fitted yield at the one-year maturity
(one-year maturity bonds do not always exist). Clearly this measure is not as reliable as our
Treasury basis measure which only uses information from traded instruments. Figure A.2
plots the cross-country mean KfW basis and the Treasury basis (cross-country mean for the
same countries) over a sample with daily data from 2011Q2 to 2017Q2.




           Figure A.2. KfW and Treasury Basis, 2011Q2 to 2017Q2




                                             23
B.     Credit Risk Adjustment
     Figure A.3 plots the Treasury basis after we adjust for credit risk. Recall that the Treasury
basis is defined as the different between Treasury yields plot the forward premium:


                                                xT
                                                 t
                                                   reas
                                                        ≡ yt$ + (ft1 − st ) − yt∗ .                            (E1)


     Here, we define the credit-risk adjusted Treasury basis as


                                      xT
                                       t
                                         reas
                                              ≡ (yt$ − cds$t ) + (ft1 − st ) − (yt∗ − cds∗t ),                 (E2)


where cds$t and cds∗t are the U.S. and foreign sovereign default CDS spreads. We use the most
liquid 5-year CDS contract from Markit, even though the Treasury yields are 1-year.
                               20
                               0
                               −20
                basis points

                               −40
                               −60
                               −80
                               −100




                                                                             Credit−Risk Adj. Treasury Basis
                                                                             Treasury Basis


                                      2004    2006     2008     2010       2012      2014       2016

                                                                 yearqtr



Figure A.3. Credit Risk Adjustment for Treasury Basis, 2003Q4 to 2017Q2




                                                                24
   Appendix F.                   VAR Estimation Identification
Rescaling Bases and Interest Rate Differences in VAR                                 We estimate the
VAR system using quarterly data. In order to convert the 1-year Treasury basis to an equiv-
alent 3-month Treasury basis, we scale the 1-year Treasury basis in the following way:

                                           1−φ
                                  x3m
                                   t  =           · x12m
                                                     t   ,
                                           1 − φ4

where φ = 0.46 is the quarterly AR(1) coefficient on the 1-year basis.This AR(1) coefficient
is slightly different from the one calculated in Section A of the paper because in the VAR
system we drop 4 quarterly observations for missing real interest rate data. With this scaling,
                                                                  1−φ
a 1% increase in the 1-year basis at time t is spread into a     1−φ4
                                                                        · 1% = 0.56% increase in the
1-quarter basis at time t (or equivalently a 2.25% increase in the annualized 1-quarter basis),
an expected 0.26% increase in the 1-quarter basis at time t + 1, an expected 0.12% increase
in the 1-quarter basis at time t + 2, an expected 0.06% increase in the 1-quarter basis at time
t + 3. In this way, the expected increases in the 1-quarter basis from time t to t + 3 sum
up to 1%. Moreover, note that in an annual model, a 1% increase in the 1-year basis raises
                                                                                         1
the expected present-value of the convenience yield term in equation (22) by           1−φ4
                                                                                              · 1%. By
                                                          1−φ
our scaling, this shock raises the 1-quarter basis by    1−φ4
                                                                · 1%, which also leads to the same
                                                                 1−φ  1               1
increase in the present value of the convenience yield by       1−φ4 1−φ
                                                                           · 1% =   1−φ4
                                                                                           · 1%.
    Similarly, we impose an AR(1) structure to the term structure of the interest rate dif-
ferential. Under this structure, we scale the 1-year interest rate differential in the following
way:

                                           1 − φi 12m
                                   i3m
                                    t  =          ·i  ,
                                           1 − φ4i t

where φi = 0.85 is the quarterly AR(1) coefficient on the 1-year interest rate differential.
With this scaling, a 1% increase in the 1-year interest rate differential at time t is spread into
increases of 0.31%, 0.27%, 0.23% and 0.19% in the 1-quarter interest rate differential at time
t to t + 3.
    A shock to the Treasury basis affects future Treasury basis, future interest rates, and
future risk premia. In order to estimate the β ∗ coefficient under the VAR model, we assume
that the response of the sum of expected risk premia to a Treasury basis shock is 0:
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                                     ∗
                                      ∆Et          RPt+τ = 0.
                                            τ =0

    Under this identifying assumption, we can identify β ∗ from the response of the exchange




                                                   25
rate to an orthogonal basis shock:
                                             P∞        $    ∗
                                                                                  P∞        ∗
                1              ∆qt − ∆Et                − rt+τ
                                                τ =0 (rt+τ     ) + ∆Et             τ =0   RPt+τ
                      =    −                                                                      (F1)
             1 − β∗                                  ∆Et ∞
                                                        P
                                                              x
                                                          τ =0 t+τ
                                             P∞        $          ∗
                               ∆qt − ∆Et        τ =0 (rt+τ     − rt+τ )
                      =    −                  P∞                          ,                       (F2)
                                        ∆Et      τ =0   xt+τ

where ∆ traces out the impulse responses of different variables to the orthogonal basis shock
in our VAR system.
    More formally, notice the VAR system zt0 = [xt , it , qt ] has the following dynamics


                                  zt = Γ0 + Γ1 zt−1 + at .


    We extract the orthogonalized basis shock from the Cholesky Decomposition:


                                   var(at ) ≡ Ω = AA0 .


    Define ãt = A−1 at , then var(ãt ) = I. The orthogonalized basis shock is defined as
Ae01 ãt . Then, we plug the impulse responses following the orthogonalized basis shock into
Eq. (F1),
                                                   P∞          $          ∗
                     1                ∆qt − ∆Et         τ =0 (rt+τ     − rt+τ )
                            =     −                  P∞                                           (F3)
                  1 − β∗                       ∆Et       τ =0   xt+τ
                                      e03 Ae01 ãt − e02 (I + Γ1 + Γ21 + . . .)Ae01 ãt
                            =     −                                                     ,         (F4)
                                              e01 (I + Γ1 + Γ21 + . . .)Ae01 ãt

and obtain an estimate of β ∗ .


Ordering       Importantly, the results are not sensitive to switching the order of the basis
and interest rate differential, indicating that we can plausibly interpret the relation between
the basis and exchange rate causally: A shock to convenience yields moves both the basis
and the exchange rate. We say this because we have allowed for other known determinants
of the exchange rate, relative price levels and relative interest rates, and yet recover the same
relation between the basis and the exchange rate. Figure A.4 switches the ordering of the
interest rate difference and the basis in the VAR. The impulse responses to a basis shock
are nearly identical to those of Figure 2. The exchange rate falls a little under 3% over two
quarters and then gradually reverts over the subsequent 2 years. We find that the ordering
does not matter because the reduced form VAR innovations to the basis and the interest rate
difference are only weakly correlated. Finally, the ordering also does not affect the variance
decomposition results.




                                                   26
                                                     Rate Shocks                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                            Basis Shocks




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
         Yield Differential (%)




                                                                                                                                            Yield Differential (%)
                                                                    Treasury Basis (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Treasury Basis (%)
                                                                                           0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.05
                                  0.2




                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                           0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.00
                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                           −0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −0.05
                                  −0.2




                                                                                                                                                                     −0.2
                                         0   10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30   40                                                  0       10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30        40
                                                  Quarter                                                   Quarter                                                                       Quarter                                                   Quarter
                                  4




                                                                                           4




                                                                                                                                                                     4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                            FX Exchange Rate (%)
                                                                    FX Excess Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            FX Excess Return (%)
                                  2




                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                  0




                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                  −2




                                                                                           −2




                                                                                                                                                                     −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −2
                                  −4




                                                                                           −4




                                                                                                                                                                     −4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −4
                                         0   10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30   40                                                  0       10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30        40
                                                  Quarter                                                   Quarter                                                                       Quarter                                                   Quarter



                                                       FX Shocks                                                                                                                           Var. Decomp.
                                                                                           0.10
                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                       0.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Basis
         Yield Differential (%)




                                                                    Treasury Basis (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RDiff
                                                                                           0.05
                                  0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FX
                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                           0.00
                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                   fraction of variance
                                                                                           −0.05
                                  −0.2




                                                                                                                                                                       0.4




                                         0   10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30   40
                                                  Quarter                                                   Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                  4




                                                                                           4
         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                    FX Excess Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                  2




                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                  0




                                                                                           0
                                  −2




                                                                                           −2




                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                  −4




                                                                                           −4




                                         0   10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30   40
                                                                                                                                                                                 0               10                        20                   30               40
                                                  Quarter                                                   Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                time




                                  Figure A.4. Panel Impulse Responses, Alternative Ordering.

The red line plots the impulse response of an orthogonalized one-standard-deviation shock
on the basis (top left panel), the real interest rate differential (top right panel), the log real
spot exchange rate (bottom left panel), and the quarterly log excess return on a long position
in dollars (bottom right panel). The units for the y-axis are in percentage points. The grey
areas indicates 95% confidence
                             h intervals. The i VAR is estimated using a sample from 1988Q1
to 2017Q2. The ordering is rt$ − r∗t , xt , qt .




                                                                                                                              27
                        Appendix G.                    Robustness
     Our robustness tests include (1) replacing the innovation to Treasury basis by the change
in Treasury basis, (2) re-running regressions in the subsample in which the Treasury basis is
small in magnitude, (3) in the predictability regression, changing the dependent variable from
the dollar’s excess return to its exchange rate movement, (4) using the quarterly average basis
instead of the end-of-quarter basis.



A.      Explaining Variation in the Dollar Using Change in Treasury
        Basis
     In Table III, we use the innovation in Treasury basis as the explanatory variable. Here
we use the change ∆x̄T
                     t
                       reas = x̄T reas − x̄T reas instead.
                                t          t−1


Table A.7. Average Treasury Basis and the USD Spot Nominal Exchange
Rate

The dependent variable is the quarterly change in the log of the spot USD exchange rate
against a basket. The independent variables are the change in the average Treasury basis,
∆xT reas , as log yield (i.e. 50 basis points is 0.005), the lagged value of the change, the change
in the LIBOR basis, and the change in the U.S.-to-foreign Treasury yield differential. Data
is quarterly. OLS standard errors in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.

                                     1988Q1−2017Q2                             1988Q1−2007Q4          2008Q1−2017Q2
                 (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)               (5)        (6)     (7)              (8)     (9)

∆xT reas         −4.27∗∗               −9.50∗∗∗                    −8.89∗∗∗ −2.08                     −11.00∗∗∗
                 (1.90)                (1.96)                       (1.73)  (2.32)                     (3.11)
∆x̄LIBOR                     3.02                                                         8.46∗∗∗                 −7.61∗
                            (2.57)                                                       (3.18)                    (3.84)
Lag ∆xT reas                         −12.15∗∗∗                    −11.36∗∗∗
                                      (2.31)                       (2.04)
∆(y $ − ȳ ∗ )                                          3.76∗∗∗     3.51∗∗∗
                                                       (0.71)      (0.61)
Observations     117        117        116             117         116         80         80            37         37
R2               0.04       0.01       0.23            0.20        0.41       0.01       0.08          0.26       0.10




                                                  28
B.      Explaining Variation in the Dollar when Treasury Basis is
        Small
     This section repeats the regressions in Table III in the sub-sample in which the U.S.
Treasury basis is above or equal to the 25th percentile (−30 basis points), which represent
the 75% of the data in which the Treasury basis is small in magnitude. We find that the U.S.
dollar’s exchange rate also comoves with the U.S. Treasury basis in these calm periods.

Table A.8. Average Treasury Basis and the USD Spot Nominal Exchange
Rate, Calm Periods

The dependent variable is the quarterly change in the log of the spot USD exchange rate
against a basket. The independent variables are the innovation in the average Treasury basis,
∆xT reas , as log yield (i.e. 50 basis points is 0.005), the lagged value of the innovation,
the innovation in the LIBOR basis, and the innovation in the U.S.-to-foreign Treasury yield
differential. Data is quarterly. OLS standard errors in parentheses. One, two and three stars
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.

                                      1988Q1−2017Q2                        1988Q1−2007Q4        2008Q1−2017Q2
                 (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)    (7)           (8)     (9)

∆xT reas         −9.55∗∗∗              −13.30∗∗∗                −6.12∗      −6.75∗∗             −23.86∗∗∗
                 (2.47)                 (2.96)                  (3.08)       (2.78)              (5.11)
∆x̄LIBOR                    −7.28∗                                                    −4.35                 −11.44∗
                             (3.90)                                                    (5.20)                (5.81)
Lag ∆xT reas                            −7.76∗∗                 −2.53
                                         (3.54)                 (3.38)
∆(y $ − ȳ ∗ )                                        5.01∗∗∗    4.13∗∗∗
                                                     (0.78)     (0.89)
Observations       88        88           88          88          88          58       58         30          30
R2                0.15      0.04         0.19        0.32        0.36        0.10     0.01       0.44        0.12




                                                29
C.     Forecasting Exchange Rate Movements using Treasury Basis
     This section checks the predictability of nominal exchange rate movements instead of the
predictability of currency excess returns.

       Table A.9. Forecasting Exchange Rate Movements in Panel Data

The dependent variable is the annualized change in the exchange rate (in logs) (4/k)∆st→t+k
on a long position in the dollar over k quarters. The independent variables are the aver-
age Treasury basis xT reas lagged by 1 quarter, and the nominal Treasury yield difference
  $
(yt→t+k  − y ∗t→t+k ) with maturities of k quarters. Data is quarterly from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2.
We omit the constant, and report Newey-West standard errors with lags equal to the length
of the forecast horizon k. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% level.


                                Panel A: 1988Q1—2017Q2
                               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                           3 months          1 year         2 years         3 years
      Lag xT reas            −0.59             1.34            4.65            5.17∗∗∗
                              (6.20)          (6.07)          (3.15)          (1.73)
       $
      yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k      −0.21             0.15            0.77            0.63
                              (0.87)          (0.72)          (1.11)          (0.79)
      Observations            117             117             117             115
      R2                     0.001           0.002            0.05            0.07
                                Panel B: 1988Q1—2007Q4
                               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                           3 months          1 year         2 years         3 years
      Lag xT reas            −9.91           −6.39           −0.10             4.21
                              (6.45)         (6.95)          (2.83)           (2.62)
       $
      yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k      −0.03           −0.004           0.70             1.21
                              (0.86)         (0.75)          (1.24)           (0.94)
      Observations             80              80              80              80
      R2                      0.02            0.03            0.03            0.10
                                Panel C: 2008Q1—2017Q2
                               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                           3 months          1 year         2 years         3 years
                                     ∗               ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
      Lag x   T reas
                              18.84          19.81           16.00            10.03∗∗∗
                             (10.54)         (6.32)          (3.33)           (1.89)
       $
      yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k      −6.87∗∗         −0.48            0.41             0.42
                              (3.24)         (0.91)          (0.96)           (1.03)
      Observations             37              37              37              35
      R2                      0.17            0.30            0.40            0.31




                                              30
D.      Market Microstructure
     The FX markets in both spot and forward are large and liquid. Nevertheless, one may
want to know the extent to which the relation we uncover stems from micro-structure order
flow effects as in Evans and Lyons (2002) or Froot and Ramadorai (2005). Our theory does
not involve these types of effects, and to test our theory ideally our data would reflect the mid
of the bid and ask. By computing a quarterly average, we average out bid-ask bounce and
thus likely measure true mid-market prices. The relation we uncover is quite strong in this
averaged data (in fact it is stronger than the end-of-quarter data of Table III).8 The variation
reflected in the exchange rate is an order of magnitude larger than typical bid-ask spreads.
The standard-deviation of exchange rate changes in log points is 0.04, or 4%, which is well
above typical bid-ask spreads. The standard-deviation of Treasury basis changes is 0.00134
(13.4 basis points). The slope coefficient on the fitted regression line of −14.5 implies that a
one standard deviation change in the basis drives a 1.94% move in the exchange rate, which
is also an order of magnitude larger than bid-ask spreads.




Figure A.5.        Scatter plot of changes in the log exchange rate, averaged over a quarter,
against shocks to the quarterly average basis. Data is from 1988Q1 to 2017Q2. In red we plot
the fitted regression line. The R2 is 22.8% and the slope coefficient is −14.6 with a t-statistic
of 5.8.




     8 Figure   A.5 presents a scatter plot of the change in the quarterly average log exchange
rate against the change in the quarterly average basis.


                                                31
Appendix H.                     The U.S. vs U.K. Treasury Basis

                                   and the USD/GBP Exchange

                                                            Rate
A.       Explaining Exchange Rate Movements
       Figure A.6 plots the real exchange rate in units of GBP-per-USD (dashed line) against the
U.S./U.K. Treasury basis (full line). Both series are based on quarterly averaged data. We
use the real exchange rate because there are clear trends in the price levels of both countries
in the 1970s and early 1980s that we would expect to enter exchange rate determination. It
is evident that the two series are negatively correlated.
       Table A.10 presents regressions analogous to that of Table III. We again see a strong
relationship between shocks to the basis and real exchange rate changes. The relation becomes
stronger later in the sample. We think this is in part because of measurement issues with the
basis during the 1970s. Note the spikey behavior of the basis in the 1970s in Figure A.6. In
column (5), where the sample starts in 1990, the coefficient of −11.67 is similar in magnitude
to our earlier estimates in Table III. The regression R2 is 28.4% which is a remarkably strong
fit.
       Column (2) considers the innovation in the interest rate differential as a regressor. In
this sample in contrast to the cross-country sample, the interest rate differential has almost
no explanatory power for the exchange rate. As noted in the introduction, the prior evidence
linking interest rate changes and exchange rates is mixed and this is a clear example of this
pattern. The source of the difference is the time period: If we focused on the sample from
1990 onwards, the interest rate differential has explanatory power similar to the result in
Table III. Column (3) includes basis innovations and interest rate differential innovations.
The coefficients on the basis in column (3) are almost identical to those of column (1).




                                                32
                                        250                                                                      0.8
                                                                                            Treasury Basis
                                        200                                                 Real Exchange Rate
                                                                                                                 0.7
                                        150
                                                                                                                 0.6
                                        100




                                                                                                                       log of real exch. rate
                                                                                                                 0.5
                                         50



                         basis points
                                          0                                                                      0.4

                                        -50
                                                                                                                 0.3
                                        -100
                                                                                                                 0.2
                                        -150
                                                                                                                 0.1
                                        -200

                                        -250                                                                     0
                                               1971   1976   1982   1987   1993   1998   2004    2009    2015



        Figure A.6. U.S./U.K. Treasury Bases and Real Exchange Rate

One-year maturity Treasury basis from 1970Q1 to 2017Q2 for U.S./U.K., in basis points, and
the log real U.S./U.K. exchange rate.




  Table A.10. U.S./U.K. Treasury Basis and the Spot Real Exchange Rate

The dependent variable is the quarterly change in the quarterly-mean of the log of the spot
USD/UK real exchange rate (quoted in GBP-per-USD). The independent variables are the
innovation in the quarterly average Treasury basis, ∆xT reas , as log yield (i.e. 50 basis points
is 0.005), the lagged value of the innovation, and the innovation in the real U.S.-UK interest
rate differential. Data is quarterly. OLS standard errors in parentheses.

                            1970Q1 - 2016Q2                                       1980Q1 - 2016Q2                                               1990Q1 - 2016Q2
                          (1)      (2)     (3)                                           (4)                                                           (5)
     ∆xT reas            -1.77            -1.74                                         -3.40                                                        -11.67
                        (0.78)           (0.77)                                        (1.57)                                                        (2.40)
     Lag ∆xT reas        -1.70            -1.69                                         -4.59                                                         -3.89
                        (0.78)           (0.77)                                        (1.52)                                                        (2.36)
     ∆(y $ − ȳ U K )             0.13     0.13
                                 (0.08) (0.08)

     R2                  5.0                           1.6            6.5                       10.3                                                 28.4
     N                   183                           185            183                       144                                                  104


In the following table, we include the change in the quarterly average Treasury basis and the
change in the real U.S.-UK interest rate differential as independent variables.
                            1970Q1 - 2016Q2                                       1980Q1 - 2016Q2                                               1990Q1 - 2016Q2
                          (1)      (2)     (3)                                           (4)                                                           (5)
     ∆xT reas            -1.23            -1.26                                         -3.05                                                        -11.70
                        (0.71)           (0.71)                                        (1.49)                                                        (2.22)
     Lag ∆xT reas        -1.85            -1.67                                         -5.74                                                        -11.69
                        (0.71)           (0.71)                                        (1.45)                                                        (2.22)
     ∆(y $ − ȳ U K )             0.13     0.11
                                 (0.06) (0.06)

     R2                  4.0                           2.4            5.8                       10.3                                                 33.2
     N                   183                           190            183                       144                                                  104




                                                                            33
    In Table A.11, we repeat the exercise using 3-month U.S./U.K. Treasury basis. The 3-
month U.S./U.K. Treasury basis also explains the current exchange rate movement, and this
relationship is stronger later in the sample. In the post-1990 sample, the 12-month basis has
an R2 of 28.4%, whereas the 3-month basis has an R2 of 17.3%.

Table A.11. U.S./U.K. 3M-Treasury Basis and the Spot Real Exchange Rate

The dependent variable is the quarterly change in the quarterly-mean of the log of the spot
USD/UK real exchange rate (quoted in GBP-per-USD). The independent variables are the
innovation in the quarterly average Treasury basis, ∆xT reas , as log yield (i.e. 50 basis points
is 0.005), the lagged value of the innovation, and the innovation in the real U.S.-UK interest
rate differential. Data is quarterly. OLS standard errors in parentheses.

                            1970Q1 - 2016Q2        1980Q1 - 2016Q2       1990Q1 - 2016Q2
                                    Average across 3 months
     ∆xT reas            -0.92            -0.82          -0.08                  -1.99
                        (0.48)           (0.48)         (1.02)                 (1.23)
     Lag ∆xT reas        -0.53            -0.52          -3.75                  -5.61
                        (0.48)           (0.48)         (0.99)                 (1.23)
     ∆(y $ − ȳ U K )             0.16     0.14
                                 (0.08) (0.08)

     R2                  2.8     2.1       4.4            9.7                   17.3
     N                   183     185       183            144                   104




                                                 34
B.     Currency Return Predictability
     The return predictability results for the U.S./U.K. Treasury basis are quite similar to
those obtained on the shorter sample for the Panel. Table A.12 reports the results obtained
when forecasting the annualized excess returns on a long position in the dollar and a short
position in the pound. Panel A considers the results obtained on the entire sample. At the
horizon of 3 years, the slope coefficient is positive and statistically significant: 4.55. This is a
quantitatively significant response as well: a one-standard-deviation change in the U.S./U.K.
Treasury basis increases the annual return by 2.19% in the next 3 years. These regressors
jointly explain 20% of the variation in the 3-year excess returns. Panel B and C report results
for the pre-and post-crisis sample. The slope coefficients at the 3-year horizon vary from 4.47
in the pre-crisis sample to 9.14 in the post-crisis sample.
     Table A.13 repeats the exercise using the exchange rate movements as the dependent
variables. The lag Treasury basis similarly predicts future exchange rate movements of the
dollar against the pound.




                                                35
         Table A.12. Forecasting Currency Excess Returns: U.S./U.K.

The dependent variable is the annualized nominal excess return (in logs) rxft→t+k x
                                                                                        on a long
position in U.S. Treasuries and a short position in U.K. bonds with maturities of k quarters.
The independent variables are the average Treasury basis xT reas lagged by 1 quarter, and the
                                      $
nominal Treasury yield difference (yt→t+k     − y ∗t→t+k ) with maturities of k quarters. Data is
quarterly from 1970Q1 to 2017Q2. We omit the constant, and report Newey-West standard
errors with lags equal to the length of the forecast horizon k. One, two and three stars denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.


                                 Panel A: 1970Q1-2017Q2
                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                              3 months          1 year        2 years       3 years
                                                                      ∗
       Lag x   T reas
                                  0.62            0.64          2.52           4.55∗∗∗
                                 (3.53)          (2.28)        (1.36)         (1.24)
        $
       yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k          2.65∗∗          1.70          1.33           1.33∗∗
                                 (1.27)          (1.08)        (0.89)         (0.64)
       Observations              185             185           184            180
       R2                        0.06            0.07          0.09           0.20
                                 Panel B: 1970Q1-2007Q4
                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                              3 months          1 year        2 years       3 years
                                                                      ∗
       Lag x   T reas
                                −0.03             0.33          2.30           4.47∗∗∗
                                 (3.60)          (2.31)        (1.37)         (1.23)
        $
       yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k          2.93∗∗          1.70          1.32           1.31∗
                                 (1.33)          (1.12)        (1.07)         (0.76)
       Observations              152             152           152            152
       R2                        0.08            0.07          0.09           0.20
                                Panel C: 2008Q1—2017Q2
                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                              3 months          1 year        2 years       3 years
               T reas                   ∗               ∗∗∗
       Lag x                    35.36           18.12          14.16          9.14
                               (19.91)          (6.29)        (11.52)        (7.20)
        $
       yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k       −14.53∗∗         −3.25         −2.65          −0.61
                                (7.29)          (5.85)         (2.56)        (1.55)
       Observations               33              33            32             28
       R2                        0.31            0.19          0.29           0.18




                                               36
         Table A.13. Forecasting Exchange Rate Changes: U.S./U.K.

The dependent variable is the annualized change in the exchange rate (in logs) (4/k)∆st→t+k
on a long position in the dollar over k quarters. The independent variables are the aver-
age Treasury basis xT reas lagged by 1 quarter, and the nominal Treasury yield difference
  $
(yt→t+k  − y ∗t→t+k ) with maturities of k quarters. Data is quarterly from 1970Q1 to 2017Q2.
We omit the constant, and report Newey-West standard errors with lags equal to the length
of the forecast horizon k. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% level.


                                 Panel A: 1970Q1-2017Q2
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
                             3 months          1 year        2 years       3 years
                                                                     ∗
       Lag x   T reas
                               −0.03             0.52          2.59          4.70∗∗∗
                                (3.60)          (2.49)        (1.37)        (1.09)
        $
       yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k         1.93            0.95          0.79          0.91
                                (1.33)          (1.13)        (1.00)        (0.67)
       Observations             152             152           152           152
       R2                       0.04            0.02          0.05          0.19
                                 Panel B: 1970Q1-2007Q4
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
                             3 months          1 year        2 years       3 years
                                                                     ∗
       Lag x   T reas
                               −0.03             0.33          2.30          4.47∗∗∗
                                (3.60)          (2.31)        (1.37)        (1.23)
        $
       yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k         2.93∗∗          1.70          1.32          1.31∗
                                (1.33)          (1.12)        (1.07)        (0.76)
       Observations             152             152           152           152
       R2                       0.08            0.07          0.09          0.20
                                Panel C: 2008Q1—2017Q2
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
                             3 months          1 year        2 years       3 years
               T reas                  ∗               ∗∗∗
       Lag x                   35.36           18.09          13.97         8.84
                              (19.91)          (6.37)        (11.80)       (6.21)
        $
       yt→t+k − y ∗t→t+k      −15.53∗∗         −3.78         −2.98         −0.85
                               (7.29)          (5.43)         (2.48)       (1.34)
       Observations              33              33            32            28
       R2                       0.34            0.21          0.32          0.19




                                              37
C.     Impulse Responses
     We report the estimated impulse responses for the U.S./U.K., too. The variables included
in the VAR are the Treasury basis, the interest rate differential and the log of the real exchange
rate (GBP-per-USD). The impulse response patterns are similar to those documented in Figure
2. An increase in the quarterly basis of 23 basis points leads to a real depreciation in the dollar
against the pound of about 1.3% over two quarters. Then, the effect gradually reverses out
over 3 years. We also report the impulse responses that obtain when we switch the ordering
of the interest rate differences and the basis. The responses to the basis shock again look
identical.9




   9 Finally, we also adopted a local projection approach by projecting returns rx
                                                                                     t+k−1→t+k
  h                 i
         $    ∗
on xt , rt − rt , qt . These yield impulse responses that are quite similar to the ones produced
by the Cholesky decomposition. The results are not reported.


                                                38
                                                   Basis Shocks                                                                                                                             Rate Shocks
                                0.25




                                                                                                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                   Yield Differential (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yield Differential (%)
         Treasury Basis (%)




                                                                                                                                            Treasury Basis (%)
                                0.15




                                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                0.05




                                                                                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                −0.05




                                                                                                                                                                   −0.05
                                                                                            −0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.2
                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40                                                 0       10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30        40
                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter                                                                      Quarter                                                    Quarter
                                4




                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                            FX Exchange Rate (%)
                                                                   FX Excess Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           FX Excess Return (%)
                                2




                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                0




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                −2




                                                                                            −2




                                                                                                                                                                   −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −2
                                −4




                                                                                            −4




                                                                                                                                                                   −4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −4
                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40                                                 0       10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30        40
                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter                                                                      Quarter                                                    Quarter



                                                      FX Shocks                                                                                                                           Var. Decomp.
                                0.25




                                                                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                                                      1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Basis
                                                                   Yield Differential (%)
         Treasury Basis (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RDiff
                                0.15




                                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FX
                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                0.05




                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                   fraction of variance
                                −0.05




                                                                                            −0.2




                                                                                                                                                                      0.6




                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40
                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                4




                                                                                            4
         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                   FX Excess Return (%)
                                2




                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                0




                                                                                            0
                                −2




                                                                                            −2




                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                −4




                                                                                            −4




                                        0   10     20    30   40                                   0   10     20    30   40
                                                                                                                                                                                0               10                         20                   30               40
                                                 Quarter                                                    Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                time




                                                       Figure A.7. UK/U.S. Impulse Responses.

The red line plots the impulse response of of a one-standard-deviation orthogonalized shock to
the U.S./U.K. Treasury basis (top left panel), the real U.S./U.K. interest rate differential (top
right panel), and the log real GBP-per-USD spot exchange rate (bottom left panel), as well as
the quarterly excess return (bottom right panel). The units for the y-axis are in percentage
points. The grey areas indicates 95% confidenceh intervals. The  i VAR is estimated using a
sample from 1970Q1 to 2016Q2. The ordering is xt , rt$ − r∗t , qt .




                                                                                                                              39
                                                     Rate Shocks                           0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                            Basis Shocks




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.25
                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
         Yield Differential (%)




                                                                                                                                            Yield Differential (%)
                                                                    Treasury Basis (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Treasury Basis (%)
                                                                                           0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                  0.2




                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                           0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.05
                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                           −0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −0.05
                                  −0.2




                                                                                                                                                                     −0.2
                                         0   10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30   40                                                  0       10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30        40
                                                  Quarter                                                   Quarter                                                                       Quarter                                                   Quarter
                                  4




                                                                                           4




                                                                                                                                                                     4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                            FX Exchange Rate (%)
                                                                    FX Excess Return (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            FX Excess Return (%)
                                  2




                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                  0




                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                  −2




                                                                                           −2




                                                                                                                                                                     −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −2
                                  −4




                                                                                           −4




                                                                                                                                                                     −4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −4
                                         0   10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30   40                                                  0       10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30        40
                                                  Quarter                                                   Quarter                                                                       Quarter                                                   Quarter



                                                       FX Shocks                                                                                                                           Var. Decomp.
                                                                                           0.25
                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                       1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Basis
         Yield Differential (%)




                                                                    Treasury Basis (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RDiff
                                                                                           0.15
                                  0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FX
                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                           0.05
                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                   fraction of variance
                                                                                           −0.05
                                  −0.2




                                                                                                                                                                       0.6




                                         0   10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30   40
                                                  Quarter                                                   Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                  4




                                                                                           4
         FX Exchange Rate (%)




                                                                    FX Excess Return (%)
                                  2




                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                  0




                                                                                           0
                                  −2




                                                                                           −2




                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                  −4




                                                                                           −4




                                         0   10     20    30   40                                  0   10     20    30   40
                                                                                                                                                                                 0               10                        20                   30               40
                                                  Quarter                                                   Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                time




         Figure A.8. UK/U.S. Impulse Responses: Alternate Ordering.

The red line plots the impulse response of of a one-standard-deviation orthogonalized shock to
the real U.S./U.K. interest rate differential (top left panel), the U.S./U.K. Treasury basis (top
right panel), and the log real GBP-per-USD spot exchange rate (bottom left panel), as well as
the quarterly excess return (bottom right panel). The units for the y-axis are in percentage
points. The grey areas indicates 95% confidenceh intervals. The     i VAR is estimated using a
sample from 1970Q1 to 2016Q2. The ordering is rt$ − r∗t , xt , qt .




                                                                                                                              40
