                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES CHEAP TALK AFFECT MARKET OUTCOMES? EVIDENCE FROM EBAY

                                     Daniel W. Elfenbein
                                      Raymond Fisman
                                      Brian McManus

                                      Working Paper 24437
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24437


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




We are grateful for eBay’s support for this research, especially Tom Blake and Dimitriy
Masterov. We thank Chiara Farronato for valuable comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Daniel W. Elfenbein, Raymond Fisman, and Brian McManus. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Cheap Talk Affect Market Outcomes? Evidence from eBay
Daniel W. Elfenbein, Raymond Fisman, and Brian McManus
NBER Working Paper No. 24437
March 2018
JEL No. D83,K2,L15,M37

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the use of and response to cheap talk by firms and their consumers, focusing on
unverifiable promises of charitable donations on eBay. For transactions during March 2005 –
May 2006, cheap talk listings have lower sales probabilities but sell at higher prices when they
are successful. The negative relationship between cheap talk and sales is concentrated in the
months following Hurricane Katrina, a time when both verifiable and unverifiable charity-related
listings increased dramatically. Finally, we show that cheap talk sellers have significantly lower
quality ratings than sellers who make verifiable donations. Collectively, our results suggest that
most buyers (justifiably) avoid cheap talk listings when credible quality signals are available, thus
limiting the extent of cheap talk under these conditions.

Daniel W. Elfenbein                               Brian McManus
Olin School of Business                           Department of Economics CB 3305
Washington University in St. Louis                University of North Carolina
St Louis, MO 63130                                Chapel Hill, NC 27599
elfenbein@wustl.edu                               mcmanusb@unc.edu

Raymond Fisman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road, 304A
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu
1.      Introduction

Unverified claims by sellers are ubiquitous in the marketplace, despite the fact that in most settings,

they convey little to no information. As Gardete (2013: 609) writes, “because the source of the

information is an interested party, [claims] can be biased so as to cater to [the seller’s] interests …

[For example, t]he automotive manufacturer may boast about the stability and driving comfort of

a new model, the supermarket may claim to have the best prices or best produce in town, and a

real estate agent may highlight photos of the exquisite art nouveau handrails, digitally enhanced to

look appropriately exquisite.” The firm’s cost of such cheap talk may be low, but it is non-zero,

given that it potentially crowds out other information that a seller may wish to communicate. The

persistence of cheap talk raises a number of questions on whether and how it impacts markets. In

particular, does cheap talk affect consumer choices or do they ignore it? If a sufficiently large

fraction of consumers take cheap talk at face value, can it crowd out efforts at providing verifiable

quality information? Conversely, how do mechanisms that independently verify claims affect the

prevalence of cheap talk?

        The answers to these questions have significant implications both for policy and market

design. If most consumers are sophisticated enough to distinguish between credible information

and cheap talk, its effect on the market may be limited; however, if a sufficient fraction of

consumers are naïve, direct oversight or regulation may instead be required to prevent the market

from unraveling. Quantifying the prevalence of cheap talk, as well as analyzing consumers’

response to it, is central to discussions dating back to Beales, Craswell, and Salop (1981) on the

role of legal regulation intended to protect consumers from misleading advertising2, as well as


2
 Recognizing the potential impact of unverified, self-serving claims on consumers and markets, Section 5 of the
Federal Trade Commission Act prohibits “deceptive acts … affecting commerce” (15 USC 45); according to the FTC’s
Bureau of Consumer Protection, “advertising must tell the truth and not mislead consumers. A claim can be misleading



                                                                                                                  2
more recent explorations of the design of two-sided platforms that compete, at least in part, by

attracting sellers that meet buyers’ expectations (Nosko and Tadelis 2015, Tadelis 2016).

         We examine the prevalence and consequences of cheap talk about an activity – charitable

giving linked to product purchases – for which consumers often value the activity but potentially

have difficulty verifying it directly. Charity may be directly valuable to consumers, either from

direct utility (warm glow) or as a signal of trust or reliability (Elfenbein and McManus, 2010;

Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus, 2012). But seller claims about charity or other good deeds are

notoriously difficult to monitor by individual consumers, giving rise to concerns about selective

or deceptive reporting of these actions by firms. (In the popular press the term “greenwashing” is

used to describe seller claims about environmental good deeds that are not backed up by the

associated costly actions.) While researchers have studied the impact of verifiable charity tie-ins

or pro-social production on consumer decisions (e.g., Hainsmuller, Hiscox, and Sequiera 2015;

Canals Cerda 2014; Andrews, Luo, Fang, and Aspara 2014; Dube, Luo and Fang 2015), we know

of only a single study – conducted in a lab setting – that examines the impact of credibility of

donations on market outcomes (Feicht, Grimm, and Seebauer 2016).

         The eBay platform, our setting for this paper, has several features that make it well-suited

to studying charity cheap talk. In the period we study, verifiable and non-verifiable charity tie-ins

co-existed on eBay. Sellers’ unverifiable charity claims were straightforward to identify across a

variety of products via a short list of keywords sellers used in the title field of product listings.3 At

the same time, eBay’s charity program, Giving Works (GW), gave sellers an opportunity to link

their listings to verified charitable contributions through a system that was easy to use and provided



if relevant information is left out, or if it implies something that’s not true. (FTC Bureau of Consumer Protection 2000:
2)”
3
  Examples include adding the phrases “Katrina Benefit” or “Charity Auction” to the listing title.



                                                                                                                       3
cost and tax advantages. This provides a clear benchmark against which to compare the outcomes

of cheap talk listings. While our main interest is in buyers’ responses to cheap talk, in the

discussion that follows, we refer to sellers’ unverified promises to make donations contingent on

a product sale as “unverified charity claim” (UCC) listings, given our inability to discern the

seller’s true intentions.

        We examine data across all product categories for listings that end between March 2005

and May 2006. We first observe that cheap talk charity listings were a relative rarity on eBay

during the period we study, only about a thirtieth of the number of legitimate charity listings.

Furthermore, cheap talk charity listings perform relatively poorly: Controlling for seller identity,

product category, starting price, and a host of other listing attributes, we find that, for the full

sample period, UCC auction listings are 13 percentage points less likely to sell than listings that

make no charity claims, whereas listings with verifiable (GW) charity-linked listings are 7

percentage points more likely to sell, relative to non-charity listings. (Comparing UCC listings to

GW listings that also promise donations explicitly in their titles, the difference is even larger.)

These findings are, at least prima facie, difficult to reconcile with consumers placing any value on

cheap talk claims, or even simply disregarding cheap talk. Furthermore, these initial results suggest

that the supply of cheap talk listings may be limited, in large part, because of the negative response

it elicits from consumers. Why, then, do any sellers nonetheless make cheap talk claims?

        To better understand the consumer response to cheap talk listings, we examine how UCC

versus GW listings’ sales probability and price varies throughout our sample. In particular, we take

advantage of the very large increase in both GW and UCC listings (225 percent and 350 percent

respectively) during the months immediately following the landfall of Hurricane Katrina, which

we interpret as stemming from high anticipated demand for charity-linked listings. The increased




                                                                                                    4
availability of GW listings was associated with both higher sales probabilities and prices,

consistent with an upward shift in demand for verifiable charity-linked listings. However, for UCC

listings, the sale probability of UCC auction listings dropped by 31 percentage points, a roughly

70 percent decline. Despite this decline in sales probability, consumers who purchased UCC items

following Katrina paid significantly higher prices. Outside the post-Katrina increase in charity-

linked listings, cheap talk had no effect (or a weak positive effect) on a listing’s sale probability

or price.

        The divergent responses of consumers to the increased availability of charity-linked listings

during Katrina is consistent with the presence of only a small number of consumers who are willing

to buy products with unverified claims even when a legitimate alternative is available. (We

interpret the increased availability of UCC listings post-Katrina as a failed experiment on the part

of UCC sellers.) When combined with the relatively small number of UCC listings available and

the lack of any effect of UCC on listing outcomes outside of the Katrina period, this interpretation

further suggests that the simultaneous availability of products with verified quality may be

sufficient to severely curtail cheap talk. In such cases, optimal public policy or platform design

may tilt toward supporting verification institutions instead of emphasizing regulation or oversight

to police fraud and deception. To some degree, the availability of verified alternatives may

effectively allow the market to police itself.

        We conclude our empirical analysis by exploring the attributes of sellers in the market who

make UCC listings, with the aim of understanding why most buyers avoid them. We find that UCC

sellers are of lower quality relative to GW sellers across a variety of measures. This raises the




                                                                                                   5
intriguing possibility that cheap talk – even if unrelated to the product’s main attributes – may be

broadly construed as a negative signal of seller quality by all but the most naïve of consumers.4

         Despite the academic and policy importance of cheap talk and potentially fraudulent

statements, practical difficulties in collecting appropriate field data have resulted in little prior

empirical research outside of the lab.5 The most direct precedent for our paper is Jin and Kato

(2006), who study baseball card sellers on eBay in 2001 – 2002. They find that sellers who make

unverifiable claims receive much higher prices, but do not provide cards of higher quality. Cawley,

Eisenberg, and Avery (2013) investigate whether advertisements for (largely worthless) weight

loss medication influence drug sales and health, and find no demand response to the ads. Zinman

and Zitzewitz (2016) analyze ski resorts’ self-reported snowfall, and find that it is consistently

higher than comparable government figures, a gap that widens during weekends and other periods

when demand would be expected to be higher. Whereas these earlier papers focus on highly

specific individual markets, and tend to emphasize only the demand or supply side of the market,

our analysis considers the activity and characteristics of large and varied populations of buyers

and sellers.6

         Our paper also contributes to the emerging body of research that considers how poorly

informed or naïve agents affect seller decisions and the functioning of markets. Prominent



4
  This is evident in the advice of eBay advice-givers, many of whom suggest that it is best to stay away from listings
that use terms like “authentic” or “genuine” in their product descriptions. As one eBay expert put it, “the more [100%
genuine] is mentioned in the listing the less likely I am to believe it.” Quote from http://www.ebay.com/gds/HOW-
TO-TELL-IF-AN-ITEM-IS-A-FAKE-/10000000002765872/g.html.
5
  The marketing literature offers many examples of laboratory experiments on deceptive advertising, e.g. Johar (1995)
and Darke and Richie (2007). In the economics literature, lab experiments have focused on cheap talk and deception
in more stylized game theoretic settings, e.g. Croson, Boles and Murnighan (2003) and Gneezy (2005).
6
 We note that cheap talk need not involve misleading claims and may serve to increase welfare. Crawford and Sobel
(1982) show that cheap talk can, even in the presence of some incentive to lie, carry some information for
counterparties. Gardete (2013) examines a model in which cheap talk reduces the cost of consumer search. See Farrell
and Rabin (1996) for a discussion of the role of cheap talk in exchange more generally.



                                                                                                                    6
contributions include Nagler (1993), DellaVigna and Malmendier (2006), Gabaix and Laibson

(2006), Malmendier and Lee (2011), Woodward and Hall (2012), and Akerlof and Shiller (2015).

Our conclusions are tentatively optimistic: in our setting (in which a verified alternative is

available) most buyers avoid sellers that make unverifiable claims, a heuristic that may serve them

well given the lower average quality of UCC sellers.

          Insofar as we examine unverifiable claims of altruistic or other-regarding behavior, our

paper also relates to studies of greenwashing (Laufer, 2003; Lyon and Maxwell, 2011). While

Delmas and Burbano (2011) discuss the potential impact of greenwashing on consumer behavior,

we are aware of no studies that document it empirically.7



2.        eBay, Giving Works, and Unverified Charity Claims

Founded in 1995, eBay has become one of the world’s largest facilitators of e-commerce, claiming

more than 162 million active buyers and 800 million annual product listings globally.8 Online

markets, and eBay in particular, have increasingly become an object of study for economists, who

have examined them to address a variety of questions.9 On the eBay platform, sellers offer an item

for sale by providing a description of it, disclosing a small amount of personal information, and

specifying an ending time and method for the sale. Buyers on the platform generally cannot inspect

the item prior to purchase, nor do they engage in face-to-face communication with sellers. It is

critical, therefore, that buyers trust sellers to deliver the product as described. eBay’s public filings


7
 Empirical studies of greenwashing have focused, to our knowledge, on the correlation between firms’ claims of
environmental performance and their actual track records. See Cho and Patten (2007) and Clarkson et al. (2008) for
examples.
8
    Source: eBay 10K - 2015.
9
  Bajari and Hortascu (2004) describe many of the institutional features of eBay in a review of the early empirical
literature on internet auctions. Einav et al. (2017) describe changes in the eBay platform and in seller behavior from
2003 to 2009.



                                                                                                                    7
acknowledge that “[f]ailure to deal effectively with fraudulent activities on our websites would

increase our loss rate and harm our business, and could severely diminish consumer confidence in

and use of our services.” eBay has promoted several mechanisms to limit opportunistic behavior

by sellers, including reputation scores, money-back guarantees, and seller certification (see Cabral

and Hortascu (2010), Hui, Saeedi, Shen, and Sundaresan (2013), and Elfenbein, Fisman, and

McManus (2015), respectively, for empirical evidence of the impact of these mechanisms).



2.A.       Giving Works

A parallel feature of the eBay platform, originally called Giving Works, was launched in 2003 to

enable sellers to raise money for charitable causes through their product sales.10 When listing an

item for sale, a seller can use the Giving Works (GW) program to link her product to a specific

charitable cause. The seller chooses a donation rate between 10 and 100 percent of the final sale

price in 5 percent increments, which eBay collects directly if the listing results in a sale. Benefits

for the seller include higher sale prices and/or higher probability of sale (Elfenbein and McManus

2010, Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus 2012), a rebate of listing fees proportional to the donation

rate, and tax account records documenting the seller’s donation. A significant number of sellers

engage in both GW listings and “standard” listings with no charity connection; generally these

sellers list a minority of their items via GW. A buyer can be confident that the promised donation

will be made to a GW listing’s associated charity, as eBay makes clear that the platform itself

receives the buyer’s payments and disburses the appropriate funds to the charity and seller.



2.B.       Unverifiable charity claims


10
     In 2015, this program was re-labeled, “eBay for Charity.”



                                                                                                    8
Independent of the fraction of total sale price donated, GW represents the most efficient way for

sellers to engage in charity-linked sales. eBay provides 100 percent of the donated amount to

charity and improves the seller’s net revenue by rebating listing fees by the same fraction the seller

pledges to donate. Nonetheless, in the early years of the Giving Works program, eBay allowed

sellers to include claims about charitable donations in a listing’s title, subtitle, or description. For

example, a September 2005 listing for a toy train set included the subtitle “Hurricane Katrina Relief

Red Cross Donation W/ Purchase.” Near the end of our selected sample period, however, eBay

placed restrictions on non-GW charity listings and threatened non-compliant listings with

removal.11 Current policy requires non-GW listings that make charity claims must include an

image of a letter of support from a recognized 501(c)(3) charity. Consistent with this policy having

a material impact on unverified charity claims, the ratio of UCC items available (identified by the

method described in Section 3) to total items listed on eBay dropped by 90 percent between March

2006 and March 2016, while the ratio of GW items increased by over 400 percent.12

           Why would sellers make unverifiable charity claims when GW is available? One

possibility is that these sellers were motivated by altruistic considerations, but were unaware of or

inexperienced in using GW and therefore avoided it. We believe this is unlikely to be the case for

most UCC sellers given that, as we discuss below, UCC sellers tend to be very experienced with

the eBay platform, especially relative to sellers who post GW listings. Alternatively, these sellers

may have sought the benefits of charity linkages, i.e., increases in sale price and or sale probability,

without the cost of making the donation itself, from consumers who take their charity claims at



11
     Private communication between the authors and eBay personnel.
12
  We see further evidence of eBay’s policing of UCC listings in the months following the 2010 earthquake in Haiti,
with a mass cancellation of listings we identify as containing unverified charity claims.




                                                                                                                9
face value. A final possibility is that sellers simply wished to experiment with alternative selling

strategies, in order to learn the most effective ways to promote their goods.13 Regardless of sellers’

(unobservable) motivation, consumers taking a cautious view of UCC would have no reason to

believe the donations would be made.



3.         Data

3.A.       Sample period and data extract

We draw data from eBay’s U.S. platform, and focus on listings that ended between March 1, 2005

and May 31, 2006. This centers our analysis on a period when both GW and UCC listings were

relatively common on the site. (During the 12 months prior to our sample period, for example, GW

volume was very low, with an average of 800 listings concluding each week.) We may thus

examine consumer response to charity cheap talk at a point in time when a verifiable alternative

was readily available to eBay sellers.

           This sample period also focuses our analysis around the spike in charitable activity

following Hurricane Katrina, which is an important aspect of our analysis, since we interpret

Katrina relief efforts as a positive shock to demand for charity-linked listings. We identify the

interval from August 29, 2005, when Katrina made landfall, until November 15, 2005 as the

“Katrina period” or simply “post-Katrina.” All other dates constitute the “non-Katrina” portions

of the sample.14




13
     Einav, Kuchler, Levin, and Sundaresan (2015) document extensive seller experimentation on the eBay platform.
14
  See Figures 1 and 2 below for the strong drop-off in charitable activity in mid-November 2005. Our results are
robust to alternative definitions of the Katrina period. See below for a discussion of the impact of ending the Katrina
period on October 15, and Online Appendix Table OA1 for results using alternative definitions of the Katrina window.



                                                                                                                    10
         We collect data on three broad types of eBay listings, with some potential overlap across

types. First, to identify charity claims (whether or not they are backed up by a Giving Works

donation) we search for all listings that contain strong language about charitable donations in the

listing title or subtitle. (See the Data Appendix for the search terms we use regarding donations.)

Each identified listing is associated with a seller and an eBay “leaf category,” which is eBay’s

finest product category designation.15 We identify 10,206 seller-category combinations in this step.

We then download all U.S.-based auction and fixed-price listings during our period of study by

the same seller and in the same product category as any UCC listing.

         We repeat the above procedure for Giving Works listings, and collect all listings by sellers

in product categories in which the seller posts a GW listing during the sample period. In this step

we identify 91,757 seller-category combinations, about 5,000 of which are also captured in the

UCC-focused step. Between UCC and GW listings, we assemble about 34 million listings that are

associated with the collected seller-category combinations. The vast majority of these listings are

neither UCC nor GW. Third, in order to have a control set of listings from sellers who do not make

charity-linked listings, we take the set of product categories that are identified in the previous steps

for UCC and GW listings, and we draw a 0.1 percent sample that captures 1.2 million listings.

         Once we have identified the listings described above, we obtain information on each

listing’s format (true auction or fixed price), its starting auction price or fixed price, the number of

units offered if fixed price, the number of units sold and the sale price, the listing title and subtitle,

the percentage donated via the GW system, the number of photos, the starting date and the

scheduled and actual end dates, the shipping fee, the associated seller ID, and the leaf category ID.




15
   We use the terms “leaf category” and “product category” interchangeably in this paper. Our full data extract contains
listings from over 14,000 leaf categories.



                                                                                                                     11
For listings that end in a sale, we collect the buyer ID for each unit purchased. A small fraction of

auction listings (about 2%) include a secret reserve price that is above the start price. The listing

goes unsold if the highest bid falls short of this reserve. We drop these auctions from our analysis.16

        We use the seller and buyer IDs to obtain background information on each eBay user in

order to generate proxies for seller reliability. We download each user’s eBay creation date in order

to calculate user age (in days) at the time of each listing captured within our sample. We collect

information on users’ accumulated positive feedback as of the first day of each month in the sample

period. Because provided feedback is almost always positive, the feedback level is effectively a

measure of seller experience rather than customer satisfaction. We link the seller’s feedback score

to the month and year of each listing in the data sample. In addition, we follow Nosko and Tadelis

(2016) to compute for each seller the share of transactions on which she received positive feedback

from a buyer, i.e. an “effective percent positive” feedback (EPP) measure. For each month in the

sample period, we compute each seller’s EPP over the previous two years and then link it to listings

using the same procedure as for total feedback. The EPP measure may do a better job of capturing

consumers’ satisfaction than direct feedback measures given that, as Nosko and Tadelis observe,

dissatisfied customers are more apt to leave no feedback rather than negative comments. Finally,

we calculate each seller’s share of positive feedback over the same rolling two-year window that

we use for EPP.



3.B.    Data preparation steps and sample characteristics

We prepare the listing and user data in several steps. We begin by constructing a “descriptive

sample” that we use to characterize overall UCC and GW activity, and for this sample we use


16
  Secret reserve prices are slightly more common (2.2%) among GW and UCC auctions than the non-charity listings
(1.5%). Our results are unchanged if we include these listings in our analysis.


                                                                                                            12
nearly the full pool of listings described in the preceding section. Exceptions include listings with

non-standard conclusions (which might indicate that the seller posted a UCC listing rather than a

GW one by accident, and closed the auction early); those with starting prices, ending prices, or

shipping fees above $1,000; and those with more than 1,000 individual units for sale in a single

fixed-price listing. In total, these exceptions lead to the removal of about 3.4M listings, primarily

due to abnormal endings for listings with no GW or UCC connection. In a final step, we directly

inspected the 13,468 remaining UCC listings that we identified through our text-based search

procedure. About 20% of these listings are false positives (e.g. memorabilia from celebrity charity

auctions or tickets to Katrina benefit concerts) and we remove the UCC indicator for these

observations.

        We perform regression analysis on a subset of listings that we call the “analysis sample,”

for which we employ four additional filters. First, to reduce computation costs we retain a

maximum of 1,000 non-GW, non-UCC listings for each seller-category combination (i.e., if a

seller operates in many categories, we retain 1,000 listings, selected at random, in each category

in which he/she has a presence).17 This step removes over 90 percent (27M) of listings from the

descriptive sample. Second, we identify all seller-category combinations in which the seller’s

listing outcomes have non-zero variance in the number of units sold. If a seller is successful (or

unsuccessful) in all listings within a leaf category, the seller-category fixed effects we introduce

below will lead to biased estimates of the impact of a listing characteristic (such as UCC status)

on listing outcomes in a linear model with a binary dependent variable. See Elfenbein, Fisman,

and McManus (2012, 2015) for additional discussion of this issue. This step eliminates about 20


17
  For sellers with fewer than 1,000 non-GW and non-UCC listings in a product category, we retain all listings in the
category. In our empirical analysis these observations mainly serve to recover the values of seller-category fixed
effects, and we conjecture that we can do this adequately with 1,000 observations per seller-category despite some
opportunities to use more.



                                                                                                                 13
percent of listings from the remaining descriptive sample in forming the analysis sample, mostly

due to sellers with a single listing in a product category. Third, in the analysis sample we focus on

listings with a starting (or fixed) price greater than $2. This affects about 15 percent of the listings

in the remaining descriptive sample.

         In Table 1 we report summary statistics for the analysis sample. About 60 percent of the

listings are true auctions (compared to only 20 percent in the descriptive sample); the remainder

are fixed-price listings. A key attribute of the data is that both fixed price and auction listings do

not always result in a sale. For auction listings in our sample, a listing does not result in a sale

when no buyer is willing to bid more than the start price of the auction. In the analysis sample,

about 40 percent of listings resulted in a sale of one or more units.18 The median (mean) start price

for an item is $11.30 ($36.55). For auctions, the median sales price for listings that end in a sale is

about 50 percent greater than the median start price, and the mean sales price is a third greater than

the mean start price. (We do not present summary statistics on sale probabilities or prices to

preserve confidentiality of eBay’s data.) The median listing has a shipping fee of $3.99 and lasts

for 7 days, which is also the modal duration for true auctions. GW listings account for 8 percent

of the sample, a level that is much higher than for eBay overall – this is a natural result of the

sample construction. There are 5,948 UCC listings in the analysis sample; these listings comprise

about 0.2 percent of total observations.

         In Table 2 we focus on listings that are either GW or UCC in the analysis sample. (By

definition, a listing cannot be both GW and UCC.) GW listings are about 30 times as common as

UCC listings, which make up only 2 percent of the group summarized in Table 2. Among GW



18
  Einav et. al (2017) document the shift of seller choices about sales format on eBay from being predominantly
auctions in the early 2000’s to predominantly fixed price in the late 2000s. Our study takes place in the middle of this
shift.


                                                                                                                     14
listings, donation pledges of 100 percent are most common during the sample period. The

remaining GW listings are split evenly between revenue pledges of 10 percent and values in 15 -

95 percent. We include as a distinct category GW listings with charity-related text, for listings with

the same words or phrases in their titles as we used to identify UCC listings.19 These are about as

common as UCC listings. In our analysis below, these listings serve as a second comparison group

for UCC listings: they implicitly use the same syntactic structure in their titles, but offer verifiable,

rather than unverifiable donations.

         In Figures 1 – 4 we explore the temporal patterns in UCC listings over the sample period.

Figure 1 displays the (smoothed) number of descriptive-sample listings per day that are GW, GW

with charity-related text, and UCC. We use a log scale on the vertical axis, given the vastly

different daily flows of GW and UCC listings. Both GW and UCC listings increased substantially

when hurricane Katrina struck, and then diminished over the next six weeks. UCC listings had

other periods when they increased in frequency, in particular the 2005 holiday season and each

spring. Figure 1 shows that GW listings with charity text were generally less common than UCC

listings on eBay, with the exception of the Katrina period. Despite the sizable increase in UCC

listings during the Katrina period, in Figure 2 we show that total sales per day did not increase by

nearly as much.20 Instead, the Katrina-period UCC sales per day is on the same scale as other

periodic up-ticks in UCC purchases during the sample period. In Figure 3 we provide a clearer

representation of patterns in sales rates by plotting the analysis sample’s smoothed daily sales

percentages for UCC listings (in blue), all GW listings (red), and non-UCC non-GW listings



19
   We inspected a sample of these listings for false positives, as we did for UCC listings, but in all cases the charity-
related text did in fact advertise the sellers’ donations.
20
   As may be inferred from Figure 3, there is also a large increase in GW sales during Katrina. We omit this line from
Figure 2, given the very different average levels of GW and UCC listings.




                                                                                                                      15
(green) in the analysis sample.21 While UCC and GW listings are often noticeably different from

each other, the Katrina period stands out for the depth of decline in UCC sale probability and the

fact that the GW sale probability moves distinctly in the opposite direction. As an alternative

representation of the different patterns of UCC and GW activity, in Figure 4 we plot the UCC to

GW ratios of listings and sales. The initial downward trend in both ratios is due to the rise of GW

relative to UCC, as shown in Figure 1. More interestingly, we can see that while the ratios of

listings and sales co-move outside of the Katrina period, at the beginning of the Katrina period

there is a large increase in the UCC/GW listings ratio while the sales ratio remains flat. However,

after this initial spike, which lasted about two weeks after Katrina’s landfall, the listings ratio

almost immediately drifts back toward its pre-hurricane value.

           We conclude our overview of the data by describing the sellers and buyers associated with

listings in our descriptive sample. While a few sellers posted many UCC listings during our period

of investigation, a much larger number engaged in this practice only once or twice. In Table 3 we

report, averaged over listings, seller effective percent positive feedback (EPP), feedback score,

percentage positive feedback overall and divided into a few discrete categories, and age. We report

statistics for the full set of sellers (who largely come from the platform-wide random sample) and

separately for those who ever offer a UCC or GW listing. Some notable differences emerge across

the groups. The mean and median EPP scores for UCC sellers are below those of the full seller

population and those of the GW sellers. GW sellers have relatively low feedback scores and have

been active on eBay for less time, indicating less experience for GW sellers, on average, relative

to the remaining population. UCC sellers, by contrast, have higher feedback scores and have been

on the site for longer than both the GW sellers and those from the platform-wide random sample,


21
     We omit Figure 3’s vertical scale for data confidentiality.



                                                                                                 16
which suggests that their use of charity claims is unlikely to be due to ignorance of the verified

GW system.22

         The distribution of percent positive feedback is very similar between UCC sellers and the

full population, while GW sellers are more likely to have 100 percent positive feedback and less

likely to have a positive feedback share in the lowest category (below 98 percent). Some users

received no feedback as sellers during the rolling two-year window we use for these data, so the

positive feedback share categories do not sum to one. Empty records are most common for GW

sellers. We explore the differences in seller characteristics in a regression framework in the next

section.

         In Table 4 we compare the attributes of buyers who purchase UCC items, GW items, or

items with no charity association. Buyers who purchase UCC-listed items are slightly “younger”

than buyers who purchase GW items, but the UCC buyers have greater mean and median feedback

scores than GW buyers. (As with sellers, age and feedback measures are highly correlated with

each other.) A natural explanation for these differences in experience is that UCC listings (and to

a lesser degree GW listings) are relatively rare. Thus, a buyer who engages in more transactions –

and hence has a higher feedback score – is more likely to have encountered a UCC listing. The

final column of Table 4 does, however, indicated that buyers of UCC items during the Katrina

period were somewhat less experienced than buyers of UCC items overall. That said, we see no

strong evidence in the present sample that UCC buyers taken as a whole are substantially less

experienced than those who purchase GW items.




22
   A small number (377) of UCC sellers also use GW during the sample period. For these sellers, 40 percent of their
UCC listings were posted on dates strictly after their first GW posting, while 48 percent of UCC were posted on
strictly earlier dates. This suggests that exposure to the GW system had little effect in curtailing cheap talk by UCC
sellers.



                                                                                                                   17
4.     Empirical Analysis

We estimate a series of regression models to assess the impact of UCC status and other charity-

related activity on eBay listing outcomes. Throughout our analysis, we regress a collection of

outcome measures (e.g. whether an item sells, the full price at which it sells) on a large collection

of listing characteristics; we use y to denote the outcome of interest. We collect listing

characteristics relevant for UCC status in the vector U, and GW characteristics in G. We collect

all other observable listings attributes in the matrix X. These include the log of starting price; the

log of shipping fees plus 0.01; individual dummies for the number of pictures; dummies for the

number of units available; indicators for the length and ending day of the week; and a dummy

variable, b, for each week in the sample period. In our main analysis we include a separate fixed

effect, a, for each combination of seller and leaf category in the analysis sample. We account for

additional listing-level unobserved factors with the error term e, which we cluster at the seller

level. Finally, we use i to index individual listings, j to index seller-category combinations, and t

to index the week the listing ended. We thus estimate a collection of models that have the form:

                          Υ      Γ      Θ                   .                                     (1)

We estimate (1) as a linear regression model. While this involves some misspecification given the

discrete nature of y in some cases, the approach allows us to include a large set of controls in the

model, including about 70,000 distinct values of aj.

       Our estimates of the effect of UCC and GW listing status may still be biased if unobserved

quality is correlated with a seller’s propensity to create a UCC or GW listing (after conditioning

on start price and other listing choices). We will return to this point at the end of Section 4.A,

where we probe the robustness of our results to such concerns.




                                                                                                   18
4.A.     Baseline effects of UCC and GW status

In Table 5, we investigate the relationship between UCC/GW status and auction listing sales

probability and price. In the main tables, we report only the coefficients of primary interest. Results

on the complete set of control variables are included in Appendix Table A1.

        In specification 1 we include the full set of listing-level controls, as well as seller-category

fixed effects to account for potential non-random selection of charity-related listings by seller and

leaf category. Echoing previous results of Elfenbein and McManus (2010) and Elfenbein, Fisman

and McManus (2012), we find a large and positive relationship between GW and sales probability.

Within a seller-category group, a GW donation is associated with an increase in sales probability

by 7 percentage points.23 We find a further benefit of charity text in a listing title for GW listings:

a GW listing that also includes charity text has a sales probability that is 13 percentage points

greater than a listing with no charity link. This suggests a complementarity between charity claims

in the title and a mechanism that establishes the credibility of the claims.

        We find a sharply contrasting relationship between sales probability and the use of charity

text when not accompanied by a verifiable donation: the coefficient on UCC is -0.126 (significant

at the 1 percent level), implying that UCC listings are almost 30 percent less likely to sell than

listings with no link to charity at all. The results on control covariates (i.e., on the impact of X),

reported in Appendix Table A1, imply that objects are more likely to sell if they have a lower start

price, have more photos, or have a longer scheduled length.

        In specification 2, motivated by the patterns observed in Figures 1-4, we allow the effects

of GW and UCC to vary with time. In particular, we interact all three charity variables (GW




23
   For simplicity in this analysis, we do not disaggregate GW observations by their donation share. These results are
provided in Appendix Table A2.



                                                                                                                  19
without charity text, UCC, GW with charity text) with an indicator variable for listings posted

during the Katrina period (the direct effect of Katrina is absorbed by the time fixed effects,    ).

We find that the lower sales probability for UCC listings is present only during the Katrina period,

when UCC is associated with a reduction in sales probability of 31 percentage points. In non-

Katrina months, there is a relatively small (positive) and statistically insignificant relationship

between UCC and sales probability. Turning to the role of GW, we find that the improvement in

sales probability associated with GW is greater during the Katrina period. We also find that the

complementarity between charity text and GW certification is far stronger during the Katrina

period. At other times the positive relationship between sales probability and GW without charity

text is slightly higher than GW with charity text, though the difference is not statistically

significant.

           We next turn to study the relationship between charity listings and auction prices,

conditional on a sale taking place, using the logarithm of the sales price plus shipping fee

conditional on a transaction occurring, log(Price + Ship fee), as the outcome variable.24 In

specification 3 we find a positive relationship between GW and price, of a magnitude roughly in

line with the results reported in Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus (2012), which uses a larger

dataset and more powerful matched-listing identification to estimate the impact of charity.

Intriguingly, despite the negative relationship between UCC and sales probability, we find that

successful UCC auctions have prices which are 8 percent greater (p < 0.05) than non-UCC non-

GW listings. We interpret this result as consistent with naïve UCC buyers taking sellers’ charity

claims at face value, and thus being willing to pay a premium similar to what other consumers pay

for GW items.


24
     We omit the shipping fee from X when the dependent variable is log(Price + Ship fee).



                                                                                                 20
        In specification 4 we include the interactions of the three charity variables with a Katrina

period dummy. We find that sold UCC items attracted a 14 percent price premium following

Katrina (significant at the 1 percent level), while outside of the Katrina period UCC sale prices

were insignificantly different from those of non-charity control items.25 For GW, we find similar

patterns to those we observe for sales probability: the benefits associated with GW are nearly twice

as high during the Katrina period.

        In Appendix Table A3, we provide results on fixed-price listings, which are less numerous

than true auctions in our analysis sample. The coefficient signs and sizes of many are roughly

comparable to those in specifications 1 and 2, although our estimates have less precision,

particularly for GW listings.

        As noted above, our estimates of the effect of GW and UCC on sales probability and price

may be biased if, say, sellers list superior (inferior) items as GW (UCC). In additional analysis we

take two approaches to mitigating these concerns. First, we limit the sample to listings for which

sellers have entered a SKU number that, in theory, links the listing to a very specific product type;

this eliminates products such as collectibles, artwork, memorabilia, event tickets, and other

“unique” product from the sample. Sellers entered SKU numbers for about 20 percent of the

listings in our sample. We use the SKU values to create seller-category-SKU fixed effects to better

capture product attributes. We include these fixed effects in results we present in Appendix Table

A4. These results, which parallel those in Table 5, echo our primary findings interest: UCC listings

are less likely to sell than their non-charity counterparts, and this penalty is much more pronounced

during the Katrina period. We also find that GW listings are more likely to sell than non-charity




25
  When we estimate this model with log(Price) as the dependent variable and include shipping fees in X, we find a
similar premium for UCC items during the Katrina period.



                                                                                                              21
listings in this subsample, though the difference in this sales probability premium is only slightly

higher in the Katrina period, and the difference is not significant.

        A separate approach to assessing the possibly confounding effect of unobserved quality is

based on the assumption that start price is a good proxy of the seller’s assessment of the product’s

“market value.” If, as we add controls, the effect of start price on sales probability and/or sales

price shifts considerably, we may worry that there are other unobservable quality attributes that

we are not capturing, in the spirit of Altonji et al. (2005). We present results in Appendix Table

A5 that parallel those presented in columns 2 and 4 of Table 5, but vary the control variables

included. First, we include only the log of start price as a control. When we add seller-category

fixed effects, the coefficient on log start price changes substantially. However, the inclusion of the

full battery of controls in the third set of results leaves the coefficient on log start price virtually

unchanged. Thus, to the extent that log start price captures a seller’s assessment of a good’s market

value, its stability as we add controls to our analyses suggest that there may be few unobserved

quality differences left once we control for seller and category.26 While the results in Tables A4

and A5 do not rule out the potentially confounding effects of unobserved quality, we do believe

that they do somewhat mitigate these concerns.

        To summarize our results thus far, the sales probabilities and prices of listings with

unverified charity claims are statistically indistinguishable from non-charity listings throughout

most of our sample. Notably, however, UCC sales probabilities decline markedly in the weeks

following Hurricane Katrina – exactly the period when demand for (and supply of) legitimate



26
   A related concern is that there may be time-varying shifts in the quality of UCC and/or GW listings. Again
presuming that start price is a rough proxy for quality, in Appendix Table A6 we examine the determinants of start
prices. Our main interest is whether, for UCC and GW listings, start prices shift systematically during the Katrina
period. As reflected by the insignificant interaction terms in Appendix Table A6, we do not observe any evidence of
a systematic shift in start prices, after controlling for seller-category fixed effects.



                                                                                                                22
charity listings increases (as evidenced by the simultaneous increase in the price, sales probability,

and volume of GW listings). One plausible interpretation of this finding is that “most” consumers

take cheap talk about product attributes as a negative signal. This is consistent with the relatively

modest quantity of UCC listings in our sample overall, and the fact that, despite a large increase

in the supply of UCC listings in the Katrina period, the number of completed transactions increased

by only a small amount.


4.B.    Attributes of UCC and GW Sellers

The different sales probabilities associated with verified versus unverified charity listings raises

the question of whether buyers’ choices are consistent with differences in seller or product

attributes across UCC- and GW-sellers. In earlier work (Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus, 2012),

we showed that GW-intensive sellers are less likely to generate unresolved customer disputes.

While data for this outcome are unavailable in the period we study, we examine whether other

measures of seller quality correlate with a seller’s use of charity-linked listings. To do so, we revisit

the patterns in Table 3, exploring them in a regression framework.

        We perform the analysis first at the seller level, focusing on the approximately 22,000

sellers who are in the descriptive sample and offer either a UCC or GW listing. For each seller in

this sample we create an indicator variable for whether the seller offered one or more UCC listings

(Ever UCC) and a second variable for the seller’s frequency of UCC (Percent UCC) within the

full descriptive sample. By omitting the sellers who never use GW or UCC, we avoid swamping

this analysis with over 400,000 sellers who have shown no interest in engaging with consumers

interested in charity donations. In addition to this seller-level analysis, we examine whether seller

characteristics predict whether individual listings in the analysis sample are UCC or GW. This




                                                                                                      23
allows us to introduce product-category fixed effects which can account for cross-category

differences in GW and UCC frequency.

           We report our seller-level analysis in specifications 1 and 2 of Table 6 using Probit and

Tobit models, respectively, to estimate the correlation between seller UCC use and seller

characteristics.27 As an additional control for differences in charity-related practices across seller

sizes, we also include the log of the seller’s total number of listings in the descriptive sample. Our

results are consistent with an overall lower level of quality for UCC sellers relative to GW sellers.

We find that sellers with greater EPP values are less likely to post UCC listings at all (specification

1), and also devote a smaller share of their listings to UCC (specification 2). The results in

specification 1’s imply that a one standard deviation (22.0) increase in a seller’s EPP score above

the mean reduces the probability of a UCC listing by 13 percent. Differences across UCC and GW

sellers are also apparent in these users’ shares of positive feedback. Relative to sellers with percent

positive feedback below 98 percent (the omitted category), sellers who post UCC listings are less

likely than GW sellers to have percent positive scores in any higher category. This difference is

statistically significant and largest in magnitude for 100 percent positive ratings.

           We conclude the seller-focused analysis by investigating whether individual listings’ UCC

or GW status is predicted by sellers’ characteristics, while controlling for GW and UCC frequency

by product category. We use the full analysis sample (and all sellers, including the control group)

for these listing-level models, and in doing so allow seller frequency within the sample to provide

an ad-hoc weighting on which sellers’ characteristics have a greater impact on the dependent

variable.




27
     We can use Probit and Tobit models in this analysis because we do not include a large number of fixed effects.



                                                                                                                      24
         We report the results of our listing-level analysis in Table 6, specifications 3 and 4. Each

specification is a linear regression of a listing’s UCC or GW status on: the same seller

characteristics discussed above, the same set of listing-level characteristics included in Table 5’s

analysis (provided in full in Table A1), a dummy variable for whether a listing is fixed-price rather

than true auction, and a collection of 11,000 leaf category fixed effects. We cluster standard errors

by seller. We find that sellers’ EPP scores are not significantly correlated with the probability that

a listing has UCC = 1. However, sellers with 99 percent positive feedback or greater are

significantly less likely to offer a UCC listing. We test for the joint significance of the (uniformly

negative) coefficients on EPP and the positive feedback categories, and we find that the

coefficients are significantly different from zero at p < 0.06. In specification 4 we consider the

probability that a listing has GW status, and we find that sellers’ EPP scores and positive feedback

measures are positively correlated with the likelihood of offering a verified charity donation; the

coefficients on 100 percent and 98-99 percent positive feedback are significantly different from

zero. A joint test of the EPP and percent positive feedback coefficients reveals that they are

significantly different from zero at p = 0.001. These findings suggest that buyer response to UCC

listings are consistent with the lower quality of sellers who tend to post such listings.28



5.       Conclusions

We provide empirical evidence on consumer responses to cheap talk claims, and the sellers that

make such claims. Despite the importance of policy bodies such as the FTC’s Bureau of Consumer

Protection, field evidence is rare on potentially deceptive claims by firms. While we find that some,




28
   Similarly, GW listings may sell with greater probability at least in part because verifiable charity listings serve as a
positive signal of trustworthiness, as suggested by Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus (2012).



                                                                                                                        25
naïve consumers are drawn to products with unverified claims, in our eBay setting the evidence

suggests that the number of naive consumers is largely invariant to the extent of cheap talk. On the

supply side, sellers are quick to adjust their perceptions about consumer receptiveness to cheap

talk – when Hurricane Kartina hit, sellers began making a larger number of unverified charity

claims, but when consumers did not move strongly toward these listings, sellers moved rapidly

away from them (see, in particular, Figure 4). The evidence we provide also suggests that the

majority of buyers draw a neutral to slightly negative view of sellers that make unverified claims.

In our setting this view is warranted, as sellers making unverified claims receive lower rates of

positive feedback than their counterparts that make verified charity claims, or no charity claims at

all.

       One intriguing implication of our research is that in many markets the existence of a

legitimate and verifiable mechanism for informing buyers of product attributes may be effective

in limiting cheap talk. While eBay began policing unverifiable charity claims more rigorously in

recent years, our Katrina-era findings suggest that it may not have been necessary: the existence

of a verifiable charity mechanism may have severely limited the scope for charity cheap talk.

Although this observation may limit the generalizability of our findings, it also highlights an

important market design insight derived from our analysis.




                                                                                                 26
References

Akerlof, George and Robert J. Shiller. 2015. Phishing for Phools: The Economics of Manipulation
       and Deception. Princeton University Press.

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005 Selection on Observed and
        Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools. Journal of
        Political Economy 113(1): 151-184.

Andrews, Michelle, Xueming Luo, Zheng Fang, and Jaakko Aspara. 2014. Cause marketing
      effectiveness and the moderating role of price discounts. Journal of Marketing 78(6): 120-
      142.

Bajari, Patrick and Ali Hortacsu. 2004. Economic Insights from Internet Auctions. Journal of
        Economic Literature 42(2): 457-486.

Beales, Howard, Richard Craswell, and Steven C. Salop. 1981. The efficient regulation of
       consumer information. The Journal of Law and Economics 24(3): 491-539.Cabral, Luis
       and Ali Hortacsu. 2010. “The Dynamics of Seller Reputation: Evidence from eBay.” The
       Journal of Industrial Economics 58(1): 54-78.

Canals‐Cerda, Jose J. 2014. Charity art auctions. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics
       76(6): 924-938.

Cawley, John, Matthew Eisenberg, and Rosemary Avery. 2013. “The Effect of Deceptive
      Advertising on Consumption of the Advertised Good and its Substitutes: The Case of Over-
      the-Counter Weight Loss Products.” NBER working paper 18863.

Cho, Charles H., and Dennis M. Patten, 2007. “The Role of Environmental Disclosures as Tools
      of Legitimacy: A Research Note.” Accounting, Organizations and Society 32(7-8): 639-
      647.

Clarkson, Peter M, Yue Li, Gordon D. Richardson, and Florin P. Vasvari. 2008. “Revisiting the
       Relation between Environmental Performance and Environmental Disclosure: An
       Empirical Analysis,” Accounting, Organizations and Society 33(4-5): 303–327.

Crawford, Vincent P., and Joel Sobel. 1982. “Strategic information transmission.” Econometrica
      50(6): 1431-1451.

Croson, Rachel, Terry Boles, and J. Keith Murnighan. 2003. “Cheap Talk in Bargaining
      Experiments: Lying and Threats in Ultimatum Games.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
      Organization 51(2): 143-159.

Darke, Peter R., and Robin J. B. Ritchie. 2007. “The Defensive Consumer: Advertising Deception,
       Defensive Processing, and Distrust.” Journal of Marketing Research 44(1): 114-127.

DellaVigna, Stephano, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2006. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.” American
      Economic Review 96(3): 694-719.


                                                                                             27
Delmas, Magali A. and Vanessa Cuerel Burbano. 2011. “The Drivers of Greenwashing.”
      California Management Review 54(1): 64-87.

Dubé, J.P., Xueming Luo, and Zheng Fang. 2015. “Self-signaling and prosocial behavior: a cause
       marketing mobile field experiment.”. National Bureau of Economic Research working
       paper w21475.

Elfenbein, Daniel W. and Brian McManus. 2010. “A Greater Price for a Greater Good? Evidence
       that Consumers Pay More for Charity-Linked Products.” American Economic Journal:
       Economic Policy 2(2): 28-60.

Elfenbein, Daniel W., Raymond Fisman, and Brian McManus. 2012. “Charity as a Substitute for
       Reputation: Evidence from an Online Marketplace.” Review of Economic Studies 79(4):
       1441-1468.

Elfenbein, Daniel W., Raymond Fisman, and Brian McManus. 2015. “Market Structure,
       Reputation, and the Value of Quality Certification.” American Economic Journal:
       Microeconomics 7(4): 83-108.

Einav, Liran, Chiara Farronato, Jonathan D. Levin, and Neel Sundaresan. 2017. “Auctions versus
       Posted Prices in Online Markets” Journal of Political Economy. (forthcoming).

Einav, Liran, Theresa Kuchler, Jonathan D. Levin, and Neel Sundaresan. 2015. “Assessing Sale
       Strategies in Online Markets Using Matched Listings.” American Economic Journal:
       Microeconomics 7(2): 215-247.

Farrell, Joseph, and Matthew Rabin. 1996. “Cheap talk.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives
        10(3): 103-118.

Federal Trade Commission Bureau of Consumer Protection. 2000. “Advertising and Marketing on
       the     Internet.”   https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/plain-language/bus28-
       advertising-and-marketing-internet-rules-road.pdf [accessed 10/5/2017]

Feicht, R., Grimm, V. and Seebauer, M., 2016. An experimental study of corporate social
        responsibility through charitable giving in Bertrand markets. Journal of Economic
        Behavior & Organization 124 (1): 88-101.

Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and
      Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      121(2): 505-540.

Gardete, P.M., 2013. Cheap-talk advertising and misrepresentation in vertically differentiated
       markets. Marketing Science, 32(4), pp.609-621.

Gneezy, Uri. 2005. “Deception: The Role of Consequences,” American Economic Review 95(1):
      384-394.




                                                                                           28
Hainmueller, Jens, Michael J. Hiscox, and Sandra Sequeira. 2015. Consumer demand for fair trade:
      Evidence from a multistore field experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2),
      pp.242-256.

Hui, Xiang, Maryam Saeedi, Zeqian Shen, and Neel Sundaresan. 2015. “Reputation &
      Regulations: Evidence from eBay.” Ohio State University working paper.

Jin, Ginger Zhe, and Andrew Kato. 2006. “Price, quality, and reputation: Evidence from an online
        field experiment.” The RAND Journal of Economics 37(4): 983-1005.

Johar, Gita Venkataramani. 1995. “Consumer Involvement and Deception from Implied
       Advertising Claims.” Journal of Marketing Research 32(3): 267-279.

Laufer, William S. 2003. “Social Accountability and Corporate Greenwashing.” Journal of
       Business Ethics 43(3): 253-261.

Leszczyc, P.T.P. and Rothkopf, Michael H. 2010. Charitable motives and bidding in charity
      auctions. Management Science, 56(3): 399-413.

Lyon, Thomas P. and John W. Maxwell. 2011. “Greenwash: Corporate Environmental Disclosure
       under Threat of Audit.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 20(1): 3-41.

Nagler, Matthew G. 1993. "Rather bait than switch: Deceptive advertising with bounded consumer
       rationality." Journal of Public Economics 51(3): 359-378.

Nosko, Chris and Steven Tadelis. 2015. “The Limits of Reputation in Platform Markets: An
      Empirical Analysis and Field Experiment.” eBay Research Labs working paper.

Spence, Michael. 1973. “Job Market Signaling.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(3): 355-74.

Tadelis, Steven. 2016. “Reputation and feedback systems in online platform markets.” Annual
       Review of Economics 8: 321-340.

Woodward, Susan E., and Robert E. Hall. 2012. “Diagnosing Consumer Confusion and Sub-
     Optimal Shopping Effort: Theory and Mortgage-Market Evidence.” American Economic
     Review 102(7):. 3249-76.

Zinman, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz. 2016.”Wintertime for Deceptive Advertising?” American
      Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(1): 177-192.




                                                                                             29
A.       Data Appendix

To identify listings with strong language about charitable donations, we flagged all listings that

satisfied one or more of the following conditions in the listing title or subtitle:

        Contains the term “charity auction” or “charity listing.”

        Contains the term “benefit auction” or “benefit listing.”

        Contains the phrase “will be donated,” “profit goes to,” “profits go to,” “revenue goes to,”

         “winning bid goes to,” or “proceeds to charity.”

        Contains the term “Katrina,” “hurricane,” “New Orleans,” or “Red Cross” plus one or more

         of the word stems “donat,” “benefit,” or “charit.”




                                                                                                  30
           Figure 1: Listings per day for UCC, GW, and GW with charity text


 5000


 1000




  100




      10




            01apr2005      01jul2005          01oct2005      01jan2006        01apr2006
                                            Listing end date

                              All GW lstgs                  GW with charity text
                              All UCC lstgs




             Figure 2: Total sales per day for UCC and GW with charity text
150
100
50
0




           01apr2005      01jul2005       01oct2005           01jan2006      01apr2006
                                       Listing start date

                            All UCC sales               All GW char txt sales




                                                                                          31
                 Figure 3: Sale probabilities of GW and UCC listings




     01apr2005        01jul2005      01oct2005         01jan2006        01apr2006
                                  Listing start date

                           UCC sale pctg               GW sale pctg
                           Std sale pctg




                            Figure 4: UCC-to-GW Ratios
.3
.2
.1
0




       01apr2005        01jul2005    01oct2005         01jan2006        01apr2006
                            UCC/GW Listings and Sales Ratios

                            UCC/GW listings              UCC/GW sales




                                                                                    32
                               Table 1: Listing characteristics

                           Mean         Median         Std Dev         Min            Max
Auction listing            0.61          1.00            0.49          0.00           1.00
Fixed price listing        0.39           0.00           0.49          0.00           1.00
Start or fixed price       36.55         11.30          87.22          2.00         1000.00
UCC listing                0.002          0.00           0.04          0.00           1.00
GW listing                 0.08           0.00           0.28          0.00           1.00
GW w/ charity text         0.003          0.00           0.05          0.00           1.00
Num. photos                1.08           1.00           1.25          0.00          76.00
Shipping fee               4.92           3.99           7.25          0.00          900.00
Quantity avail.            3.91           1.00          22.82          1.00         1000.00
Scheduled length           13.60          7.00          13.60          1.00          90.00
Observations              3095456
Notes: Start or fixed price provides the start price of auction listings, and the (fixed) sales
price for fixed price listings. UCC listing denotes that the title of the listing makes an
unverified charity claim. GW listing denotes that the listing has associated with it a verified
charitable contribution made via eBay’s Giving Works program. GW w/ charity text
denotes that a listing both has charity-related text in its title and also a verifiable Giving
Works donation associated with it. Quantity avail. is the number of items available in a
listing, equal to one for all auction listings. Scheduled length is the time in days that a
listing is posted for. Num. photos and Shipping fee are self-explanatory. See text for further
details.




                                                                                                  33
                         Table 2: GW or UCC listing characteristics

                                     Mean       Median       Std Dev       Min         Max
UCC listing                          0.022        0.00         0.15        0.00        1.00
GW lstg 10% donated                  0.090        0.00         0.29        0.00        1.00
GW lstg 15%-95% don.                 0.089        0.00         0.29        0.00        1.00
GW lstg 100% donated                 0.752        1.00         0.43        0.00        1.00
GW w/ charity text                   0.034        0.00         0.18        0.00        1.00
Observations                           265,754
 Notes: The table provides summary statistics for the subsample of listings that are
 associated with either unverifiable charity claims (UCC) or verifiable charity claims made
 via Giving Works (GW). We disaggregate GW listings based on the fraction of the sale
 price that is donated to charity. GW w/ charity text denotes that a listing both has charity-
 related text in its title and also a verifiable Giving Works donation associated with it. See
 text for further details.




                                                                                                 34
                           Table 3: Seller Characteristics

Sellers included                       All          Ever UCC          Ever GW

Effective % Positive (EPP)            75.16            71.93            73.68
                                      78.56            76.79            78.57

Feedback Positive %                   0.98              0.98             0.98
                                      1.00              1.00             1.00

Positive feedback 100%                0.41              0.46             0.56
                                      0.00              0.00             1.00

Pos. feedback [.99, 1)                0.28              0.21             0.16
                                      0.00              0.00             0.00

Pos. feedback [.98, .99)              0.11              0.09             0.06
                                      0.00              0.00             0.00

Pos feedback < .98                    0.16              0.17             0.11
                                      0.00              0.00             0.00

Feedback Score                      1137.06           784.91           523.76
                                    262.00            154.75           80.60

Seller age (days)                   1253.32           1238.99          1200.39
                                    1183.00           1148.53          1137.89

Observations                        448,569          2,433             22,936
Notes: Each cell displays mean (top) and median (bottom) values. Effective %
Positive is the fraction of transactions in the two years preceding a listing for
which the seller received a positive rating, averaged at the seller-level. Positive
feedback 100% denotes sellers for whom 100 percent of ratings are positive.
The other Pos. feedback variables similarly denote sellers in other feedback
ranges based on the fraction of feedback received that is positive. Feedback
score is the sum of a seller’s positive ratings minus the sum of its negative
ratings. Seller age is the number of days since a seller first listed an item on
eBay. See text for further details.




                                                                                      35
                            Table 4: Buyer Characteristics

                           (1)              (2)                (3)          (4)
                                                                         UCC during
Buyers included            All          Ever UCC          Ever GW
                                                                         Katrina pd

Age                      1096.20          1110.95            1165.32       1094.56
                         987.50           1003.00            1077.00       970.00

Feedback                 237.51           282.44             275.88         232.63
                          51.00            56.00              62.00          47.00

Observations              807,871            2,381           101,943           607
Notes: Each cell displays mean (top) and median (bottom) values. Column (1) provides
summary data for all buyers in our sample. Column (2) provides summary data for buyers
who, at some point during our sample period, purchased an item with an unverifiable
charity claim (UCC), and column (3) provides summary data for buyers who at some
point purchased an item with a verifiable charitable contribution via Giving Works (GW)
associated with it. Column (4) is the subsample of buyers from column (2) who made
UCC purchases during the months following Hurricane Katrina’s landfall (August 29 –
November 15, 2005). Age is the time in days since the buyer first purchased an item on
eBay and Feedback is the sum of positive ratings minus the sum of negative ratings
received by a buyer. See text for details.




                                                                                          36
                     Table 5: Effects of UCC and GW on Auction Listing Outcomes

Specification                               (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                                            log(Price +       log(Price +
Dependent variable                         Sold              Sold
                                                                             Ship Fee)         Ship Fee)

UCC listing                             -0.126***           0.0337           0.0806**           0.0586
                                         (0.0295)          (0.0363)          (0.0316)          (0.0378)
UCC listing X Katrina pd.                                 -0.305***                             0.0777
                                                           (0.0529)                            (0.0550)

GW w/o charity text                     0.0730***         0.0564***         0.0620***         0.0441***
                                        (0.00524)         (0.00619)          (0.0101)          (0.0129)
GW w/o charity txt X Katrina pd.                          0.0359***                           0.0396***
                                                          (0.00719)                            (0.0123)

GW w/ charity text                       0.130***           0.0380           0.191***          0.151***
                                         (0.0199)          (0.0353)          (0.0232)          (0.0477)
GW w/ charity txt X Katrina pd.                            0.128***                             0.0594
                                                           (0.0340)                            (0.0449)

Observations                              1,813,385         1,813,385          827,756            827,756
R-squared                                   0.253             0.253              0.875             0.875
Notes: Each column presents the results of OLS estimation with both seller-category and weekly fixed
effects, and the covariates listed in Table A1 as controls. The dependent variable in the first two columns
is an indicator variable denoting whether an auction listing was sold. The dependent variable in the
second two columns is the log of the final sales price plus listed shipping fee, defined only for listings
that sold. UCC listing denotes that the title of the listing makes an unverified charity claim. GW listing
w/o charity text denotes that the listing has associated with it a verified charitable contribution made via
eBay’s Giving Works program, but no mention of the charitable contribution in the listing’s title. GW w/
charity text denotes that a listing both has charity-related text in its title and also a verifiable Giving
Works donation associated with it. Katrina pd. denotes listings initiated during the months following
Hurricane Katrina’s landfall (August 29 – November 15, 2005). Robust standard errors, clustered by
seller, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                            37
                        Table 6: Analysis of Seller Characteristics

Specification                   (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
Sample used                 Descriptive        Descriptive       Analysis           Analysis
Level of analysis              Seller            Seller           Listing            Listing
Sellers included            UCC or GW         UCC or GW              All               All
Dependent variable           Ever UCC         Percent UCC      Listing UCC?       Listing GW?
Model                          Probit             Tobit             OLS               OLS

EPP avg                     -0.00436***       -0.00386***         -1.88e-05         0.000118
                             (0.000777)        (0.000670)        (3.02e-05)        (0.000384)
Fdbk pos = 100%               -0.204***         -0.163***        -0.00213*         0.0448***
                               (0.0373)          (0.0323)         (0.00117)          (0.0148)
Fdbk pos = 99%                 -0.0810*          -0.0711*       -0.00311***           0.0241
                               (0.0454)          (0.0397)         (0.00108)          (0.0174)
Fdbk pos = 98%                -0.000537         0.000163          -0.000671        0.0792***
                               (0.0535)          (0.0467)         (0.00156)          (0.0203)
No feedback rec’d             -0.467***         -0.375***          -0.00225           0.0581
                                (0.107)          (0.0902)         (0.00404)          (0.0407)
log(Fdbk)                      0.116***         0.0963***         -0.000304        -0.0129***
                              (0.00964)         (0.00846)        (0.000240)         (0.00265)
log(Age)                     -0.0938***        -0.0767***         0.000211           -0.0139*
                               (0.0146)          (0.0127)        (0.000430)         (0.00780)
log(lstgs desc. samp)        -0.0881***         -0.113***
                              (0.00772)         (0.00699)
Fixed price listing                                             -0.00290***        -0.0341***
                                                                 (0.000717)         (0.00864)



Observations                   21,702            21,702          1,967,851          1,967,851
                                                                   0.058              0.219
Notes: Effective % Positive (EPP) is the fraction of transactions in the two years preceding
a listing for which the seller received a positive rating, averaged at the seller-level. Positive
feedback 100% denotes sellers for whom 100 percent of ratings are positive. The other
positive feedback variables similarly denote sellers in other feedback ranges based on the
fraction of feedback received that is positive. Feedback score is the sum of a seller’s positive
ratings minus the sum of its negative ratings. Seller age is the number of days since a seller
first listed an item on eBay. The seller’s total number of listings in the descriptive sample
is reported in “lstgs desc. samp.” All included independent variables are shown for
specifications 1 and 2. Specifications 3 and 4 also include an indicator for whether a listing
is fixed price, plus the full set of observable listing characteristics provided in Table A1.
Specifications 3 and 4 also include fixed effects for each leaf category plus a dummy for
each week in the sample period. Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                    38
                                 APPENDIX
Table A1: Effects of UCC and GW on Auction Listing Outcomes, Full Set of Variables

             Specification                        (1)          (2)
                                                           log(Price +
             Dependent variable                  Sold       Ship fee)

             UCC listing                       -0.126***   0.0806**
                                                (0.0295)    (0.0316)
             GW w/o charity text               0.0730***   0.0620***
                                               (0.00524)    (0.0101)
             GW w/ charity text                 0.130***   0.191***
                                                (0.0199)    (0.0232)
             log(Start price)                 -0.0615***   0.706***
                                               (0.00234)   (0.00799)
             Photos = 0                       -0.0172***    -0.0195*
                                               (0.00596)    (0.0111)
             Photos = 2                       0.0235***    0.0521***
                                               (0.00440)   (0.00767)
             Photos = 3                       0.0452***    0.103***
                                               (0.00671)    (0.0116)
             Photos = 4                       0.0654***    0.162***
                                               (0.00636)    (0.0169)
             Photos = 5 to 7                  0.0859***    0.230***
                                               (0.00707)    (0.0189)
             Photos = 8 to 11                  0.101***    0.341***
                                                (0.0110)    (0.0312)
             Photos = 12+                      0.128***    0.462***
                                                (0.0162)    (0.0428)
             Log(Shipping fee)                 -0.000931
                                              (0.000600)
             Sched. length 1                  -0.0257***   -0.0425***
                                               (0.00699)    (0.00982)
             Sched. length 3                    0.00835    -0.0194***
                                               (0.00515)    (0.00550)
             Sched. length 5                  0.0108***     -0.000421
                                               (0.00343)    (0.00400)
             Sched. length 10                   -0.00328    0.106***
                                               (0.00797)     (0.0124)
             Sched. length 30                   0.226***      -0.0125
                                                (0.0765)      (0.128)
             End Monday                       0.0117***     0.000116
                                               (0.00226)    (0.00278)
             End Tuesday                       0.00537**     -0.00233
                                               (0.00232)    (0.00272)

                                  Continued on next page




                                                                                     39
Specification                         (1)               (2)
                                                    log(Price +
Dependent variable                   Sold            Ship fee)

End Wednesday                     0.0169***         -0.000142
                                  (0.00228)         (0.00273)
End Thursday                      0.0160***         0.00580**
                                  (0.00235)         (0.00293)
End Friday                        0.0196***          -0.00138
                                  (0.00262)         (0.00288)
End Saturday                      0.0138***          -0.00282
                                  (0.00243)         (0.00283)

Observations                      1,813,385          827,756
R-squared                           0.253             0.875
Note: See Table 5. Robust standard errors, clustered by seller,
are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  40
        Table A2: Differential Effect of GW by Donation Amount in Auction Listings

                                    (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
Dependent variable                 Sold             Sold       log(Price+ship) log(Price+ship)

UCC listing                     -0.125***          0.0345          0.0805**           0.0582
                                 (0.0295)         (0.0364)         (0.0316)          (0.0379)
UCC Katrina pd.                                  -0.305***                            0.0781
                                                  (0.0529)                           (0.0551)

GW lstg 10% donated             0.0583***        0.0549***        0.0863***         0.0891***
                                (0.00658)        (0.00858)         (0.0109)          (0.0159)
GW 10% Katrina pd.                                0.00620                            -0.00399
                                                  (0.0116)                           (0.0187)

GW lstg 15%-95% don.            0.0646***        0.0306***        0.0715***         0.0604***
                                (0.00893)         (0.0109)         (0.0111)          (0.0200)
GW 15%-95% Katrina pd.                           0.0545***                            0.0203
                                                  (0.0134)                           (0.0247)

GW lstg 100% donated             0.114***        0.0978***        0.0502***          0.0309*
                                 (0.0120)         (0.0128)         (0.0143)          (0.0164)
GW 100% Katrina pd.                              0.0434***                          0.0478***
                                                 (0.00968)                           (0.0146)

GW w/ charity text               0.136***         0.0530           0.189***         0.147***
                                 (0.0209)        (0.0397)          (0.0229)         (0.0467)
GW chrtxt Kat. pd.                               0.116***                            0.0622
                                                 (0.0376)                           (0.0442)


Observations                     1,813,385         1,813,385           827,756            827,756
R-squared                           0.253             0.254             0.875              0.875
Notes: Giving Works listings without charity text are separated by share of revenue donated. See
Table 5 for additional notes. Robust standard errors, clustered by seller, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                41
                  Table A3: Effects of UCC and GW on Fixed Price Listing Outcomes

Specification                               (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
Dependent variable                         Sold              Sold          log(Qty sold)     log(Qty sold)

UCC listing                             -0.140***           0.0174           -0.129**           0.0541
                                         (0.0406)          (0.0584)          (0.0572)           (0.113)
UCC listing X Katrina pd.                                 -0.238***                            -0.278**
                                                           (0.0664)                             (0.117)

GW w/o charity text                      0.0298**           0.0193           0.0212*           0.00869
                                         (0.0129)          (0.0159)          (0.0122)          (0.0152)
GW w/o charity txt X Katrina pd.                            0.0248                              0.0295
                                                           (0.0169)                            (0.0181)

GW w/ charity text                       0.107***           0.0757           0.163***           0.0749
                                         (0.0410)          (0.0477)          (0.0592)          (0.0486)
GW w/ charity txt X Katrina pd.                             0.0415                              0.113
                                                           (0.0610)                            (0.0720)

Observations                              1,192,808         1,192,808         1,192,808         1,192,808
R-squared                                   0.541             0.541             0.544             0.544
Notes: Included observations are all fixed price listings. See Table 5 for additional notes. Robust standard
errors, clustered by seller, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                          42
                  Table A4: Effects of UCC and GW on Auction Outcomes.
                  Models include matching on seller-provided SKU values.

                                    (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)
VARIABLES                          Sold          Sold       log(Price+ship) log(Price+ship)

UCC listing                     -0.122**       0.00616          0.0162            -0.0284
                                (0.0486)       (0.0707)         (0.109)           (0.137)
UCC Katrina pd.                                -0.205**                            0.189
                                               (0.0903)                           (0.191)

GW w/o charity text             0.0825***     0.0735***        0.0812***        0.0720***
                                 (0.0135)      (0.0127)         (0.0196)         (0.0204)
GW nochtxt Kat pd.                              0.0176                            0.0167
                                               (0.0195)                          (0.0243)

GW w/ charity text              0.159***       0.148***        0.112***            0.126
                                (0.0463)       (0.0415)        (0.0389)          (0.0839)
GW chrtxt Kat. pd.                              0.0176                            -0.0208
                                               (0.0715)                          (0.0936)

Observations                     361,977         361,977          152,869             152,869
R-squared                         0.246           0.246            0.885               0.885
Notes: Specifications include fixed effects for seller-category-SKU and week of listing. See
Table 5 for additional notes. Robust standard errors, clustered by seller, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                 43
                                     Table A5: Effects of UCC and GW on Auction Outcomes.
                                               Impact of various control variables.

                                         (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
Dependent variable                      Sold             Sold             Sold         log(Price+ship)   log(Price+ship)    log(Price+ship)

UCC listing                            0.0858*          0.0385           0.0337          0.255***           0.0827**            0.0586
                                       (0.0500)        (0.0357)         (0.0363)          (0.0686)           (0.0360)          (0.0378)
UCC Katrina pd.                       -0.309***       -0.306***        -0.305***          -0.00144            0.0671            0.0777
                                       (0.0526)        (0.0518)         (0.0529)          (0.0988)           (0.0544)          (0.0550)
GW w/o charity text                     0.0169        0.0602***        0.0564***         0.203***           0.0589***         0.0441***
                                       (0.0245)       (0.00668)        (0.00619)          (0.0466)          (0.00838)          (0.0129)
GW nochtxt Kat pd.                      0.0236        0.0346***        0.0359***           -0.0314          0.0360***         0.0396***
                                       (0.0195)       (0.00696)        (0.00719)          (0.0467)           (0.0101)          (0.0123)
GW w/ charity text                     0.297***         0.0407           0.0380          0.804***            0.170***          0.151***
                                       (0.0590)        (0.0348)         (0.0353)          (0.0904)           (0.0468)          (0.0477)
GW chrtxt Kat. pd.                     -0.120**       0.127***         0.128***          -0.445***            0.0490            0.0594
                                       (0.0608)        (0.0337)         (0.0340)           (0.113)           (0.0445)          (0.0449)
Log(start price)                     -0.0198***      -0.0588***       -0.0615***         0.832***           0.716***          0.705***
                                      (0.00336)       (0.00233)        (0.00235)         (0.00507)          (0.00794)         (0.00799)

Seller X Category fixed effects?          N               Y                Y                  N                 Y                  Y
Additional listing chars.?                N               N                Y                  N                 N                  Y

Observations                          1,817,116        1,813,385         1,813,385           832,295           827,756           827,756
R-squared                                0.005            0.253             0.253             0.708             0.874             0.875
Notes: All models include weekly fixed effects. “Additional listings chars.” refer to the control variables also include in Table 5’s models
and listed in full in Table A1. Robust standard errors, clustered by seller, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                               44
                            Table A6: Models of Listing Start Price

                                      (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
Listing type                       Auction            Auction           Fixed price        Fixed price
Dependent variable              log(Start price)   log(Start price)   log(Start price)   log(Start price)

UCC listing                        -0.0236             -0.0954            0.0718             0.0936
                                   (0.0557)           (0.0921)           (0.0870)           (0.0797)
UCC Katrina pd.                                         0.140                                -0.0324
                                                      (0.0855)                               (0.136)

GW w/o charity text                0.134***           0.124***           0.208***           0.199***
                                   (0.0275)           (0.0316)           (0.0337)           (0.0379)
GW nochtxt Kat pd.                                     0.0237                                0.0199
                                                      (0.0193)                              (0.0344)

GW w/ charity text                 0.163***           0.135***           0.462***           0.401***
                                   (0.0416)           (0.0467)           (0.0514)           (0.0874)
GW chrtxt Kat. pd.                                     0.0408                                0.0778
                                                      (0.0556)                              (0.0922)

Observations                       1,875,524         1,875,524          1,204,608          1,204,608
R-squared                            0.796             0.796              0.745              0.745
Note: Sample includes listings with variation in auction start price or fixed price within seller-
category. Other details follow the specifications reported in Table 5; see that table’s notes for
additional detail. Robust standard errors, clustered by seller, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                            45
                      ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

           Table OA1: Effects of UCC and GW on Auction Outcomes by Time Period
          Using Alternative Definition of Katrina Period (August 29 – October 15 2005)

Specification                             (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)
Listing format                          Auction          Auction        Fixed Price    Fixed Price
                                                       log(Price +
Dependent variable                        Sold          Ship fee)          Sold        Log(Q Sold)

UCC listing                             0.00864         0.0619*          -0.0150         0.0162
                                        (0.0336)        (0.0366)         (0.0588)        (0.101)
UCC listing X Katrina pd.              -0.297***         0.0803         -0.205***       -0.239**
                                        (0.0394)        (0.0653)         (0.0685)        (0.108)

GW w/o charity text                    0.0523***       0.0423***          0.0134        0.00273
                                       (0.00599)        (0.0124)         (0.0151)       (0.0145)
GW w/o charity txt X Katrina pd.       0.0554***       0.0510***        0.0498***       0.0560**
                                       (0.00737)        (0.0136)         (0.0188)       (0.0223)

GW w/ charity text                      0.0258          0.119**           0.0118         0.0329
                                       (0.0319)         (0.0482)         (0.0435)       (0.0419)
GW w/ charity txt X Katrina pd.        0.156***         0.112**          0.139**        0.190***
                                       (0.0331)         (0.0496)         (0.0559)       (0.0711)

Observations                         1,813,385          827,756          1,192,808      1,192,808
R-squared                               0.253            0.875              0.541         0.544
Notes: See Table 5. Robust standard errors, clustered by seller, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                     46
                 Table OA2: Effects of UCC and GW on Auction Outcomes.
       Listings excluded if end date is between December 1 2005 and January 1 2006.

                                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)
Dependent variable                 Sold           Sold       log(Price+ship) log(Price+ship)

UCC listing                     -0.135***        0.0302         0.0917***          0.0755**
                                 (0.0298)       (0.0379)         (0.0303)          (0.0368)
UCC Katrina pd.                                -0.304***                            0.0545
                                                (0.0548)                           (0.0534)

GW w/o charity text             0.0740***      0.0573***        0.0614***         0.0422***
                                (0.00538)      (0.00656)         (0.0102)          (0.0135)
GW nochtxt Kat pd.                             0.0343***                          0.0404***
                                               (0.00760)                           (0.0132)

GW w/ charity text               0.138***       0.0571**        0.203***           0.181***
                                 (0.0147)       (0.0238)        (0.0220)           (0.0475)
GW chrtxt Kat. pd.                              0.106***                            0.0313
                                                (0.0244)                           (0.0455)

Observations                   1,673,840       1,673,840          762,523            762,523
R-squared                         0.257           0.257            0.875              0.875
Notes: See Table 5. Robust standard errors, clustered by seller, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                               47
