                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO FINANCIAL FRICTIONS EXPLAIN CHINESE FIRMS’ SAVING AND MISALLOCATION?

                                             Yan Bai
                                             Dan Lu
                                             Xu Tian

                                       Working Paper 24436
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24436


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2018




 We would like to thank the discussants and other participants at the China Meeting of
 Econometric Society 2014, World Congress of Comparative Economics 2015, SED 2016
 Conference, CEA 2016, 2016 Conference at Tsinghua Center for Growth and Institutions, the 2nd
 Annual BoC-UoT-Rotman Conference on the Chinese Economy, CCER Summer Institute, Asian
 Meeting of the Econometric Society, and seminar participants at the University of Rochester,
 University of Toronto, Syracuse University, Hong Kong University, San Francisco Fed, SUNY
 Buffalo, and City University of New York for their helpful comments and discussions. Special
 thanks to WestGrid Computing and Center for Integrated Research Computing (CIRC) at the
 University of Rochester for computational support. All remaining errors are our own. The views
 expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2018 by Yan Bai, Dan Lu, and Xu Tian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
 including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Financial Frictions Explain Chinese Firms’ Saving and Misallocation?
Yan Bai, Dan Lu, and Xu Tian
NBER Working Paper No. 24436
March 2018
JEL No. E2,G3

                                         ABSTRACT

We use firm-level data to identify financial frictions in China and explore the extent to which
they can explain firms' saving and capital misallocation. We first document the features of the
data in terms of firm dynamics and debt financing. State-owned firms have higher leverage and
pay much lower interest rates than non-SOEs. Among privately owned firms, smaller firms have
lower leverage, face higher interest rates, and operate with a higher marginal product of capital.
We then develop a heterogeneous-firm model with two types of financial frictions, default risk,
and a fixed cost of issuing loans. Our model generates endogenous borrowing constraints as
banks consider the firm's productivity, asset, and debt when providing a loan. Using evidence on
the firm size distribution and financing patterns, we estimate the model and find it can explain
aggregate firms' saving and investment and around 50 percent of the dispersion in the marginal
product of capital within private firms, which translates into a TFP loss as high as 12%.


Yan Bai                                         Xu Tian
Department of Economics                         University of Toronto
University of Rochester                         150 St. George Street,
216 Harkness Hall                               Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Rochester, NY 14627                             xu.tian@utoronto.ca
and NBER
yanbai06@gmail.com

Dan Lu
University of Rochester
232 Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY
danlu@rochester.edu
1       Introduction
A large body of literature has emphasized that financial frictions can generate high saving
and capital misallocation in less-developed countries like China. China has been growing
fast for decades and yet, despite this, it runs a current account surplus, accumulating a large
stock of foreign reserves. This is puzzling, since standard economic theories predict that
capital should flow to countries with fast-growing productivity and thus high returns. One
explanation for this puzzle, advanced in the literature, is that Chinese financial markets are
underdeveloped, leading to distorted financial allocations.1 Privately owned firms, which are
more productive than their state-owned counterparts, rely heavily on internal financing.2
Indeed, saving among firms accounts for around 50 percent of the total saving in China in the
last two decades. Financial frictions can also lead to capital misallocation and low total factor
productivity (TFP). Hsieh and Klenow (2009) quantify the potential extent of misallocation
in China, relative to the US: if capital and labor were hypothetically reallocated in a way that
reduced dispersion of marginal products to US values, China would see a 30-50% increase in
manufacturing TFP.
    The existing literature tend to use aggregate data or micro-level firm dynamics to quantify
the role of financial frictions on TFP. Most works, however, ignore firms’ financing patterns.
Our paper fills this gap. We ask to what extent financial frictions, quantified using firm
dynamics and financing patterns, can explain saving and capital misallocation in China.
    We start by documenting the salient features of rich, Chinese firm-level data. In particular,
we are interested in how debt financing and firm growth vary across firms. We find that
state-owned firms (SOE) have higher leverage and pay lower interest rates than non-SOEs.
Among privately owned firms, small firms have lower leverage, pay higher interest rates,
grow faster, and face a higher marginal product of capital (MPK) than large firms. Even
though China has been undergoing significant reforms, like the state-owned-enterprise reforms
and financial liberalization, these patterns of debt financing and firm dynamics are observed
consistently over time.
    To explain these salient features and quantify the magnitude of financial frictions in China,
we build a heterogeneous-firm model with endogenous default risk and a fixed cost of issuing
loans. All firms produce with a decreasing return to scale technology using capital. They
face stochastic productivity shocks. Adjusting capital (size) is costly due to both adjustment
cost and financing costs. Firms finance investment and dividend payouts from profits and
bank loans. They may default on their loans and secretly operate in financial autarky, with

    1
      Many papers have addressed this puzzle, for example, Buera and Shin (2009), Song, Storesletten, and
Zilibotti (2011), Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008), Quadrini, Mendoza, and Rios-Rull (2009).
    2
      See Huang (2011), who shows that firms’ saving vary with their ownership structure.

                                                   2
penalized productivity. Firms with lower productivity, smaller size, and larger amount of
debt default more easily. Banks incorporate these default risk into the loan prices as well
as the fixed cost of issuance. Hence, our model generates endogenous borrowing limits and
differential leverage and interest rates across firms.
    In the model, the firm’s size, leverage, and growth are all affected by financial frictions.
When considering external finance via bank loans, firms face a trade-off. On the one hand,
borrowing more is associated with higher default risk and thus higher effective interest
rate. On the other hand, borrowing involves a fixed cost, so that small loans have a high
effective interest rate. In equilibrium, small firms with low assets tend to be more financially
constrained, stay inefficiently small, pay high interest rate, and ultimately face low leverage.
When they experience a good productivity shock, these small firms grow faster, due to their
inefficient size. Our model thus has the potential to match the firm financing pattern in the
data, namely low leverage and high interest rates faced by small firms.
    The financial frictions in our model can not only explain the observed firm financing
patterns, but also reflect the realistic frictions in China. According to a survey by Wagle (2000),
around 70 percent of Chinese firms reported that paperwork and relationship with banks as
major obstacles to their application for a formal bank loan. These overhead costs within the
application process make it especially hard for small firms to access to external financing.
Although China has made significant progress in reducing government intervention in the
banking sector, there is still ample evidence that local governments continue to encourage
banks to lend to state-owned banks by extending explicit or implicit government guarantees.
With these guarantees, a bad loan to a state-owned enterprise is not considered as a bad
loan for the banks, since the government will almost surely bail out the firm. By contrast,
absent these government guarantees, privately owned enterprises are in general charged a
much higher interest rate when they borrow from the banks.
    We estimate the model using the firm size distribution, dynamics of sales, and financing
patterns. These moments help us identify the productivity process, capital adjustment cost,
and the parameters jointly governing financial frictions. In particular, the productivity process
parameters are mostly related to the distribution of value added and its growth. We therefore
target the shares of value added in the top 5, 10, and 20 percentiles, the mean autocorrelation
of value added, and the standard deviation of growth. The capital adjustment cost affects
how responsive a firm’s investment to shocks. We discipline it with the regression coefficient
of capital growth rate on value added. The fixed issuing cost and productivity loss after
default determine the mean leverage and how leverage and interest rate vary with firm size.
We thus include these moments in our estimation. Overall, the moments in our model closely
match those in the data.


                                                3
    With the estimated parameters, we can explore the model implication on capital misallo-
cation. Our model accounts for about 50% of MPK variation, which implies about a 12%
of TFP loss. Hence we explain about one third of China’s TFP loss measured in Hsieh and
Klenow (2009). In the data, firms with low asset, low leverage, and high value added face
higher MPK. The model produces a similar pattern, except regarding the MPK and asset
relationship. Specifically, the correlation between MPK and value added is 0.38 in the model
and 0.11 in the data. The MPK-leverage correlation is -0.05 in the model, which is close to
that in the data, -0.01. The MPK-asset correlation is close to zero in the model, but -0.31 in
the data. This implies that the relatively large MPK of small firms cannot be fully explained
by financial frictions.
    Additional statistics that can shed light on financial friction include the correlation of
saving rate and investment rate. Financial frictions increase a firm’s internal return and
lead to a positive correlated saving and investment. The data correlation is 0.58 and the
model correlation is 0.68, indicating a significant level of financial frictions. Our model closely
matches the observed aggregate investment rate, and the ratio of aggregate investment to
aggregate value added is 0.22 in the model versus 0.18 in the data. Our model also matches well
how a firm’s saving and investment co-move with its asset, value added, and leverage across
time. In both the data and the model, larger firms reduce their debt and investment due to
decreasing return to scale; high leverage firms reduce their debt; higher-productivity firms tend
to have higher leverage and also invest more, leading to a positive relation between leverage
and investment; and controlling for capital and debt, firms with larger output increase their
debt and investment. In summary, our model successfully produces the observed cross-section
and within-firm patterns on saving and investment.
    Our benchmark model has two types of frictions distorting a firm’s investment decision:
financial frictions and capital adjustment cost. We conduct two analyses to decompose them.
In the first one, we rerun our benchmark model with zero capital adjustment cost while
keeping other parameters constant. In the second one, we shut down the financial frictions
and compute a model with only capital adjustment cost. We find that financial frictions
generate higher marginal returns and tend to distort the investment of less productive firms,
while capital adjustment cost distorts the investment decision more among more productive
firms. Either friction alone produces a large TFP loss, 9.5% under only financial frictions and
13% under only capital adjustment cost. Together, they interact and lead to larger but less
dispersed MPKs across firms, hence a lower misallocation across firms. The model with only
adjustment cost is apparently silent on firms’ financing patterns.
    Our paper is related to a large strand of literature in corporate finance which studies
the impact of financial frictions on firm investment and financing patterns. From the early


                                                4
descriptive work of Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) to the natural experiments and
quantitative exercises,3 we have learned that financial frictions could affect investment and
saving, and that these effects can be large. Our quantitative results show that the effects of
financial frictions on saving and investment are indeed large for Chinese firms. Also, despite
previous literature’s success in matching the mean, standard deviation, or correlation of
certain financial or real variables, they largely fail in matching the firm distribution. This
could potentially lead to biased estimates in their counterfactual experiments due to firms’
heterogeneous responses to the change of primitive parameters. Our analysis is differentiated
by its consideration of a more realistic set of shock processes and financing features, which
both generate a richer set of investment and financing predictions, and enable our model to
do a markedly better job than previous models in matching the empirical firm distribution in
sales, leverage, and interest rate. Furthermore, what is less well understood is the impact
of financing frictions on the allocation of factors of productions across firms. We enter the
picture by studying the impact of financial frictions through the lens of capital misallocation.
We show that financial frictions could explain a large proportion of capital misallocation
across heterogeneous firms, which has important implications for total factor productivity
losses.
    Our paper is closely related to the work of Whited and Zhao (2017) and David and
Venkateswaran (2017). Whited and Zhao (2017) focus on the potential welfare gain from
reallocating debt and equity among Chinese firms and estimate the distortion using a static
model and observed data directly. Our paper uses a dynamic model to quantify the impact of
financial frictions, including limited enforcement and credit intermediation cost, on firm saving
and misallocation. David and Venkateswaran (2017) also quantify the contributions of capital
adjustment cost, technology dispersion, and information friction to capital misallocation. We
focus on identifying financial frictions with firm dynamics and financing patterns. The MPK
dispersion is endogenous in our model, while it is exogenous in their work.
    Our work also contributes to the growing literature on the effect of misallocation induced
by financial frictions on aggregate TFP. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) use firm-level data to
quantify the potential extent of misallocation in China and India relative to that of the
US. They document sizable gaps in the marginal products of factors across plants in these
emerging markets. Our paper emphasizes the misallocation in Chinese data, due to domestic
financial frictions, by examining firms’ debt financing choices and growth. Midrigan and Xu
(2013) parameterize a financial frictions model to match the salient features of plant-level data
and show that the model does not predict large aggregate TFP losses from misallocation and
   3
     For example, Chava and Roberts (2008), Gomes (2001), Hennessy and Whited (2005), Hennessy and
Whited (2007), Gamba and Triantis (2008), Rampini and Viswanathan (2010), Korteweg (2010), Bolton,
Chen, and Wang (2011), Eisfeldt and Muir (2016), Armenter and Hnatkovska (2017) etc.

                                                5
that misallocation from financial constraints cannot explain the TFP gap between countries
with little use of external finance and the US. We examine firms’ financing pattern combined
with other salient features, and our exercise suggests that endogenous borrowing constraints
are essential to explain firms’ financing with Chinese data. Cooley and Quadrini (2001)
show that the combination of persistent shocks with financial frictions can account for the
dependence of firm dynamics on size and age.
    Our paper is closely related to that of Arellano, Bai, and Zhang (2012), who use cross-
country variations in financial market development to evaluate empirically and quantitatively
the impact of financial frictions on firms’ financing choices and growth rates, with a firm-level
datasets for Europe. Our findings of positive size-leverage relation in China is consistent with
their findings in the less-developed countries. We, however, focus on the effect of financial
frictions on firms’ saving and investment decisions and Chinese capital misallocation measured
by the MPK dispersion and covariance between MPK and firm size.
    Our paper is also related to the literature on the implications of financial frictions in
China. Using a growth model, Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011) show that during
an economic transition high-productivity, non-state-owned firms outgrow low-productivity,
state-owned firms if entrepreneurs have high enough saving. At the same time, the more
financially integrated SOE sector shrinks, forcing domestic saving to be invested abroad,
leading to a foreign surplus. Wang, Wen, and Xu (2012) use two types of capital, financial
and fixed capital, to explain two-way flows. In their model, underdeveloped financial market
in China offer a high rate of returns to fixed capital but low rates of return to financial capital,
relative to the US. As a result, households save abroad and FDI flows in. Most work uses
either aggregate data or ignores firms’ financing patterns. By comparison, our paper uses the
debt financing features observed in the Chinese firm-level data to identify financial frictions
and focuses on their consequences for firms. We quantify the saving and the co-movement
across firms of saving and investment, which can be explained by these frictions.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents key empirical findings
from our sample of Chinese firms, in terms of debt financing, interest rates, growth, and
MPK. Section 3 introduces the model. Section 4 contains the quantitative analysis. Section 5
concludes.


2     Data
The empirical findings in this paper are based on rich firm-level data, an annual census of
enterprises collected by the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics between 1998 and 2007.
The dataset includes all state-owned firms and non state-owned firms with sales over 5 million


                                                 6
RMB (about 600,000 US dollars) in the manufacturing sector. It contains all information in
the balance sheet, profit and loss statement, and cash flow statement. We restrict our sample
to firms with positive assets, non-negative total debt, and positive sales, yielding 125,861
firms in 1998 and 306,299 firms in 2007.
    In the following analysis, we focus on state-owned enterprises (henceforth SOEs) and
privately owned manufacturing firms (henceforth POEs), since they are more likely to be
impacted by the underdeveloped financial markets and distorted financial allocations in China,
while foreign-owned firms, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan owned firms are less likely to
be affected by local financial conditions. We use information on registration type to classify
SOEs and POEs. SOEs include solely state funded, state joint ownership, and state and
collective joint ownership. In the appendix, we also show results with the least restrictive
definition of SOE, which includes all the firms with positive state assets as well as collective
enterprises. POEs include sole private enterprises, private partnership enterprises, private
limited liability companies, and private shareholding corporations. In our sample, 29 percent
of the firms in 1998 and 2.2 percent in 2007 are strictly defined SOEs, and 8 percent in 1998
and 54 percent in 2007 are POEs.
    We first describe overall patterns for firms’ assets, leverage, interest rates, growth, and
the marginal product of capital. Nominal values are deflated using the GDP deflator and
assets are measured by the book value of total assets. To measure the extent of a firm’s
debt financing, we use both leverage and the interest rate. Leverage is defined as the ratio of
total debt to total assets, with total debt including short-term and long-term debt as well as
short-term credit from suppliers. The firm-level interest rate is the ratio of interest payments
to total debt. Firm growth is measured by the growth rate of value added. We use value
added and firms’ fixed assets to compute the marginal product of capital, which is affected
by the capital intensity in each industry. We focus on firms’ relative MPK and normalize
each firm’s value added to the capital ratio by the  mean
                                                             within each industry. Specifically,
                                             
                                          Yij         Yj
the relative MPK is calculated as log Kij − log Kj for a firm i in industry j.
    Table 1 reports descriptive statistics, the mean and standard deviation of assets, value
added, leverage, interest rates and growth rate for SOE and POE over time. Assets and value
added are measured in terms of million RMB. SOE have much more assets than POEs on
average. Both asset distributions are highly skewed, as the mean asset levels are much larger
than the median. In terms of debt financing, SOEs have higher leverage, and they pay much
lower interest rates than POEs. SOEs hold much more assets and have similar median value
added, and its distribution is more dispersed than that for POEs’. POEs also grow faster,
more than twice the rate of SOEs.
    Do firms of different sizes finance their projects differently? Figure 1 shows the relation


                                               7
                                Table 1: Statistics SOE vs POE

                                                         Year 1999                           Year 2007
                                                SOE                  POE              SOE                POE
  Asset                   Mean                   143                  17               623                42
                                               (1143)                (33)            (2911)              (174)
                          Median                 23                    8               74                 15
  Value added             Mean                  0.21                 0.07             1.26               0.19
                                                (1.6)             (0.127)             (5.88)             (0.53)
                          Median                0.03                 0.03             0.18               0.08
  Leverage                Mean                  0.81                 0.63             0.72               0.56
                                                (0.40)               (0.28)           (0.42)             (0.27)
                          Median                0.78                 0.64             0.67               0.58
  Interest rate           Mean                  0.03                 0.08             0.03               0.09
                                                (0.33)               (0.28)           (0.13)             (0.69)
                          Median                0.02                 0.04             0.01               0.03
  Growth rate             Mean                  -0.01                0.16             0.12               0.23
                                                (0.71)               (0.62)           (0.59)             (0.56)
                          Median                0.03                 0.18             0.12               0.22

Notes: The table reports the descriptive statistics of assets, value added, leverage, interest rates, and growth
rate for privately owned enterprises (POEs) and State-owned enterprises (SOEs) over time. Assets and value
added are in terms of million RMB. Interest rate is constructed using interest payment over debt. Numbers
in bracket are the standard deviations.




                                                         8
between leverage and interest rate with assets in Year 2006, and other years demonstrate
similar patterns. Figure 1(a) depicts the mean leverage for different asset levels. The x-axis
in the figure is the asset percentile of the SOEs and POEs in 2006, and on the y-axis, we plot
mean leverage. On average, SOEs have higher leverage. Among POEs, leverage increases
with firms assets. Figure 1(b) shows the relation between firms’ interest rate and asset. On
average, SOEs have lower interest rates. Among POEs, firms’ interest rate decreases with
their assets.

                              Leverage vs Asset                                                   Interest rate vs Asset
         1.2




                                                                                .2
                                                                                .15
         1




                                                                      Interest Rate
    leverage
       .8




                                                                            .1  .05
         .6




                                                           SOE                                                             SOE
                                                           POE                                                             POE
         .4




                                                                                0


                  0          5                   10          15                       0            5                 10      15
                                       lnasset                                                            lnasset



                       (a) Leverage and Assets                                            (b) Interest Rate and Assets

                                 Figure 1: Firm Size and Debt Financing


                             Growth rate vs Asset                                                  LogMPK vs Asset
         .4




                                                                                2
         .2




                                                                                1
    Growth Rate




                                                                      log MPK
         0




                                                                                0
         -.2




                                                           SOE                                                             SOE
                                                                                -1




                                                           POE                                                             POE
         -.4




                  0                5                  10                              0            5                 10      15
                                       lnasset                                                            lnasset



                      (a) Growth Rate vs Assets                                               (b) MPK vs Assets

                                  Figure 2: Firm Size, Growth, and MPK

    Figure 2 shows the relation between growth rate and MPK with assets in Year 2006.
Figure 2(a) illustrates the mean growth rate with different asset levels. As is well documented
in the literature, small firms grow faster, and POEs have higher growth rates than SOEs.
Figure 2(b) depicts the relation between the marginal product of capital and asset levels.
SOEs have lower MPK. Among POEs, MPK has large dispersion and decreases with assets.

                                                                  9
    To study these patterns systematically, we regress the variables of interest on firms’ asset
levels and an interaction of ownership and assets, controlling for industry and year fixed
effects. Table 2 reports the regression results, with leverage, interest rate, growth and MPK
in turn as the dependent variable. The table shows that leverage ratios are significantly lower
for POEs, that interest rates are significantly higher for POEs compared to SOEs, and that
among POEs, smaller firms have a lower leverage, pay higher interest rates, experience faster
growth, and operate with a higher MPK. Although there are sizable changes take place over
time, for example the dramatic contraction of SOEs from 1998 to 2007 due to the SOE reform,
the patterns we described above are consistently observed over time (see the data appendix).

                 Table 2: Regressions on Firm Ownership and Asset

                               (1)                  (2)                     (3)                     (4)
 VARIABLES                 Leverage            Interest Rate            Growth Rate              log MPK
 Private                   -0.358***             0.134***                0.354***                1.545***
                            (-19.10)              (13.95)                 (29.45)                 (28.43)
  Private*lnasset         0.0312***              -0.0203***              -0.0419***             -0.149***
                           (11.21)                 (-12.33)                (-19.81)              (-15.88)
  lnasset                 -0.0107***            -0.00343***               0.0142***             -0.211***
                            (-4.320)              (-6.681)                 (8.267)               (-25.27)
  Constant                 0.838***              0.0576***               -0.0570***             -0.859***
                            (49.17)               (14.39)                  (-4.413)              (-17.12)

 Observations               859,619                587,621                 562,938                859,619
 R-squared                   0.089                  0.012                   0.022                  0.211
 Year FE                      Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
 Industry FE                  Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes

 Notes: This table reports the regression results. The estimation sample includes all state-owned firms
and privately owned firms in the manufacturing sector from 1998 to 2007 with sales over 5 million RMB,
non-negative total debt, and positive assets. The dependent variables from columns 1 to 4 are leverage,
interest rate, growth rate, and MPK, respectively. The explanatory variables include firm asset, a dummy
variable which indicates firm ownership, and the interaction of ownership and assets. T-statistics reported in
parentheses are calculated using robust asymptotic standard errors clustered at the four-digit industry level.
All specifications control for both industry and year fixed effects. ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗p < 0.1.


   Note that the observed firm financing patterns are not easily reconciled with models with
exogenous borrowing constraints, for example collateral constraints, which generate negative
correlation between firm size and leverage and fail to generate firm-specific interest rates.
This calls for a model with endogenous borrowing constraints.
   What type of financial frictions can generate these patterns and are realistic in China?
In our setting, firms can default, and banks provide debt schedules, taking into account

                                                     10
firms’ default risk and fixed credit cost. The endogenous borrowing constraints model can
explain the financing patterns across Chinese firms, and it also reflects the realistic financial
frictions in China. Privately owned firms are more productive, but the state-owned banks
have concerns that these firms can run away with their debt. The fixed credit cost captures
banks’ overhead cost and also the cost of obtaining necessary information for each deal. The
model generates endogenous borrowing limits depending on firms’ productivity, assets, and
debt, as in reality banks consider these when providing loans.
    How do financial frictions affect the capital allocation, hence the TFP? In addition to
calculating the TFP loss from our estimated model with financial frictions, we show the
distribution of MPK and the correlation between firms’ MPK and productivity in our model.
In general, both the dispersion of M P K and the covariance of z and M P K matter. Consider a
continuum of heterogeneous firms, with production function yi = zi1−α kiα . From the definition
                       1            1
of M P K,    ki = (α) 1−α zi M P Kiα−1 . We can therefore define TFP as
                                                            α
                                                    α−1
                                                R
                                   Y     i zi M P Ki    di
                             TFP = α = R
                                                    1
                                                          α .                                (1)
                                  K                α−1
                                        i zi M P Ki    di

In efficient allocations, the marginal product of capital is equalized across firms, M P Ki =
M P Kj . The TFP would then be given by T F P e = ( i zi di )1−α . We can define the TFP loss
                                                           R

by log(T F P e ) − log(T F P ).
    If zi and M P Ki are jointly log-normally distributed, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) show that
                      α
the TFP loss = 12 1−α      var(logM P Ki ), which implies that the loss only depends on dispersion
of M P K. But in general, the covariance of z and M P K also matters, which can be seen
from Equation (1). For example, suppose MPK is Pareto distributed with parameter µ, and
z = M P K ρ , so the correlation between z and M P K depends on ρ. In this case, the TFP loss
               α
         µ−ρ− α−1
is (µ−ρ)1−α µ−ρ−   1    α . Figure 3 depicts the TFP loss for different µ and ρ values. The TFP
           (      α−1 )
loss increases with the variance in MPK. Furthermore, given the same dispersion in MPK,
the TFP loss varies with the MPK-z correlation: a high correlation, i.e. more productive
firms have higher MPK and lead to large losses, since larger z matters more for total output.
    Meanwhile, the observed capital misallocation could also be due to other distortions. We
therefore ask to what extent financial frictions disciplined by firm financing patterns can
explain the saving and capital misallocation in China. In the next section, we construct
a model that replicates firms’ debt financing patterns, and then we estimate the model to
match the financing patterns, dynamics, and distribution of sales within the firm-level data,
and use those parameters to quantify firm saving, investment, capital misallocation, and the
TFP loss generated by the frictions.


                                               11
    Figure 3: TFP Loss with different correlation between z and MPK


3     The Model
We consider a small open economy with a continuum of firms. Financial markets are imperfect
in that firms can only borrow state-uncontingent bonds. Firms can default on their debt,
albeit subject to certain drawbacks. Banks offer firm-specific debt contracts that compensate
for default risk and a fixed cost of lending, as in Arellano, Bai, and Zhang (2012).
    Firms produce with a decreasing return to scale technology using capital k as input. The
output of firm i is given by yit = zit1−α kitα , where α captures both the capital share and the
return to scale, and zit is a shock on the measured total factor productivity (TFP).
    Firms use internal funds and external borrowings to finance the dividend payout, invest-
ment, and existing debt liabilities. The goal of firms is to maximize the life-time present
value of dividends,
                                           ∞
                                                 (β(1 − η))t xit
                                           X
                                      E0
                                           t=0

where β is the discount factor and η the exogenous exit rate. Firms have the option to default
over their debt. If in default, firms’ debt is being written off. Defaulting firms continue
operating with some productivity loss but are denied access to international financial markets.
    New firms enter with probability γ. A firm entering at period t starts with a productivity
zte and borrows bet+1 to finance initial size kt+1
                                                e
                                                   . In the second period after entry, the new
                                                             e
entrant becomes an incumbent. It will use the capital kt+1       to produce and repay bet+1 . New
entrants’ productivity in the second period follows the same process as that of incumbents.
    At period t, after the realization of the TFP shock zt , a non-defaulting incumbent produces
and uses its internal funds and external borrowings bt+1 to finance its new capital purchase
kt+1 , capital adjustment cost Φ(kt , kt+1 ), and dividend payout xt . Given that the firm may

                                                   12
default in the future, the borrowing price qt reflects the firm’s future default rate and depends
on current productivity zt , new capital stock for the next period kt+1 , and the borrowing bt+1 .
Intuitively, high, persistent TFP shock zt implies that the future repayment set is large, and
large borrowings imply higher default probability. We assume the adjustment cost takes the
quadratic specification
                                                                     !2
                                             φ    kt+1 − (1 − δ)kt
                             Φ(kt , kt+1 ) =                              kt .                    (2)
                                             2           kt

The firm’s dividend payout is given by

           xt = zt1−α ktα + (1 − δ)kt − bt + qt (zt , kt+1 , bt+1 )bt+1 − kt+1 − Φ(kt , kt+1 ).   (3)

There is limited liability and thus
                                                 xt ≥ 0.                                          (4)

   Defaulting firms can only use their internal funds to pay out dividends and finance new
investments. They are subject to a productivity loss λ and to the capital adjustment cost.
Dividends are given by

                      xt = (1 − λ)zt1−α ktα + (1 − δ)kt − kt+1 − Φ(kt , kt+1 ).                   (5)

Recursive problem A non-defaulting firm’s state variables include its productivity z,
current capital k, and current bond holding b. Upon observing its productivity shock, a
firm in state (z, k, b) decides whether to default by comparing the default value V d with the
repayment value V c ,
                             V (z, k, b) = max{V c (z, k, b), V d (z, k)}.                 (6)

When V c (z, k, b) ≥ V d (z, k), the firm repays its debt, d(z, k, b) = 0. Otherwise, the firm
defaults with d(z, k, b) = 1.
   If it repays, the firm chooses its investment and new borrowings. In particular, it makes a
decision on the next period’s capital k 0 , dividend payout x, and a loan b0 to maximize the
sum of the current dividend and discounted future values

                        V c (z, k, b) = max
                                         0 0
                                             x + β(1 − η)EV (z 0 , k 0 , b0 )                     (7)
                                        x,k ,b


subject to the budget constraint (3) and the non-negative dividend condition (4). Note the
adjustment cost specified in (2).
   If it defaults and continue to produce, the firm gets its debt written off but remains in


                                                   13
financial autarky forever. In this case, the firm chooses dividends and new investments to
maximizes its value,

                         V d (z, k) = max
                                        0
                                          x + β(1 − η)EV d (z 0 , k 0 )                     (8)
                                            x,k


subject to the budget constraint after default (5) and the non-negative dividend condition
(4). Note that the non-negative dividend condition for sure can be satisfied in this case, since
firms can always choose kt+1 = (1 − δ)kt and pays zero adjustment cost under the adjustment
cost specification (2).
    According to a survey by Wagle (2000), around 70 percent of firms reported that paperwork
and relationships with banks were major obstacles to their application for a formal bank loan.
These overhead costs of the application process make it especially hard for smaller firms to
obtain the access to external financing. Although China has made significant progress in
reducing government intervention in the banking sector, there is still ample evidence that local
governments continue to encourage banks to lend to state-owned banks by extending explicit
or implicit government guarantees. With these guarantees, a bad loan to a state-owned
enterprise is not really considered a bad loan for the banks, since the government will almost
surely bail out the firm. By contrast, absent these government guarantees, privately owned
enterprises are in general charged a much higher interest rate when they borrow from the
banks. These are consistent with our empirical findings in Section 2. To shed light on the
key mechanisms that underlie these stylized facts, we model the Chinese bank lending in the
following way.
    We assume that banks are competitive and risk neutral. They have to pay a fixed credit
cost ξ for every loan they issue. The fixed cost captures banks’ overhead cost and also the
cost of obtaining necessary information, building connection, or preparing the paperwork, for
each deal. It is easy to see that, with a fixed cost and everything else constant, the effective
interest rate is lower for larger loans. When b0 > 0, the bond price schedule incorporates both
the fixed cost and the future default probabilities,

                                                    1
                         q(z, k 0 , b0 )b0 + ξ =       E[1 − d (z 0 , k 0 , b0 )]b0         (9)
                                                   1+r

When firms save b0 ≤ 0, by making deposits b0 ≤ 0, banks pay the risk-free rate, q = 1/(1 + r).
We intentionally keep the model as parsimonious as possible for tractability and clarity of the
quantitative results. The key mechanism of the model, however, is likely to carry over to an
alternative model with additional realistic features.


Definition 1. A recursive equilibrium consists of decision rules, the value functions of firms,

                                                     14
and the bond price schedule such that

  1. Given the bond price schedule, the decision rules and value functions solve the firm’s
     problem.

  2. Given the decision rules and a risk-free rate, the bond price schedule satisfies (9) and
     banks break even in expected value.

     To understand how firms finance their investment when facing an endogenous borrowing
limit, we plot the bond price schedule and the leverage choices in Figure 4 using the parameters
estimated in the next section. Nonetheless, the features of the bond price schedule and leverage
choices are quite generic. The left panel displays the price schedule as a function of debt
choice, under the median productivity shock and the capital and debt with the largest mass
in the invariant distribution. We scale the debt choice by the firm’s average capital. When
the chosen debt level is less than zero, the firm saves at the risk-free rate. For small loans,
the fixed credit cost reduces the bond price and increases the effective interest rate. For high
enough debt levels, the bond price decreases with the loan size, due to the increase in default
risk. When debt is above 95 percent of the asset, the firm always defaults and the bond price
is flat at zero. In summary, small and large loans are more expensive due to either the fixed
credit cost or the high risk of default.

        1                                                                 1.5



       0.8

                                                                           1
                                                                                Median z
       0.6
                                                                  b'/k'




       0.4
                                                                          0.5
                                                                                  Low z
       0.2



        0                                                                  0
             -0.2   0   0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8   1   1.2                   0.5         1         1.5         2   2.5   3
                              Debt Choice (b')                                                   Current Capital (k)

                    (a) Bond Price Schedule                                               (b) Leverage Choice

                    Figure 4: Bond Price Schedule and Leverage Choice

    The right panel of Figure 4 depicts the choice of leverage, as a function of current capital
k for two firms: one with a median level of productivity and one with a low productivity.
Current debt levels have the largest mass in the invariant distribution of each productivity
type. All variables are normalized by each firm’s output. There are two prominent features.
First, for the median-productivity firm, when capital increases, its leverage (b0 /k 0 ) decreases.
This is due to the decreasing return to scale; firms with higher capital stock have lower returns

                                                                 15
and thus have less incentive to borrow to finance investment. Second, for the firm of a low
productivity, leverage first increases and then decreases with capital. The reason is because
the fixed credit cost is relatively large for such firms, increasing the effective interest rate and
dampening the incentive to borrow and invest. When the current capital level is high, the
fixed cost effect becomes negligible, and the capital return effect dominates. Firms with high
productivity tend to have higher leverage, since their capital returns are higher. Hence, the
differential relationship between size (capital) and leverage in the decision rules for different
firms helps us identify the magnitude of the fixed credit cost.


4       Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we present the quantitative analysis of the model. In Section 4.1, we estimate
the shock process and key financial parameters using both cross-sectional and time-series data
of sales distribution and financing patterns. Section 4.2 compares out-of-sample statistics in
the model, with data moments to quantify the impact of financial frictions for firm saving,
investment, and capital misallocation. In Section 4.3, we decompose the forces that distort
capital allocations across firms: financial frictions versus capital adjusting friction. Lastly,
Section 4.4 introduces state-owned firms into the model and compute the overall TFP losses.


4.1     Estimation
We assume that the TFP shock of firms has three components: a constant common growth
rate g, a permanent component A, and an idiosyncratic component ν. Specifically, firm i’s
TFP shock at period t is given by zit = (1 + g)t Ai νit . The permanent component follows a
Pareto distribution4 with a shape parameter µ, i.e.

                                      Pr(Ai ≤ a) = 1 − a−µ .                                    (10)

The idiosyncratic component ν follows an AR(1) process:

                                   log(νit ) = ρ log(νit−1 ) + σεit ,                           (11)

where εit follows the standard normal distribution N (0, 1).
    To compute the model, we discretize the permanent component A into seven points (A1 ,
A2 , ..., A6 , A7 ). We normalize A1 as 1 and put equal spaces between A1 to A6 . We then

    4
    Comparing estimates with different processes, we find that a permanent Pareto distribution and an
AR(1) idiosyncratic shocks combined with financial shocks best fit the data.

                                                  16
generate the respective probabilities of {π1 , π2 , ..., π6 , π7 } consistent with (10). Hence there
are three parameters to be determined for the permanent component: {A6 , A7 , µ}.5 We follow
Tauchen and Hussey (1991) to discretize the idiosyncratic shock ν.
    We assume a quadratic capital adjustment cost as in Equation (2). In the model, if a
firm holds debt b ≥ 0, we define the asset of the firm as its capital k and the leverage as b/k.
Otherwise if b < 0, the asset is k − b and the leverage is zero. The interest rate of the firm
is 1/q(z, k 0 (z, k, b), b0 (z, k, b)) where k 0 (z, k, b) and b0 (z, k, b) are the equilibrium capital and
debt choices, respectively. The value added is given by z 1−α k α . We solve the model using
value function iteration and compute the invariant distribution of firms.
    Table 3 presents two sets of parameters. The first set presents the chosen parameters
independent of our model. The second set includes the parameters estimated jointly with the
simulated method of moments (SMM), which chooses model parameters by matching the
moments from a simulated panel of firms to their data counterparts. All data moments are
the average of those between 1998 and 2007.
    The first set of parameters is determined with external information and includes {r, δ,
g, α}. Specifically, we pick the annual risk-free rate r = 5% to match the real interest rate
of the U.S during 1998 and 2007, as published by IMF. The capital depreciation rate δ is
chosen to be ten percent annually. The annual growth rate g is 7%, consistent with China’s
average annual GDP growth rate. We choose a value of 0.4 for the production parameter α
to capture both capital share and return to scale.
    The second set consists of 13 parameters, discount factor β, fixed financing cost ξ,
productivity loss after default λ, capital adjustment cost φ, persistence of idiosyncratic shock
ρ, volatility of idiosyncratic shock σ, the Pareto parameters µ, A6 , A7 , the parameters related
to entrants ze , ke , be , and the growth rate of number of firms γ. All of these parameters
are estimated jointly to match firm financing pattern, sale distribution, and relative size of
entrants, totaling 13 moments in total.
    Panel B of Table 3 reports the simulated and actual moments. The model tightly matches
the data moments. The success of SMM estimation depends on model identification, which
requires that the chosen moments be sensitive to variations in the structural parameters. We
now rationalize these moments.
    We consider three moments related to firms’ financing patterns: average leverage, the
leverage-asset slope, and the interest-asset slope. To obtain these two slopes, we first classify
firms into 100 bins according to their assets. We then calculate the average leverage and
interest rates for each asset bin. We run the regressions of leverage or interest rate on asset

   5
     We conduct sensitivity analysis to make sure our quantitative results are robust to the number of
discretized points for the Pareto distribution.

                                                   17
bins. We call the coefficient in the leverage regression as the leverage-asset slope and the one
in the interest rate regression as the interest-asset slope. In our dataset, the average leverage
is 0.58, the leverage-asset slope is 0.17, and the interest-asset slope is -0.08. This implies that
small firms use less debt financing but face a higher interest rate than large firms.
    The discount factor β, credit fixed cost ξ, and default cost λ are mostly relevant for a
firm’s leverage decision. The more impatient the firm, the higher the leverage it will employ.
The fixed credit cost ξ affects both mean leverage and the leverage-asset slope. A lower ξ
implies a lower borrowing cost and thus a higher repayment capacity, which in turn raises
leverage. Moreover, ξ affects firms differently. The fixed credit cost to sales is higher for small
firms than for large firms. Facing the high borrowing cost, small firms choose to use less debt
financing, which leads to a positive leverage-asset slope. The fixed credit cost also governs
the interest-asset slope. A high credit cost leads to a high effective interest rate, particularly
for small firms, and a negative interest-asset slope.
    The productivity process parameters are mostly related to a firm’s distribution in terms
of value added. We therefore target the distribution, autocorrelation of value added, and the
standard deviation of growth rate of value added. For the value-added distribution, we target
the fractions of value added in the top 5, 10, and 20 percentiles. The distribution is skewed
in that the top five percentile of firms accounts for about 34% of the total value added. The
value-added distribution directly disciplines the permanent Pareto parameters µ, A6 , and
A7 . These parameters would also indirectly change all other moments through their impacts
on the firms’ size distribution. The smaller the shape parameter and the higher the A7 , the
fatter the right tail of firm size and the higher the concentration of market share. Although
the leverage-asset slope within each type of permanent productivity might only be slightly
positive or even negative, with enough heterogeneity in permanent components, the aggregate
leverage-asset schedule can be upward-sloping as the fixed credit cost matters more for low A
firms.
    The cross-sectional autocorrelation of value-added is about 0.79, and the standard deviation
of value-added growth is 0.4. The capital adjustment cost affects how responsive a firm’s
investment to shocks are. We thus consider the following regression of capital growth rate:

                       log kt+1,i − log kt,i = γi + ψ log yt,i + α0 Xt,i + t,i .             (12)

where yt,i and kt,i denotes firm i’s value added and asset at period t, respectively. Control
variable X includes log of assets and net worth. The estimated regression coefficient ψ is 0.11.
    The productivity process parameters ρ and σ are most closely related to the persistence
of value added and standard deviation of value-added growth. Capital adjustment cost also


                                                  18
affects the volatility of the firms’ value-added growth. The higher the adjustment cost, the
smaller incentive to adjust capital, and the lower the volatility of value-added growth. Both
financial frictions and capital adjustment cost affect ψ, the regression coefficient of capital
growth on value added.
    We also match the relative size of entrants to incumbents in terms of assets, value added,
and leverage. In the data, entrants are smaller than incumbents, about 9% smaller in terms
of value added, and 31% smaller in terms of asset. Their leverage is about 10% lower than
than of the incumbent. We also match the fraction of entrants in our dataset, 20 percent on
average.
    Overall, the model closely matches the distribution of firms in terms of leverage, interest
rates, and sales distribution: see Figures 5 and 6. In both the model and the data, small firms
have lower leverage and face higher interest rates than larger firms. Value-added distribution
is skewed and concentrated in large firms.
    The estimated fixed credit cost is 0.01, about 1.3 percentage of aggregate output. After
default, the productivity loss λ is 3%. The persistence parameter ρ is 0.72, which is within
the range of values estimated in the literature. Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008)
estimate the persistence of traditional TFP about 0.8 using the U.S. Census of Manufactures
data. The value is 0.59 in Gopinath, Kalemli-Özcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez
(2017) for European firms, and 0.25 in Midrigan and Xu (2013) for Korean firms.
    Note that we estimate the productivity parameters jointly with other parameters. A
common practice in the literature, for example Wooldridge (2009), is to estimate firms’
measured total factor productivity directly from data using firms’ value added and inputs.
We do not follow that approach here for two reasons. First, according to our model, firms’
revenues, capital, and debt are jointly affected by the productivity process, costly capital
adjustment, and most importantly financial frictions. Hence, it’s not straightforward to
apply the standard practice. Second, our panel data is very short. The estimated persistence
parameter would be biased.
    As is discussed in the literature (see Moll (2014) and Midrigan and Xu (2013) among
others), the productivity process is important on the aggregate implications of financial
frictions. Our estimation strategy therefore targets the cross-section sales distribution,
autocorrelation of value added, and the volatility of value-added growth to greatly pin down
the parameters in the productivity processes. Furthermore, Table 4 shows the out-of-sample
moments of the transition matrix of value added in the model and the data. The estimated
model also captures the transition well. A firm whose valued added is in the top five percentile
has about 70% of probability remaining in this percentile, both in the model and in the data.
In the data, firms in the lower 50th percentiles are also quite persistent, about 80% in the


                                              19
                  Table 3: Model Parameters and Target Moments
                                       A. Parameter Estimates
 Parameter                                 Value             Identification
                                         External Estimation
 Production parameter                      α = 0.4           Capital share and return to scale
 Depreciation rate                         δ = 0.1           Standard
 Risk free rate                            r = 0.05          U.S. real interest rate
 Annual growth rate                        g = 0.07          China annual growth rate
                                         Internal Estimation
 Discount factor                           β = 0.96          Mean leverage
 Fixed credit cost                         ξ = 0.01          Leverage-asset slope
 Productivity loss after default           λ = 0.03          Interest-asset slope
 Capital adjustment cost                   φ = 1.03          Capital growth-output regression
 Shock standard deviation                  σ = 0.81          Std (value-added growth)
 Shock persistence                         ρ = 0.72          Autocorrelation of value-added
 Pareto shape parameter                    µ = 1.32          Share of value added of top-5%
 Discretized A6                            A6 = 0.81         Share of value added of top-10%
 Discretized A7                            A7 = 0.99         Share of value added of top-20%
 Entrant productivity                      ze = 0.20         Relative output of entrants
 Entrant capital                           ke = 0.33         Relative asset of entrants
 Entrant debt                              be = 0.15         Relative leverage of entrants
 New entrant rate                          γ = 0.19          Growth rate of number of firms

                                               B. Moments
 Target Moments                                                           Data             Model
 Average leverage                                                         0.58              0.55
 Leverage-asset slope                                                      0.17              0.20
 Interest-asset slope                                                     -0.08             -0.08
 Standard deviation of value-added growth                                  0.40              0.48
 Serial correlation of value added                                         0.79              0.85
 Capital growth-output coefficient                                         0.11              0.18

 Distribution of value added
 Frac. of value added in the top 5 Percentiles                             0.34             0.37
 Frac. of value added in the top 10 Percentiles                            0.46             0.48
 Frac. of value added in the top 20 Percentiles                            0.61             0.62

 Entrant (%)
 Relative value added                                                      -9.3              -9.3
 Relative asset                                                            -31               -20
 Relative leverage                                                         -10               -21
 Growth rate of number of firms (%)                                         20                20
Notes: Calculations are based a sample of Chinese firms from 1998 to 2007 at annual frequency. The estimation
is done with SMM, which chooses model parameters by matching the moments from a simulated panel of
firms to the corresponding moments from the data. Panel A reports the estimated parameters, Panel B
reports the simulated and actual moments.             20
                           Leverage vs Asset POE                                                                           Interest Rate vs Asset POE
          .7




                                                                                                .3
          .6




                                                                                                     .2
             .5




                                                                                        Interest rate
     Leverage
      .4




                                                                                                .1
          .3
          .2




                                                                                                0
                  0   .2        .4             .6                .8          1                            0           .2          .4             .6     .8   1
                                 Asset quantiles                                                                                   Asset quantiles

                                 model                  data                                                                       model       data



                           (a) Leverage                                                                                    (b) Interest Rate

                           Figure 5: Leverage, Interest Rate, and Asset

Notes: Panels (a) and Panel (b) depict the mean leverage ratio and mean interest rate over 50 asset quantiles
respectively. The firm leverage is calculated as the ratio of total debt to total assets. The firm-level interest
rate is the ratio of interest payments to total debt.




                                                                      Share of sales by quantiles
                                             .4    .3
                                    Share of Sales
                                         .2  .1
                                             0




                                                        0       .2           .4             .6                       .8           1
                                                                              Asset quantiles

                                                                              model                           data

                                                            Figure 6: Sale Distribution

Notes: This figure depicts the sale distribution in the data and in the model respectively. For each asset
quantile, we calculate the fraction of sales produced by firms in that quantile.




                                                                                 21
Table 4: Non-Targeted Transition matrix of value added, data and model

 Data                Top 5% at t+1             5-10          10-20         20-50          50-100
 Top 5% at t              0.69                 0.19           0.07          0.04           0.01
 5-10                     0.16                 0.39           0.32          0.11           0.03
 10-20                    0.04                 0.12           0.43          0.35           0.06
 20-50                    0.01                 0.02           0.10          0.60           0.27
 50-100                   0.00                 0.00           0.02          0.15           0.82

 Model               Top 5% at t+1             5-10          10-20         20-50          50-100
 Top 5% at t              0.71                 0.14           0.06         0.007           0.08
 5-10                     0.23                 0.28           0.31          0.07           0.12
 10-20                    0.03                 0.22           0.38          0.28           0.10
 20-50                    0.00                 0.03           0.15          0.54           0.29
 50-100                     0                    0            0.00          0.21           0.79
Notes: This table reports the transition matrix of value added in the model and the data. Each entry reports
the probability of a firm on each row quantile to transit to each column quantile.


same percentile next period, as is observed similarly in the model. Both the model and the
data have the feature that firms in the middle have much larger mobilities.


4.2     Model Implications over Capital Misallocation and Saving
We now answer the following question: to what extent is the model with financial frictions
able to account for capital misallocation, as measured by the variation in MPK across firms
and firm-saving and investment behavior?
    The upper panel of Table 5 shows the out-of-sample moments of cross-sectional volatilities
of asset, leverage, and MPK in the data and model. In the data, the standard deviation of
asset is 1.14, of leverage is 0.28, and of MPK is 1.21. The model accounts for about 60% of
the observed variations of asset and leverage and 50% of MPK variation. The model implied
TFP loss is around 11.57% in which the efficient TFP is calculated with the productivity
distribution of the incumbent firms in the benchmark, assuming no risk of capital accumulation
and a constant capital return of r + δ. TFP loss in China from misallocation is about 30-50%
in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), hence, our model with endogenous financial frictions explains
about one third of the total misallocation of their estimates. Note that the benchmark model
only includes privately owned firms; the TFP losses are greater when we incorporate SOEs in
Section 4.4.
    We also examined which types of firms are more distorted and have higher MPK by
studying the cross-sectional correlations of MPK with lagged observed variables of asset,


                                                      22
leverage, and value added. In the data, firms with low assets, low leverage, and high value
added face higher MPK. The model produces a similar pattern except the MPK and asset
relationship. Specifically, the MPK-asset correlation is close to zero in the model, but -0.31 in
the data. The correlation between MPK and value added is 0.38 in the model and 0.11 in the
data. The MPK-leverage correlation is -0.05 in the model, close to that in the data, -0.01.
    Further statistics that shed light on financial friction include the correlation of saving rate
and investment rate. Without financial frictions, the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds. Thus,
capital structure is irrelevant for firm value, and saving rate is not well defined. Financial
frictions increase a firm’s internal return and lead to a positive correlation between saving and
investment. We therefore explore this correlation in both our model and data. In the model,
firms either save with financial intermediaries or save in their own capital. Hence firms’ gross
saving is the difference between the value added and the sum of dividend payout and interest
payment, i.e. saving = z 1−α k α − x + (qb0 − b0 ), which also equals the sum of equity growth
and capital depreciation. Our saving in the data is constructed using the second method: i.e.
the sum of change in equity and capital depreciation. The data correlation of saving rate
and investment rate is 0.58 and the model correlation is 0.68, indicating a significant level of
financial frictions. Our model also closely matches the observed aggregate investment rate:
the ratio of aggregate investment to aggregate value added is 0.22 in the model versus 0.18 in
the data.
    We also study how a firm’s saving and investment co-move with its asset, value added,
and leverage across time. We run the regression of debt growth and capital growth on the
logged asset, leverage, and logged value added, controlling for industry and year effect in
both the model and the data. Table 6 presents the model and data regression coefficients.
All coefficients are significant, with p-values less than 0.01. Our model effectively matches
the sign and size of the observed regression coefficients. In both the data and model, large
firms reduce their debt and investment due to the decreasing return to scale; high leverage
firms reduce their debt. Across firms, firms with higher permanent productivity tend to have
higher leverage and also invest more, leading to a positive relation between leverage and
investment; controlling for capital and debt, firms with larger output increase their debt and
investment. In summary, our model successfully produces the observed cross-section and
within-firm patterns of saving and investment.




                                                23
                 Table 5: Across-Firm Saving, Investment, and MPK

                                                               Data          Model
                       Standard Deviations
                       Asset                                   1.14           0.70
                       Leverage                                0.28           0.17
                       MPK                                     1.21           0.59
                       TFP loss (%)                                          11.57

                       Cross-sectional correlations with M P Kt+1
                       Asset                             -0.31               0.02
                       Leverage                          -0.01               -0.05
                       Value added                        0.11               0.38

                       Saving and Investments
                       corr(saving, investment)                0.58           0.68
                       Investment rate                         0.18           0.22
Notes: The upper panel reports the out-of-sample moments of cross-section volatilties of asset, leverage, and
MPK in the model and data. The middle panel reports the cross-sectional correlation of asset, leverage, and
MPK with M P Kt+1 in the data and the model. The lower panel reports the statistics about saving and
investment in the data and the model.




                      Table 6: Within-Firm Saving and Investment

                                        Debt growth                Capital   growth
                  VARIABLES           Data      Model             Data         Model
                  Asset             -0.08*** -0.05***           -0.13***     -0.19***
                  Leverage          -0.71*** -0.28***           0.04***       0.11***
                  Value added        0.03*** 0.09***             0.07***      0.17***

Notes: This table reports the regression results of debt growth and capital growth on logged asset, leverage,
and logged value added controlling for industry and year effect in both the model and the data.




                                                     24
4.3    Decomposing Mechanism: Financial Frictions or Capital Ad-
       justing Friction
Our benchmark model has two types of frictions that distort a firm’s investment decision:
financial frictions and capital adjustment cost. Financial frictions include a fixed credit cost of
issuing debt and default risk from limited enforcement. The capital adjustment cost captures
both financial and technology constraints in augmenting or reducing capital. On the one hand,
capital adjustment cost is part of financial frictions, as it captures cost to sell used capital
as in (Cui (2014)). This cost is in particularly large in China, since it has less-developed
secondary markets for capital and less-developed stock market for merger and acquisition. On
the other hand, we can also view the capital adjustment cost as some technology restrictions:
it takes time and materials to install machines and build plants. Not taking a stand on the
intrinsic property of adjustment cost, we decompose two mechanisms, financial frictions and
capital adjustment cost, in preventing firms from choosing efficient capital: financial frictions
and capital adjusting frictions.
    We conduct two analyses. First, we rerun our benchmark model with zero capital
adjustment cost while keeping other parameters the same. We call this analysis the Only-
Financial model. Then, we shut down the financial frictions and compute a model with only
capital adjustment cost by solving recursively the following first-order condition for a firm
with (z, k):
                                        1   h                                         i
                    1 + Φ2 (k, k 0 ) =     E αz 01−α k 0α−1 + 1 − δ − Φ1 (k 0 , k 00 )        (13)
                                       1+r
where Φ1 and Φ2 denote the derivatives of the capital adjustment cost Φ over k and k 0 ,
respectively. The adjustment cost function is given by (2). We call this analysis the Only-
Adjustment model. In the latter analysis, none of the financial parameters matter, and we use
the same productivity parameters and capital adjustment cost φ as the benchmark model.
    Table 7 shows comparison between our benchmark model and the two comparative statics.
The capital adjustment cost does not significantly affect the average leverage in that the
only-financial-friction model has a leverage of 0.57 close to benchmark number. The capital
adjustment cost, however, affects firms differently in terms of leverage and interest. It
amplifies the effect of the fixed credit cost in the benchmark model. Without it, we need an
even higher fixed credit cost to generate a positive leverage-asset slope or a more negative
interest-asset slope. Capital adjustment cost also greatly matters for the firms’ investment
response to shocks. Without it, firms’ capital growth is quite responsive to the value added
with a coefficient of 1.21, about 7 times larger than the benchmark and the data. This also
demonstrates how we identify the capital adjustment cost. The firms’ value-added distribution
remains almost the same when the adjustment cost is set to zero. With only financial friction,

                                                25
Table 7: Decomposing Mechanism: Financial Friction versus Adjustment
Friction

 Moments                                      Benchmark         Only-Financial        Only-Adjustment
 Leverage                                        0.55                0.57                     -
 Leverage-asset slope                            0.20               -0.21                     -
 Interest-asset slope                           -0.08               -0.04                     -
 Capital growth-output coefficient               0.18                1.21                   0.16
 Std(value-added growth)                         0.48                0.50                   0.49
 Autocorr(value added)                           0.85                0.88                   0.87
 Share of VA in top 5 %                          0.37                0.39                   0.41
 Share of VA in top 10 %                         0.48                0.47                   0.59
 Share of VA in top 20 %                         0.62                0.60                   0.74

 Implications on distortion
 Investment rate                                  0.21                 0.33                    0.23
 Mean MPK                                          0.27                0.26                    0.16
 Std log(MPK)                                      0.58                0.53                    0.61
 TFP loss (%)                                     11.57                9.46                   13.03
Notes: This table shows the comparison between the benchmark model, and two alternative models: one has
only financial frictions, the other has only adjustment cost. To calculate the moments for the only-financial
model, we rerun our benchmark model with zero capital adjustment cost while keeping other parameters
the same. To calculate the moments for only-adjustment model, we shut down the financial frictions and
compute a model with only capital adjustment cost.




                                                     26
the firm investment rate is higher, 0.33 versus 0.21 in the benchmark. Firms are thus less
distorted. Nonetheless, financial friction alone generates sizable misallocation and TFP losses
in that the standard deviation of log MPK is 0.53 and TFP loss is 9.46%, compared to 0.58
and 11.57% in the benchmark.
    The model with only capital adjustment cost shows larger capital distortion than the
benchmark, see the last column of Table 7. Firms reluctantly increase their size in response
to positive productivity shock, and the regression coefficient ψ is only 0.16. Although the
average investment rate is higher and average capital return is close to r + δ, there are larger
variations in MPK across firms, 0.61, and thus higher TFP loss (13.03%) than the benchmark
case.
    To better understand the distortions across models, we also graph the heat maps for the
joint distribution of the expected MPK and productivity. In each subfigure of Figure 7, the
x-axis is the log productivity of firms and the y-axis is the log of expected MPK, demeaned
with the undistorted return of log(r + δ). The graphs depict the density of each combination
of MPK and productivity in the invariant distributions. The brighter the color, the larger
the density. In both the benchmark and the only-adjustment friction, larger productivity
firms face higher distortion due to higher MPK. With only financial frictions, small firms face
higher MPK due to the fixed credit cost.
    Overall, both financial friction and capital adjustment cost distort firms’ investment
decisions. Financial frictions generate higher marginal returns and tend to distort the
investment of less productive firms, while capital adjustment cost distorts more the investment
decision of more productive firms. Either friction alone produces a large TFP loss. Together,
they interact and lead to larger but less dispersed MPKs across firms, hence a smaller
misallocation among firms. The total TFP loss in the benchmark is in between those
generated by the two frictions alone.


4.4    Introducing SOE
So far we have focused on the privately owned firms and shown that financial frictions can
explain 50% of the dispersion of MPK and generate about 12% of TFP loss within privately
owned firms. Next we quantify the misallocation between POEs and SOEs. SOEs in China can
access financial resources easily; we therefore assume they do not face any financial frictions
and solve the model with only adjustment cost as in (13). We estimate SOE productivity
processes and capital adjustment cost to match the SOE distributions. The upper panel of
Table 8 shows the data and model moments for SOEs. The value added of SOEs is more
skewed than that of POEs, and the top 5 percentile of firms accounts for about 72% of the


                                              27
                                5
                                                                                            .07




                                4
                                                                                            .065
                                                                                            .06




                                3
                                                                                            .055
                                                                                            .05




                                  2
                                                                                            .045




                             logMPK




                                                                                                   den
                                                                                            .04
                                                                                            .035




                             1
                                                                                            .03
                                                                                            .025




                                0
                                                                                            .02
                                                                                            .015
                                                                                            .01
                                -1
                                                                                            .005
                                -2


                                           -3    -2         -1         0        1       2
                                                          logProductivity


                                                          (a) Benchmark
                                5
                                4




                                                                                            .07
                                                                                            .065
                                                                                            .06
                                3




                                                                                            .055
                                                                                            .05
                                  2
                             logMPK




                                                                                            .045




                                                                                                   den
                                                                                            .04
                                                                                            .035
                             1




                                                                                            .03
                                                                                            .025
                                0




                                                                                            .02
                                                                                            .015
                                                                                            .01
                                -1




                                                                                            .005
                                -2




                                      -4             -2         0           2           4
                                                          logProductivity


                                                 (b) Only-Financial Friction
                                5




                                                                                            .07
                                                                                            .065
                                4




                                                                                            .06
                                                                                            .055
                                3




                                                                                            .05
                                                                                            .045
                                  2




                                                                                            .04
                             logMPK




                                                                                                   den




                                                                                            .035
                                                                                            .03
                             1




                                                                                            .025
                                                                                            .02
                                0




                                                                                            .015
                                                                                            .01
                                -1




                                                                                            .005
                                -2




                                       -3       -2        -1         0      1       2
                                                          logProductivity


                                                (c) Only-Adjustment Friction
                   Figure 7: Distortion Comparison Across Models

Notes: This figure depicts the heat maps for the joint distribution of expected MPK and productivity for the
benchmark model, only-financial model, and only-adjustment model. In each subfigure, the x-axis is the log
productivity of firms and the y-axis is the log of expected MPK, demeaned with the undistorted return of
log(r + δ). The brighter color, the higher density of each combination of MPK and productivity.
                                                                    28
total SOE value added. In addition, SOEs are 40% less productive than POEs, which captures
other distortions within SOEs and between SOEs and POEs.
    To calculate the total TFP loss for all firms, we pool the firms from the benchmark model
and the calibrated SOEs. The share of SOEs is taken from the data, 20% average between
1999 and 2007. The overall TFP loss increases to 15%. Note that there are distortions within
SOEs, so adding a fraction of undistorted firms tends to reduce dispersion, but the dispersion
between POEs and SOEs increases the overall TFP loss. Table 8 also shows that the aggregate
TFP is 35% lower with the existence of SOEs, as SOEs are much less productive.

                    Table 8: Misallocation between POE and SOE

                Target Moments                              SOE-Data       SOE-Model
                Capital growth-output coefficient              0.18          0.14
                Std(value-added growth)                       0.54           0.54
                Autocorr(value added)                          0.92          0.92
                Share of VA in top 5%                          0.72          0.60
                Share of VA in top 10%                         0.82          0.81
                Share of VA in top 20%                         0.90          0.93
                                                            POE only       POE+SOE
                TFP loss(%)                                   11.57           15
                Aggregate TFP                                   1            0.65
Notes: We estimate the SOE model using SMM. The upper panel of table shows the data and model moments
for SOE. In the lower panel, we calculate the TFP losses and aggregate TFP for POE firms and for the whole
sample with both POEs and SOEs.




5     Conclusion
To what extent do financial frictions matter for Chinese firm saving and capital misallocation?
Most previous papers use either aggregate data or ignore firm-level financing patterns. Our
paper uses the debt financing features observed in the Chinese firm-level data to identify
financial frictions and focuses on their consequences for firms. Using a Chinese firm-level
dataset , we first present evidences on firm dynamics, financing decisions, and capital
misallocation. We find that SOEs have higher leverage, lower interest rates, and lower MPK.
Within POEs, small firms have lower leverage, face higher interest rates, and operate with
a higher marginal product of capital relative to large firms. These patterns are not easily
reconciled with exogenous borrowing constraints. We develop and estimate a heterogeneous-
firm model with financial frictions captured by endogenous default risk and a fixed cost of
issuing loans. Using the model, we examine firms’ financing pattern combined with other


                                                   29
salient features and find that endogenous borrowing constraints are essential to explain
firms’ financing in Chinese data. Despite previous literature’s success in matching the mean,
standard deviation, or correlation of certain financial or real variables, they largely fail in
matching the firm distribution. This could potentially lead to biased estimates in their
counterfactual experiments due to firms’ heterogeneous responses to the change of primitive
parameters. Our analysis is differentiated from previous literature by its consideration of
a more realistic set of shock processes and financing features, which both generate a richer
set of investment and financing predictions and enable our model to do a markedly better
job than previous models in matching the empirical firm distribution in sales, leverage, and
interest rate.
    Our estimated model can explain aggregate firm saving, the co-movement between saving
and investment, the co-movement between firms saving, investment and size, and around 50
percent of the dispersion in the marginal product of capital. Overall, our model generates a
12% TFP loss. Our work also implies that the observed high MPK of small firms cannot be
fully explained by financial frictions. Other sources of distortions, such as taxes, subsidies,
and labor market frictions seem to be important.6 It would be worthwhile to further explore
the contributions of other frictions to firm saving, misallocation, and TFP losses. Future
research along these lines should be fruitful.




   6
       Yang (2012) argues that these frictions could be important for high Chinese saving.

                                                      30
References
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and J. Zhang (2012): “Firm dynamics and financial development,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(6), 533–549.

Armenter, R., and V. Hnatkovska (2017): “Taxes and Capital Structure: Understanding
 Firms’ Savings,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 87, 13–33.

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2011): “A Unified Theory of Tobin’s q, Corporate
 Investment, Financing, and Risk Management,” Journal of Finance, 66(5), 1545–1578.

Buera, F. J., and Y. Shin (2009): “Productivity growth and capital flows: The dynamics
 of reforms,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008): “An Equilibrium Model of
 Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 98(1), 358–393.

Chava, S., and M. R. Roberts (2008): “How Does Financing Impact Investment? The
 Role of Debt Covenants,” Journal of Finance, 63(5), 2085–2121.

Cooley, T. F., and V. Quadrini (2001): “Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics,”
 American Economic Review, 91(5), 1286–1310.

Cui, W. (2014): “Delayed Capital Reallocation,” working paper.

David, J., and V. Venkateswaran (2017): “The Sources of Capital Misallocation,”
 Working Paper.

Eisfeldt, A. L., and T. Muir (2016): “Aggregate external financing and savings waves,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 84, 116–133.

Fazzari, S., R. G. Hubbard, and B. Petersen (1988): “Financing Constraints and
  Corporate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 141–195.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): “Reallocation, firm turnover,
 and efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability?,” American Economic Review,
 98(1), 394–425.

Gamba, A., and A. Triantis (2008): “The Value of Financial Flexibility,” Journal of
 Finance, 102(61), 2263—2295.

Gomes, J. (2001): “Financing Investment,” American Economic Review, 91(5), 1263–1285.


                                          31
Gopinath, G., Ş. Kalemli-Özcan, L. Karabarbounis, and C. Villegas-Sanchez
 (2017): “Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 132(4), 1915–1967.

Hennessy, C., and T. Whited (2005): “Debt Dynamics,” Journal of Finance, (1), 1129–
 1165.

        (2007): “How Costly is External Financing? Evidence from a Structural Estimation,”
  Journal of Finance, 62(1), 58–64.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China
 and India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.

Huang, Y. (2011): “Can the Precautionary Motive Explain the Chinese Corporate Savings
 Puzzle? Evidence from the Liquid Assets Perspective,” IMF Working Paper.

Korteweg, A. (2010): “The Net Benefits to Leverage,” Journal of Finance, 65(6), 2137–
 2170.

Midrigan, V., and D. Y. Xu (2013): “forthcoming, Finance and Misallocation: Evidence
 from Plant-Level Data,” American Economic Review.

Moll, B. (2014): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-financing Undo
 Capital Misallocation?,” American Economic Review.

Quadrini, V., E. Mendoza, and V. Rios-Rull (2009): “Financial integration, financial
 deepness and global imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(3).

Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan (2010): “Collateral, risk management, and the
 distribution of debt capacity,” Journal of Finance, 65, 2293–2322.

Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2011): “Growing like china,” The
 American Economic Review, 101(1), 196–233.

Tauchen, G., and R. Hussey (1991): “Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approxi-
  mate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, 59(2), 371–396.

Wagle, Dileep M., G. N. T. S. (2000): China’s Emerging Private Enterprises: Prospects
 for the New Century. World Bank Publications.

Wang, P., Y. Wen, and Z. Xu (2012): “Two-way capital flows and global imbalances: a
 neoclassical approach,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Series, (2012-016).

                                            32
Whited, T., and J. Zhao (2017): “The Misallocation of Finance,” Working Paper.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2009): “On estimating firm-level production functions using proxy
 variables to control for unobservables,” Economics Letters, 104(3), 112–114.

Yang, T. (2012): “Aggregate Savings and External Imbalances in China,” Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 26(4), 125–146.




                                        33
Appendix
 Data
Table A1 shows firms median leverage, interest rate, and growth rate for some other years in
our sample. The numbers and differences between SOE and POE are quite stable over time.

                   Table A1: SOE vs Non-SOE, Years 2002 and 2005

                                           2002                               2005
                              Average     SOE Non-SOE            Average     SOE Non-SOE

           Leverage             .657       .752       .609         .612      0.717       .603
           Interest Rate        .023      .017        .027         .024      0.014       .026
           Growth Rate          .014      -.049       .175        0.226       .09        .238

 Notes: The table reports the descriptive statistics of leverage, interest rates, and growth rate for nonstate-
owned enterprises and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) for some sample years. Interest rate is constructed
using interest payment over debt.


   Figure A1 and Figure A2 depict the relations between leverage, interest rate, growth rate,
and MPK with firms asset level for state-owned firms and privately owned firms in year 1999.
These patterns at the beginning of the sample are very similar to the pattern at the end of
the sample, shown in Section 2.
   Table A2 and Table A3 show regressions of the interested variables on firms’ asset level,
and the interaction of ownership and firms’ assets, controlling for industry fixed effects, for
year 1999 and 2006, respectively. Similar to the panel regression we show in Section 2, POEs
have lower leverage, higher interest rates, higher growth rate and higher MPK than SOEs.
Among POEs, small firms have a lower leverage, pay high interest rate, and have a larger
growth rates and higher MPK.




                                                     34
                         Leverage vs Asset, POE                                        Interest rate vs Asset, POE
     .7




                                                                      .4
     .6




                                                                            .3
                                                              Interest Rate
leverage
   .5




                                                                  .2
     .4




                                                                      .1
     .3




                                                                      0
                 2            4              6       8                           2           4                6       8
                                  lnasset                                                        lnasset



               (a) Leverage and Assets, Year 1999                           (b) Interest Rate and Assets, Year 1999

                              Figure A1: Firm Size and Debt Financing




                        Growth rate vs Asset, POE                                       LogMPK vs Asset, POE
     .3




                                                                      1
     .2




                                                                      .5
Growth Rate
        .1




                                                                       0
                                                                log MPK
                                                              -.5
 0   -.1




                                                                      -1
                                                                      -1.5
     -.2




                 2            4              6       8                           2           4                6       8
                                  lnasset                                                        lnasset



              (a) Growth Rate vs Assets, Year 1999                               (b) MPK vs Assets, Year 1999

                              Figure A2: Firm Size, Growth, and MPK




                                                         35
        Table A2: Regressions on Firm Ownership and Asset, Year 1999

                             (1)                      (2)                    (3)                   (4)
 VARIABLES                Leverage             Interest Rate           Growth Rate             log MPK
 Private                 -0.424***                0.154***                0.501***              2.221***
                          (-16.66)                 (10.81)                 (8.829)               (24.10)
 Private*lnasset         0.0467***               -0.0258***             -0.0601***             -0.233***
                           (9.789)                 (-9.045)               (-5.379)              (-10.70)
 lnasset                -0.00926***             -0.00276***              0.0166***             -0.222***
                          (-3.728)                 (-9.105)                (3.745)              (-18.76)
 Constant                 0.838***                0.0462***              -0.129***             -0.348***
                           (63.29)                 (26.72)                (-5.513)              (-5.714)

 Observations               47,152                 36,468                  33,122                46,592
 R-squared                   0.093                 0.139                   0.033                 0.271
 Industry FE                  Yes                   Yes                     Yes                   Yes

Notes: This table reports the regression results. The estimation sample includes all state-owned firms and
non state-owned firms in the manufacturing sector in 1999 with sales over 5 million RMB, non-negative total
debt, and positive assets. The dependent variables from columns 1 to 4 are leverage, interest rate, growth
rate, and marginal product of capital (MPK) respectively. The explanatory variables are firm ownership,
asset and an interaction of ownership and assets. T-statistics reported in parentheses are calculated using
robust asymptotic standard errors clustered at the four-digit industry level. All specifications control for
industry fixed effects. ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗p < 0.1.




                                                    36
        Table A3: Regressions on Firm Ownership and Asset, Year 2006

                               (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)
 VARIABLES                 Leverage            Interest Rate            Growth Rate              log MPK
 Private                   -0.395***              0.0968***               0.441***                1.238***
                            (-13.56)               (8.609)                 (9.910)                 (16.04)
 Private*lnasset          0.0347***              -0.0133***              -0.0481***              -0.138***
                            (7.210)                (-7.798)                (-6.959)               (-11.32)
 lnasset                  -0.0189***            -0.00272***              0.0177***               -0.193***
                            (-4.185)               (-2.971)                (2.926)                (-17.68)
 Constant                  0.880***               0.0410***                -0.0632               -0.371***
                            (32.40)                (5.886)                 (-1.551)               (-5.186)

 Observations              141,702                  91,236                  106,008                139,302
 R-squared                  0.070                   0.040                    0.016                  0.147
 Industry FE                 Yes                     Yes                      Yes                    Yes

Notes: This table reports the regression results. The estimation sample includes all state-owned firms and
non state-owned firms in the manufacturing sector in 2006 with sales over 5 million RMB, non-negative total
debt, and positive assets. The dependent variables from column 1 to 4 are leverage, interest rate, growth rate,
and marginal product of capital (MPK) respectively. The explanatory variables are firm ownership, asset,
and an interaction of ownership and assets. T-statistics reported in parentheses are calculated using robust
asymptotic standard errors clustered at the four-digit industry level. All specifications control for industry
fixed effects. ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗p < 0.1.




                                                     37
