                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHO OWNED CITIBANK? FAMILIARITY BIAS AND BUSINESS NETWORK
               INFLUENCES ON STOCK PURCHASES, 1925-1929

                                         Charles W. Calomiris
                                            Elliot S.M. Oh

                                         Working Paper 24431
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24431


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2018




The authors are grateful to Lois Kauffman, Kerri Anne Burke, Shira Bistricer, and Richard Gomes
of Citigroup, who patiently and graciously offered help and advice accessing materials at the Citibank
Archive, and to Citigroup for its willingness to open its archive to researchers. The authors thank Daniel
Marcin for sharing the New York Times 1924 list of taxpayers, and the NBER and IPUSM for making
the 100 Percent Federal Census data available. They thank Dora Costa, Shrihari Santosh, Pablo Slutzky
participants in the UCLA economics department conference on Organizations in History and participants
in the University of Maryland Brownbag seminar for comments on an earlier draft. They also thank
William Harvey, Anastasia De Pierro, Julie van den Kieboom, Julia Davidson, Dabin Moon, Steven
Yoon, Xiaoyu Sun, Palmer Lao, Pinank Shah, Atieh Ashkezari, Bryan Lee, Hyungbin Park, Jenny
Yoo, and Craig Buckthorp for excellent research assistance, and Taeh-Hwan Kim, Ju-Heon Kang,
Jin-Woo Huh, Hyun-Kyu Oh, Ji-Wang Ko, Do-Guen Lee, Tae-Hong Kim, Byung-Jun Song, Hee-Jin
Seo, Hae-Do Jeong, Gi-Wook Choi, and Hong-Sik Yoon for efforts in coding data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Charles W. Calomiris and Elliot S.M. Oh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Who Owned Citibank? Familiarity Bias and Business Network Influences on Stock Purchases,
1925-1929
Charles W. Calomiris and Elliot S.M. Oh
NBER Working Paper No. 24431
March 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. G02,G11,G21,N12,N22

                                              ABSTRACT

We study factors influencing individuals’ decisions to purchase Citibank stock during the 1920s. Ownership
was encouraged by proximity to New York and higher wealth. Lack of familiarity was also an important
barrier. The establishment of Citibank branches within a U.S. county or a foreign country was associated
with a large increase in share ownership in that location, ceteris paribus. Within the New York City
metropolitan area, individual characteristics related to wealth, knowledge, and one’s influence within
the New York City Business network increased the probability of becoming a Citibank shareholder.
Business associates in the network were an important influence on purchase decisions. Connections
with Citibank officers and directors, or with people who had such connections, increased the probability
of buying Citibank shares. Connections with other Citibank shareholders also increased the probability
of buying Citibank shares. Connections with officers and directors of other large New York banks
reduced the probability of owning Citibank, presumably because it increased familiarity with a close
substitute for Citibank shares. Network influence reflected more than the transmission of inside information;
executives imitated other’s stock buying behavior, which provides evidence of the importance of familiarity
for purchases. The role of some network influences, like other identifiable influences, became less
important during the price boom of 1928-1929, perhaps reflecting the rising importance of other means
of increasing familiarity during the price boom (i.e., media coverage).


Charles W. Calomiris
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Elliot S.M. Oh
Department of Finance
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
elliot.sm.oh@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24431
1. Introduction

There are large literatures documenting how familiarity bias affects investing decisions, and

the role of networks in influencing individual decision making. In this paper, we connect

those literatures in a study of the decisions of wealthy people to purchase Citibank stock in

the 1920s. This is the first study of which we are aware that uses the list of stockholders in

a firm to analyze who decides to buy the firm’s stock. We are able to do this because of

three unique features of this historical example that make this analysis possible. First, we

are able to access the information about the identity of stockholders. It generally is not

possible to analyze the identities of shareholders because such data are confidential.

Historical data on ownership remain confidential, but we were granted permission to use

historical Citibank shareholder lists because we found a way to match individuals’ names to

names from other sources without jeopardizing confidentiality. Second, the historical

context of our example (a large New York City bank, whose shares were owned only by the

rich) permits us to identify a list of individuals – members of the New York City business

network – that includes both those who chose to be stockholders and those that could have

been shareholders but were not. Third, the network’s structure allows us to trace how

business connections affect purchase decisions.

       We begin by examining holdings across the U.S. counties and in other countries to

investigate whether the proximity of a Citibank branch affected ownership of Citibank

shares. Our county-level analysis also considers the effects of distance from New York and

various demographic characteristics. We then turn to our main, individual level analysis.

We construct a mapping of the network of business executives in New York City, and
                                               1
investigate how the characteristics of executives – including income, influence within the

network, and familiarity with finance – mattered for determining who invested in Citibank.

We also investigate the extent to which members of the network influenced each other’s

investment decisions. Specifically, we explore how one’s proximity within the network to

Citibank officers and directors, or to those holding Citibank shares, influenced executives’

decisions to purchase Citibank stock. We believe ours is the first study of its kind; we are

not aware of other studies that examine individual stock purchase decisions by combining a

company’s list of stockholders with a list of individuals (New York City executives in our

case) who comprise the most relevant population of potential purchasers of that company’s

stock.

         During our sample period, Citibank was rapidly growing its businesses, innovative

in transforming its business structure, and actively issuing new equity, all of which suggest

a ripe environment for amplifying the effect that differences in information (familiarity)

have on the individual share purchasing decisions of potential investors.

         Citibank stock was not an investment option for everyone. It had a high price per

share. It also was sold mainly in the over-the-counter (OTC) market, where it was

uncommon for very small numbers of shares to be traded in any transaction.1 Furthermore,

mutual funds had not yet come into existence as a means of owning shares.2 Therefore,



1
  As we discuss further below, for a brief time in 1927 and 1928, shares were transacted in much smaller blocs
on the New York Stock Exchange.
2
  Although this fact is widely known, we investigated whether Citibank shares were held by any entities
during our period that might be regarded as similar to mutual funds. We found no evidence for such holdings.
Specifically, there were no formal financial institutions operating funds that pooled individuals’ holdings in
our data. Individuals who were members of the same family sometimes owned shares jointly, but shares never
were owned by large groups of individuals.
                                                      2
Citibank shares could only be held by the wealthy. Consistent with evidence from today’s

markets, the willingness to own shares also was limited by distance: wealthy individuals

were less likely to own Citibank shares, ceteris paribus, the farther away from New York

City they lived.

       We find that constraints related to wealth and location were not the only barriers to

purchasing Citibank shares. Despite the substantial expansion in the number of Citibank

shareholders during the 1920s (which we link, at least in part, to the frequent issuance of

shares by Citibank during the 1920s), only a tiny fraction of the wealthy business elite

living in the New York City metropolitan area owned Citibank shares (roughly 1% in

January 1925, and 2% in January 1929). In our county-level and country-level analysis, we

find that the presence of a Citibank branch substantially mitigated the effect of distance on

the propensity to own Citibank shares. In our analysis of individual shareholding within the

New York City metropolitan area, we find that individual characteristics related to wealth,

knowledge about financial services, and one’s influence within the network increased the

probability of becoming a Citibank shareholder. Those influences, however, were reduced

after 1927. In fact, highly influential people became less likely than others to purchase

Citibank shares during the price boom of 1927 and 1928. These results all point to the role

of familiarity in influencing stock purchase decisions. As Merton (1987) argues,

information costs can be a barrier to purchasing shares. Proximity to branches, knowledge

of the financial sector, and personal connections to Citibank shareholders all can be seen as

ways of increasing familiarity and reducing information costs.



                                              3
         Network connections were an important contributor to individuals’ purchase

decisions. Having business connections with Citibank officers and directors, even

indirectly, substantially increased the probability of buying Citibank shares. Furthermore,

having a business connection with a Citibank shareholder who was not a Citibank officer or

director also had an important positive effect on the decision to buy Citibank shares. The

fact that both kinds of network connections mattered for the decision to buy shares

indicates that influence reflected more than the transmission of inside information;

executives imitated each other’s behavior, perhaps because connections with existing

shareholders increased familiarity with Citibank stock. The role of some network

influences, like many other identifiable influences, became less important in explaining

who became a new shareholder during the price boom of 1928-1929. We conjecture that

this likely reflected the rising importance of other information and influences during the

price boom, which overcame barriers to familiarity (i.e., media coverage of the price

boom).

         To identify network influences on purchases, we exploit two plausibly

unidirectional linkages. First, we assume that Citibank officers and directors influence the

share purchases of others in the network, but not vice versa. Second, when analyzing new

shareholders (those that have become shareholders in the past two years), we assume that

current shareholders (those who have owned Citibank shares two years before and still own

them) influence the share purchases of others in the network, but not vice versa. We

measure these two channels of influence separately by constructing variables that capture



                                              4
either the network influence of current Citibank officers and directors, or that capture the

influence of current shareholders who are not Citibank officers and directors.

       We also perform a placebo test to see whether network connections to Citibank

officers and directors had a different influence on Citibank shareholding than network

connections to other large banks’ officers and directors. This test investigates whether

contact with influential New York bankers produced a general sectoral interest in New

York bank stocks, of which Citibank was one. We find that network influences from

Citibank officers and directors remain unchanged after controlling for network influences

of other large New York banks’ officers and directors. Once-removed connections to those

people, however, did increase the probability of purchasing Citibank shares, which suggests

that once-removed connections via the network may have affected broader sectoral

perceptions. Interestingly, we also find that business connections to other large New York

banks reduced the probability of owning Citibank shares. Apparently, familiarity with a

close substitute for Citibank shares made the purchase of Citibank shares less likely.

       Our discussion is divided as follows. Section 2 reviews the recent academic

literature on familiarity and home bias. Section 3 reviews trends in Citibank shareholding

during the 1920s, and provides relevant background relating to Citibank’s circumstances as

a national bank operating in New York City during the 1920s. Section 4 summarizes the

data sources that we employ in our analysis of the stock purchase decisions by business

executives residing in the New York City metropolitan area. Section 5 analyses county-

level and country-level data on the locational characteristics of Citibank shareholders, and

shows the influence of proximity to a Citibank branch, as well as distance from New York
                                               5
and various demographic characteristics. Section 6 presents logit and tobit regression

analysis of individual shareholder purchase decisions and network influences of New York

business executives. Section 7 concludes.



2. Related Literature

Distance (i.e., positive home bias) is a well-recognized influence on investors (French and

Poterba 1991, Tesar and Werner 1995, Coval and Moskowitz 1999, Dahlquist et al. 2002,

Strong and Xu 2003, Speidell and Xing 2004, Craft 2006, Giannetti and Laeven 2012,

Philips et al. 2010, and Philips et al. 2012).

        Home bias has been found to vary importantly with issuer and investor

characteristics. For example, political, economic, legal, and corporate governance

environments of issuers affect home bias (Kang and Stulz 1997, Stulz 2005). With respect

to investor characteristics, Graham, Harvey and Huang (2009) find that self-reported

investor competence is positively associated with investing internationally. Karlsson and

Norden (2007) find that home bias is negatively related to wealth and positively related to

age. Aside from home bias, other factors have been found to encourage investors to begin

to participate in equity markets. For example, Kaustia and Knupfer (2012) find that positive

stock returns for local firms tend to encourage investors to begin to invest in the stock

market. Keloharju, Knupfer and Linnainmaa (2012) find that consuming a firm’s product

increases the probability of investing in the firm. This builds on other research about factors

that influence investor interest as the result of greater familiarity, financial literacy, physical

proximity, and education (Huberman 2001, Coval and Moskowitz 1999, Hong, Kubik and
                                                 6
Stein 2004, Giannetti and Yafeh 2012, Hong and Kostovetsky, 2012, Okawa and van

Wincoop 2012, Bekaert et al. 2016). Still other studies seek to identify how strategies that

firms might undertake – related to disclosure or investor relations – can broaden their

investor bases (Busbee and Miller 2012, Liang, Lin and Chin 2012).

       The literature suggests several factors that should be relevant in understanding

differences across investors and issuers in the identities of stockholders in the 1920s,

including the distance between the issuer and the investor, the economic and demographic

characteristics of the investor (wealth, education, consumption of issuer’s product),

previous returns on the issuer’s equity, and recent issuance activity (which may influence

the firm’s attempts to broaden its investor base, and investors’ familiarity with the issuer).

       When analyzing investor behavior in the 1920s there are historical factors that

should be considered. In the early 20th century, and especially in the period 1917-1929, the

United States experienced a major shift in the distribution of shareholdings in publicly held

firms. On average, the number of shareholders in publicly traded firms doubled from 1900

to 1917, and then doubled again from 1917 to 1928. Judging from many firms’ experiences,

the number of shareholders appears to have continued to grow rapidly during the boom of

1928-1929 (comparable figures are not available for 1929).

       As H.T. Warshow (1924) and Gardiner Means (1930) showed, the rapid average

growth in the number of shareholders over 1917-1928 differed dramatically across sub-

periods and across different industries and firms. According to Means, new financing needs




                                               7
and tax policies during World War I (especially the highly progressive taxation of income)3

drove firms that had previously relied on wealthy investors to search out “persons of

moderate means.” While the income of the rich was subject to high taxation, on average,

per capita disposable income grew significantly (cumulatively by about 5%) from 1916 to

1919, which led issuers to target this “middle class” to fund growth. On average, 1923-

1928 saw a smaller rate of growth in the number of shareholders for the firms in Means’

sample (3.8% per year, compared to 11.3% per year for 1917-1923), and that led Means to

conclude that the increase in stockholders observed for the period 1917-1928 was mainly

due to special factors related to World War I, and “not the result of a permanent

[acceleration of the ownership dispersion] trend.”

        Means’ view that shareholder ownership distribution was not shifting dramatically

in the 1920s was based on calculations of the average experience of 31 firms. But for some

firms (such as International Paper, which was included in Means’ sample, and Citibank,

which was not), during the 1920s, the number of shareholders increased by roughly an

order of magnitude. For Proctor and Gamble, the number of shareholders more than tripled,

while it doubled for American Telephone and Telegraph, and increased by about 50% for

Du Pont and General Electric. For many other firms, however, the number of shareholders

was static or declining: U.S. Rubber and U.S. Steel saw declines while Standard Oil and

Swift experienced slight increases. Firms in established industries – which were over-

represented in Means’ sample – saw little growth in shareholders. Firms in the most



3
 For example, by 1919, someone earning $35,000 had to pay $6,000 to the federal government in income tax,
while someone earning $100,000 had to pay $61,000.
                                                    8
technologically dynamic sectors saw higher growth in shareholders, and these were also the

sectors experiencing the biggest growth in equity capital, and much higher equity returns

(Nicholas 2007). From many high-growth firms’ perspective, the period 1923-1929 was the

one that most transformed their ownership structure.

       New York City’s largest banks grew especially quickly by issuing stock in the

1920s. They also saw large increases in their number of shareholders. Citibank’s number of

shareholders increased by an order of magnitude from 1925 to 1930. Large New York

banks, like path-breaking non-financial firms such as General Electric and General Motors,

were highly innovative during the 1920s. Citibank dramatically changed its structure and

lines of business in the 1920s. It spread its branch network throughout the world, as well as

throughout the five Boroughs of New York, and it entered aggressively into the growth

areas of portfolio management and securities underwriting. Innovative, growing firms like

Citibank also needed to raise new capital repeatedly, which meant that they had an interest

in attracting new investors.

       Limits on the expansion of shareholders in the 1920s likely reflected informational

barriers. Even rich New Yorkers may have lacked an understanding of stock valuation, and

may have been unfamiliar with Citibank’s changing structure and prospects. Disclosures by

public firms were quite limited. Basic balance sheet information was available (and was

required to be reported publicly for all national banks). Information about dividends and

stock prices (available in the form of “tear sheets” handed out by stock brokers) was also

available. But even the most basic information about Citibank’s revenues and profits from

various lines of businesses remained obscure, with the exception of selective tidbits
                                              9
revealed in the annual letter from the President to the stockholders, or aggregate profits

reported annually in investment manuals such as Moody’s Finance Manual.

         Networks of business relationships may have been an important source of

information transmission that wealthy New Yorkers relied upon when deciding on stock

investments. As we show below, it is possible to reconstruct the networks of corporate

executives – officers and directors of all corporations operating in New York City4 – and

trace potential influences related to network contacts. When doing so we can identify the

influence of Citibank officers and directors on executives with whom they had network

connections, as well as the influence of other banks’ officers and directors, and Citibank

shareholders, all of whom may have influenced business associates’ purchase decisions.

         Sorting between those two influences can provide unique insight about why

network connections influence stock decisions. If someone is influenced only by contact

with a Citibank insider, that is more likely to reflect the communication of relevant private

information. In contrast, influence through network connections by stockholders who are

outsiders is more likely to reflect other kinds of communication, or possibly just simple

imitative behavior (Banerjee et al. 2013)..

         To date, there are no studies analyzing which investors became stockholders in

which firms during the 1920s, or the possible influences of networks in encouraging stock



4
  While the 1929-1930 volume mentions no explicit minimum capitalization requirements for inclusion, firms
may have had to meet a certain capitalization threshold in order to be included. Starting in 1933, the Directory
states that it only includes firms with a capitalization greater than or equal to $50,000 (which, adjusting for
inflation, is roughly a million 2017 dollars). Even if such a capitalization requirement implicitly existed in
1929, this is not a very high hurdle, and would include virtually all firms whose executives had the purchasing
power to become Citibank shareholders.
                                                      10
purchases.5 The reason is simple: data about the identities of stockholders are confidential,

and even historical data on stockholders’ identities are considered sensitive and proprietary.

        Our study was made possible when we found a way to use confidential shareholder

data without compromising confidentiality. We thus are able to identify shareholders,

measure their relevant characteristics, and locate them within the New York business

network. This was accomplished by assembling the relevant pieces of the dataset at the

Citibank archive, with the active participation (and patience) of its staff, and then

anonymizing the data for use outside the archive.



3. Citibank Shares and Shareholders

Citibank’s formal name was National City Bank of New York. It was chartered under the

National Banking Act as a successor to a state-chartered bank whose charter began in 1812.

By the 1920s, Citibank was one of the leading commercial banks in the New York City and

in the world. In 1922, its President, Charles E. Mitchell, wrote that Citibank, “directly

through our own branches and those of our affiliates, The National City Company and the

International Banking Corporation, we are in daily touch with and giving service to banks

and individuals in every city and hamlet in every state of the Union. Spanning the world,

itself, we stand at the crossroads of the world’s commerce in contact with all nations…”

        There are several factors that made bank stocks like that of Citibank different from

other publicly traded stocks. First, until 1927, national banks like Citibank were prohibited


5
 Some closely related studies include Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008), which examines educational
affiliation networks and their effects on mutual fund manager performance, and Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy
(2010), which examines how educational affiliation networks affect analyst stock recommendations.
                                                    11
from splitting their shares (Kane and Wilson 1998). That resulted in high share prices per

share, which limited Citibank’s shareholders to the wealthy. As Figure 1 shows, Citibank’s

price per share exceeded per capita national income during the 1920s (and grew to several

times national income per capita in 1929).6 Citibank did split its shares five-for-one in

January 1929 (Figure 1 maintains consistent pricing per share, as if the split had not

occurred). The split occurred just after our January 1929 observations of shareholders.

        Two other factors may have influenced Citibank’s stockholder base. First, Citibank

– like other firms at this time – relied on rights offerings to sell new shares. Citibank issued

shares several times in the 1920s, as its growing capital stock indicates (Figure 2).

Citibank’s growth was similar to the growth rates of Chase, Chemical, and Manhattan.7

From 1920 to 1929, Citibank issued shares into the market six times (in 1920, 1925, 1927,

1928, and once in 1929).8 Those share issues supported the more than doubling of its total

assets from 1924 to 1929 (the capital stock shown in Figure 2 consists of roughly equal

amounts of “paid in capital” and accumulated “surplus plus undivided profits”). Existing



6
  National income per capita was $252 in 1929 (the ratio of $86.8 billion in income for 1929, divided by a
population of 34.4 million in 1930). See Historical Statistics of the United States, Vol. I, pp, 22, 237.
7
  Chase, Chemical, and Manhattan all roughly doubled their asset size through the acquisition of other banks
and trust companies and financed these acquisitions by more than doubling their capital stocks through rights
offerings. Chase National Bank, which grew its asset size and capital stock most aggressively among the five
banks (including Citibank), increased its number of shareholders by 37% between the end of 1927 and the end
of 1928 (9203 to 12666 shareholders). Chemical National Bank, another active acquirer, increased the number
of shareholders by 10% during the same period, while Citibank saw a 17% increase during that period. Other
New York banks, which did not pursue acquisitions as actively, increased their asset size by 29.5% and
capital stock by 10.2%. In fact, National Bank of Commerce, First National Bank of New York, and National
Park Bank did not increase their capital stock during this period. Unsurprisingly, these banks experienced a
modest 7% increase in the number of shareholders. All of these slow-growing banks except for First National
Bank were either acquired by other banks or trust companies or were targets for acquisitions. (Data are from
Moody’s Investment Manuals.)
8
  Calomiris and Oh (2019) analyze the pricing of these rights and their implications for whether Citibank
shares were over-valued in the market in 1927-1929.
                                                     12
stockholders had the option to buy new share offerings, although they could also transfer

the right to buy to others (and these rights to buy traded as assets in the market). Given that

Citibank was an active equity issuer during the 1920s, it is important to bear in mind that its

paid in capital was growing rapidly in this decade. It remains somewhat unclear how

widely traded the rights to buy new shares were, and it is possible that during the 1920s

new share issues may have been purchased initially mainly by preexisting stockholders,

although our analysis below of the growth in shares owned by preexisting shareholders

suggests that a large number of rights were purchased by new shareholders.

         Second, bank shares were traded in the OTC market within a network of dealers

specializing in bank and insurance stocks (the prices plotted in Figure 1 are weekly OTC

quotations from the Commercial and Financial Chronicle). These markets appear not to

have been as liquid as the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), with transactions occurring

infrequently (Loeser 1940, O’Sullivan 2007), in bundles of a few shares, and in small

volume. Some of that illiquidity reflected the high prices of bank shares and the selective

nature of their shareholder base (Forum 1925, Gorton and Tallman 2015).

         Third, from 1926 to 1928, the largest New York banks actively resisted ownership

by small shareholders.9 Several New York banks delisted from the New York stock



9
  In January 1929, Citibank made use of the right to split its shares (which was granted in the McFadden Act
of 1927). Kane and Wilson (1998) conjecture that during the stock boom banks may have wanted to attract
small investors so that wealthy bank stockholders could sell high-priced shares to people with less wealth who
would have less potential loss from double liability. As we discuss further below, this conjecture is not valid
for Citibank. Like other large New York banks, it delisted from the NYSE in January 1928 to resist the
increase in small buyers. Furthermore, large blockholders rarely sold their Citibank shares from January 1925
to January 1929. From 1925 to 1930, officers, directors, and their families we have been able to identify,
which owned about a fifth of the bank, very rarely sold any of their shares while they were officers or
directors.
                                                      13
exchange simultaneously in January 1928 in reaction to what they regarded as

unsustainable increases in their stock prices, which they (wrongly) saw as the result of the

exchange’s new practice of executing and reporting small stock purchase transactions for

their shares.10 The New York banks did not return to the New York Stock Exchange for

decades after delisting in 1928. New York banks, like other U.S. banks, traded primarily in

the OTC market before that delisting, and exclusively in the OTC market after the delisting.

          These regulatory and institutional factors made Citibank somewhat unusual as an

issuer, both during the 1920s, and in comparison to present issuers.11 The combination of

the prohibition on stock splits, the use of rights offerings to distribute shares, and the

reliance on OTC markets for trading in shares, should have limited the number of

shareholders in Citibank, compared both to other fast-growing issuers of the time and even

more with respect to current issuers.



4. Data

We collected the lists of Citibank stockholders for January 1925, January 1927, and

January 1929. These data contain the names, addresses, and number of shares owned by

more than 80% of all shares on those dates.12 Because the data list names and addresses, it



10
   That belief was proven incorrect by the continuing rise in stock prices after the banks delisted.
11
   Also, from 1863 to 1935, national bank shareholders were subject to double liability, meaning that if the
bank were liquidated and existing assets were inadequate to pay debtholders, shareholders could be assessed
an additional amount equal to their paid in capital contributions (which equals the amount of net worth per
share that is not attributable to the accumulation of retained earnings over time into the bank’s surplus and
undivided profits accounts). Double liability meant that there was downside risk to owning shares beyond the
loss of the entire amount invested, and this may have made shares less attractive to low-income stockholders.
12
   Our stockholder lists are derived from the voting shares at the annual stockholders’ meeting. These
comprise 82% of shares in 1925, 83% in 1927, and 84% in 1929.
                                                     14
is possible to match these data with other sources to link names across data bases. Our

Online Data Appendix describes our sources in detail. Table 1 reports which data are

gathered from which sources. Table 2 defines the variables used in our empirical analyses.

The remainder of this section provides a brief summary.

       In our country-level analysis, we use a list of countries from Wimmer and Min

(2006) and match it with the shareholding and branch location information obtained from

Citibank’s archive (from voting records and annual reports, respectively). We restrict our

list of countries to exclude those in Africa, given that no African country had any Citibank

shareholders. We define countries as both imperial colonies and sovereign nations. In our

county-level analysis, data on demographic characteristics are from various Censuses, taken

from the ICPSR database. We also use information from Security Dealers of North America

to identify the locations of securities dealers throughout the U.S.

       In our logit and tobit analysis of individuals’ shareholdings, we focus our attention

on the sample of individuals contained in the Directory of Directors in the City of New York

for 1929-1930 and examine how individual characteristics and network influences can

explain which of those business executives became a Citibank shareholder. The analysis is

performed separately for 1925, 1927, and 1929. This source lists each director and officer

of each corporation based in the New York City metropolitan area. Summary statistics for

all the variables used in our individual regression analysis are reported in Online Appendix

Table A1. Correlations are reported in Online Appendix Table A2.

       For the sample of names contained in the Directory of Directors, we matched names

with several other sources. We matched names with our list of Citibank stockholders, with
                                              15
a list of federal income taxpayers, with Citibank Annual Reports (which list officers and

directors), and with lists of names appearing in Poor’s Register of Directors for 1928 and

Who’s Who In America for 1928. Similarly, for other large New York banks, we collect

names of their officers and directors from the Directory of Directors. Other large New

York banks are defined as Bank of Manhattan, Chase National Bank, Chatham-Phenix

National Bank & Trust Co., Chemical National Bank, Corn Exchange Bank, First National

Bank of the City of New York, National Bank of Commerce, and National Park Bank. We

also identify individuals who work for securities dealers. Those firms are identified using

the Securities Dealers of North America (1929).

        In many cases, using exact address matches or distinctive names, or both, we were

able to verify matches immediately. In other cases, where matches were not immediately

obvious, we employed a variety of methods to obtain additional matches while ensuring the

accuracy of our matching procedure. We used a variety of sources to verify that matches

were correct, including Ancestry.com, phone books, Manuscript Census data, and other

information. Generally, we had very few uncertain matches (only 18 cases in our matching

of Citibank shareholders with the Directory of Directors, and similarly small percentages

for other data sets). If we were unable to be sure of a match, despite our efforts, in the case

of Citibank shareholder identity, we conservatively assumed that the individuals were not

matches. In the other matching, we conservatively assumed that ambiguous matches were

actual matches. (The reason for this difference in procedure is that one of these variables is

our dependent variable, the others are independent variables.) Alternative treatment of



                                               16
ambiguous matches (such as dropping them) does not affect our results. The full description

of the methods used for matching are reported in the Online Data Appendix.

       Our taxpayer information comes from a unique release of information by the

Internal Revenue Service (IRS). In 1925, the IRS made income tax information on all

taxpayers available to the public. Newspapers throughout the country published this

information, with varying levels of detail and completeness. Typically, the published data

list the name, address, and the amount of income tax paid. Coverage differs somewhat

across locations. In some cities, published names include only the highest-paying taxpayers,

while in other cities, the list is more comprehensive. Data for the country as a whole, with

particular emphasis on residents located in the New York area, were collected from the

New York Times, which provides the most comprehensive list of taxpayers for the New

York City area. Although the data are only available for 1924, this source provides a unique

window into the levels of income of individuals.

       Data from other business network sources (Poor’s Register of Directors for 1928

and Who’s Who In America for 1928) are used as indicators that an individual is

sufficiently prominent to be listed in those directories.



5. Trends in Shareholder Participation and Locational Differences

As Figure 3 shows, the number of Citibank shareholders grew dramatically from 1925 to

1930. The use of shares in the June 1926 acquisition of Peoples Trust Co., the February

1925, February 1927, and June 1928 rights offerings of new shares, a five-for-one stock

split in January 1929, the February 1929 rights offerings of new shares, the use of shares to
                                               17
acquire shares of Farmers’ Loan & Trust Co. in June 1929, and perhaps the continuing

price boom itself resulted in the more than tripling of the number of stockholders during

1929 alone. From January 1925 to January 1929 – the period studied here – the number of

shareholders nearly tripled, even in the absence of a stock split, and despite the rising price

per share. Between January 1925 and January 1927, 5,315 new shareholders bought one

share of Citibank stock and held it until January 1927. Between January 1927 and January

1929, the comparable number was 6,334. The numbers of new shareholders who bought

five or fewer shares were 3,489 for 1925-1927 and 3,045 for 1927-1929.

       As Figure 4 shows, the size composition of shareholders changed from January

1925 to January 1929. In 1925, 5.7% of shares were held by those that owned only one

share, but by January 1929, that had risen to 11.6% despite the steep rise in the price per

share. Mostly shares were owned by individuals; companies and organizations accounted

for less than 5% of shareholders and less than 15% of shares in both 1925 and 1929.

       Online Appendix Figure A1 provides a map of Citibank shareholding in the U.S. by

county. The Northeast (as defined by the Census) accounted for 85% of Citibank’s shares,

and more than 61% of its shareholders in 1925. In January 1929, the proportions of shares

and shareholders in the Northeast were 79% and 64%. The Midwest (which was the next

largest region) accounted for 15% of shareholders in 1925 and 14% in 1929, and 6% and

9% of shares, respectively, in 1925 and 1929. Shareholding was concentrated in cities. In

January 1925 and January 1929, respectively, Manhattan alone accounted for 71% and 62%

of all Citibank’s shares, and 20% and 24% of its shareholders. In both January 1925 and

January 1929, the 15 counties (including Manhattan) that contained the greatest number of
                                              18
shareholders accounted for 42% of Citibank shares and 52% of its shareholders. In most

counties (2,474 counties in 1925 and 2,379 in 1929), no Citibank shares were held (there

were a total of 3,064 counties in the United States in 1930).

        A minority of shareholders sold their shares in Citibank from 1925 to 1929. 1,416

shareholders (or 26% of all shareholders) sold some or all of their shares between January

1925 and 1927 (that is the number who either were no longer listed as shareholders, or who

reduced their number of shares). The number of sellers for the period January 1927 to

January 1929 was 3,590 (or 38% of all shareholders). A large majority of current officers or

directors, or their family members we have been able to identify (which accounted for

roughly a fifth of total shares in 1925), never sold shares from January 1925 until January

1930. This contradicts the conjecture by Kane and Wilson (1998) that the sharp increase in

the number of shareholders for New York banks may have represented a shareholder “run”

in which blockholders shed stock during the price boom.

        The small number of shareholders who sold shares from 1925 to 1929 – a period

when the number of shareholder rose by roughly 12,000 – exemplifies the potentially

important relationship between the rise in shareholders and issuance of new shares. The

warrants to purchase new shares distributed via the several rights offerings could be

transferred from existing shareholders to new shareholders via the network of dealers.

        Using our data on shareholders in 1925, 1927, and 1929, along with data on the

rights13 to purchase new shares offered to existing shareholders in February 1925, February



13
  The February 1925 warrants provided existing shareholders with the right to purchase one share for every
four shares at $200 per share. The February 1927 warrants provided existing shareholders with the right to
                                                    19
1927, and June 1928, we examine stockholders who are present at both times and calculate

the increase in their number of shares for the period January 1925 to January 1927. We

compare that increase with the amount of increase that would have occurred by fully

exercising the right to purchase offered in February 1925. We find that 27% of (or 1,098)

shareholders did not fully exercise their purchase rights. Similarly, we examine the

shareholders present in both January 1927 and January 1929 who did not fully exercise

their rights to purchase shares offered in February 1927 and June 1928. We find that 33%

(or 2,052) of those shareholders did not fully exercise their purchase rights. Presumably,

those shareholders sold their warrants in the market. This suggests that stock offerings may

have played a major role in expanding the number of Citibank shareholders in the 1920s.

More generally, this evidence may help to explain why it was that fast-growing firms (i.e.,

those more likely to be offering shares into the market) were more likely to experience

dramatic increases in their number of shareholders during the mid-1920s.



5.1 County-Level and Global Regressions

        As a first step toward analyzing trends in ownership, we aggregate shareholders and

shares at the county level, and employ tobit regressions to explore the relationships between

the propensity for shareholding and county characteristics that capture attributes that we

expect to be relevant to the propensity to own shares. The dependent variable is defined

alternatively as the county’s proportion of shares, or its proportion of shareholders.


purchase one share for every two shares at $200 per share. The June 1928 warrants provided existing
shareholders with the right to purchase one share for every five shares at $400 per share.

                                                    20
       The vector of county characteristics, informed by the literature reviewed above,

includes 19 variables, which capture eight sets of influences: I. Distance from New York

City, II. Demography (total population, percentage white, percentage native white,

percentage rural, percentage of land in farmland, population per square mile, whether the

county contains a “megacity” – one of the 20 most populous cities as of 1930, the number

of manufacturing wage earners, and the percentage of population over age 45), III. Access

to Media (number of radios per family in the county), IV. Education (percentage illiterate,

percentage 16-17 year olds attending school), V. Wealth (the number of homes worth more

than $10,000 divided by the population, the total farm value per farm), VI. Presence of

Securities Dealers (number of dealers per capita in the county), VII. Economic Environment

(unemployment rate, rate of population growth from 1920 to 1930), and VIII. Presence of a

Citibank Branch (defined as any Citibank-affiliated office, exclusively consisting of

securities affiliate offices, located in that county). By 1928, there were 45 domestic

branches outside of New York City mostly located in the 50 largest cities based on the 1930

Census and 107 international branches, including both deposit-taking branches and

securities affiliate offices, in 28 countries in various regions such as Europe, Asia (China,

Japan, India, and Southeast Asia), and the Americas (Canada, Caribbean islands, Central

America, and South America).

       Tobit regression results are reported in Table 3 for the percentage of Citibank

shareholders as a fraction of county population (Online Appendix Tables A3 and A4 report

similar regressions using percentage of shares held in the county, and the number of shares,



                                              21
as alternative dependent variables). Counties closer to New York, with more expensive

homes, older residents, and higher population density all exhibit greater shareholding.

       Table 3 reports tobit regressions for 1925, 1929, and the change from 1925 to 1929.

Distance from New York City, and several other county characteristics, are significant in

one or both years for explaining the propensity to own Citibank shares. All eight categories

of regressors capture important determinants of share ownership. Shareholding declines

with distance from New York (although this is less important in 1929 than in 1925), a

greater share of rural residents (also less important in 1929), and a higher proportion of

farmland. It increases with a higher share of expensive housing, greater population density,

megacity status, a greater share of older residents, total population size, and more radios per

family (which is less significant in 1929). Interestingly, the presence of manufacturing is

associated with a lower percentage of shareholders, but a larger number of shares (Online

Appendix Tables A3 and A4). It may be that manufacturing is associated with a greater

degree of inequality (capitalists hold more shares, workers do not). After controlling for all

these county characteristics, the presence of a Citibank branch significantly raises the

percentage of shareholders in both 1925 and 1929, although the effect is much larger in

1925. In Online Appendix Tables A3 and A4, we find it also is associated with a higher

percentage of shares and a higher number of shares in that county. Interestingly, the effect

of the presence of a Citibank branch is much more persistently large (in 1929 relative to

1925) in its effect on the percentage of shares or the number of shares 1929 than it is on the

percentage of shareholders. This suggests that over time, the availability of a Citibank



                                              22
branch matters more for the intensive margin (more shares purchased by shareholders) than

the extensive margin (the number of new shareholders).

       The results that examine the effects of these regressors on within-county changes in

shareholding from 1925 to 1929 tend to show smaller, and often insignificant, coefficients.

There are several possible interpretations of those findings. First, it could be that

stockholding adjusts slowly to changes in the environment. Second, it could be that the

observable county characteristics used in the regressions partly proxy for unchanging

unobservable characteristics. Under the latter interpretation, new branches are not as highly

correlated with changes in the important unobservable characteristics. Third, it may be that

there is structural change over time in the importance of some influences. For example, if

familiarity with shareholding increases over time for some segment of the population, that

could reduce the importance of other influences for explaining shareholding. In particular,

this could explain the reduced coefficients on distance from New York, and on Citi branch,

as well as some of the other coefficients. Finally, with respect to the Citi branch effect, the

number of new branches established between 1925 and 1929 outside of New York is small

(six), which also could explain the lack of significance of the estimate of the effect of

within-county change in branch presence.

       Table 4 reports country-level tobit results that examine the effects of Citibank

branches on the percentage of shareholders in the population of each country (Online

Appendix Tables A5 and A6 report results for percentage of shares and number of shares).

We find that both the existence of a Citibank branch, and the number of branches, are

associated with substantially greater Citibank shareholding. As in the county-level
                                               23
regressions, the within-country coefficient estimate (examining the effect of change from

1925 to 1929 in branch locations) tends to be small and statistically insignificant. As

before, there are four alternative explanations for that finding (including the fact that only

three countries saw Citibank enter between 1925 and 1929).

        Thus, although the results in Tables 3 and 4 are suggestive of the importance of

familiarity, they are not conclusive. In particular, they do not allow us to discern whether

the small and insignificant coefficients related to the change in Citibank branches from

1925 to 1929 reflect adjustment lags, unobservable heterogeneity, changes in the

importance of the influence over time, or a small sample of new branches. Our analysis of

individual decisions in Section 6 is helpful in providing less ambiguous evidence of the

importance of familiarity.



6. Regression Analysis of New York City Business Network Influences on Share Purchases

6.1 Business Executives Sample, Variables and Methods

        Here we analyze the determinants of New York City business executives’ decisions

to become Citibank shareholders. We analyze the decisions separately for each of our three

sample years: 1925, 1927, and 1929. We report both logit and tobit results, where the logits

predict whether an individual is a shareholder, and the tobits predict the number of shares

owned. For the 1927 and 1929 analysis, we are also able to identify “new” shareholders,

defined as those that were not present in the prior sample of shareholders.14


14
  We also experimented with analyzing exits by stockholders, but the number of exits in our sample of New
York business executives was small. Even using our broad definition of stockholders, which includes
corporate holdings, the number of stockholders in 1925 who exited by 1927 was 31 out of 434, and the
                                                    24
        Citibank shareholding was relatively uncommon. In 1925, 1% of New York

business executives in our sample were Citibank shareholders.15 That percentage rose to

1.5% in 1927 and 1.9% in 1929. Our model includes a variety of individual characteristics,

and several variables that capture network attributes of businessmen, or network influences

on share ownership. Among the individual characteristics we capture, we include measures

of each individual’s importance within the business network, which we capture with the

individual’s Number of Affiliated Firms, the individual’s Eigenvector Network Centrality,

the individual’s Number of Network Connections, and the individual’s Network

Betweenness Centrality, all of which measure aspects of an individual’s importance in the

network (see, for example, Banerjee et al. 2013). We also include a High Position

Indicator, which captures whether the individual serves as both an officer and a director at

any particular firm. Finally, we include indicator variables for whether the individual is

listed in Who’s Who, or in the Poor’s Register of Directors. Given that our direct measures

of individual wealth are noisy (whether the individual is listed in the New York Times as a

taxpayer in 1924, and if so, the amount of tax paid), we believe that these network

measures capture a combination of the wealth, knowledge and sophistication of the

individual, all of which should be positively associated with share ownership.16




comparable number for exits from 1927 to 1929 was 168 out of 666. We return to discuss exits briefly at the
end of our regression analysis.
15
   In 1925, if shareholding is defined to include corporate holdings, as in our main results, 1% of business
executives are shareholders. If shareholding includes only personal holdings, then the comparable number is
0.6%. In 1927, the comparable percentages are 1.5% and 0.9%, and in 1929, they are 1.9% and 1.3%.
16
   We also tried including an additional commonly used network characteristic – the network clustering
coefficient – but it did not prove significant in any of our specifications, so we dropped it.
                                                     25
         We expect that, ceteris paribus, individuals that work in the financial industry may

be more likely to purchase Citibank shares, owing to their greater familiarity with banking.

We include an indicator variable that captures this effect.

         To measure network influences on share purchases, we identify linkages that are

plausibly unidirectional. We do so in two ways. First, when analyzing all shareholders as of

a given date, we assume that Citibank officers and directors are a source of influence on the

share purchases of others in the network, but are not themselves influenced by others to buy

Citibank shares.17 For that reason, we drop Citibank officers and directors from the

dependent variables18 in our regressions (because their stock ownership was not a choice in

the same way as others’ decisions were), but we include them as influencers in the

measures of network influence. Second, when analyzing new shareholders (those that have

become shareholders in the past two years) we assume that, with respect to network

influences coming from non-Citibank officers and directors, those influences are causal

only if the presumed influencing shareholders had owned Citibank shares two years before,

and still own them. We regard this as a conservative assumption.

         We measure these two channels of network influence separately by constructing

variables that capture either the network influence of current Citibank officers and


17
   In 1925, 8 of the 36 Citibank officers and directors did not hold shares. In 1927, 18 out of 56 officers and
directors did not hold shares. In 1929, 14 out of 54 officers and directors did not hold shares. The rising
number of officers and directors from 1925 to 1929 reflected new reporting conventions after 1926 that
included lower-level officers in the reported figures. As noted elsewhere, in robustness analysis, we find that
restricting the definition of officers and directors to the earlier, higher standard does not affect our results.
18
   We also drop seven individuals from our sample who we were able to identify as close relatives of Citibank
officers and directors (cousins, nephews, or immediate family). Presumably, those individuals would have
been influenced by their familial relations, not just their business contacts. In our 2018 NBER Working Paper
draft of this paper, we had not removed those observations, which accounts for some differences from that
version’s tobit coefficients.
                                                       26
directors, or that capture the influence of prior (and still holding) shareholders who are not

Citibank officers and directors.19 We allow both of those measures to influence stock

purchasing either through a direct network connection (where the subject and the

influencing party share an affiliation as officers or directors of the same firm) or through a

one-off connection (where they are each connected to a common person, but not connected

directly to each other). In various robustness tests we considered additional indirect

connections, but found no evidence of their importance.20

         Our measure of share ownership includes shares owned by a corporation in which

the individual is an officer or director. We allocate those shares equally among officers and

directors. In cases where we lacked a complete list of officers and directors, we divided by

five when assigning shares to executives present in our sample. In Online Appendix Tables

A7-A16, we report results where we exclude corporate-owned shares and confine the

definition of shareholding to shares actually owned by individuals. Results are very similar.

         If shares are owned by the spouse of a business executive present in our network,

and if that spouse is not listed in the Directory, we assign those shares to the spouse listed



19
   In robustness tests, we also constrained the set of influencing Citibank officers and directors to those who
had been officers or directors for at least two years. The results were nearly identical, although the size of
marginal effects on the influence of Citibank officers and directors were somewhat larger in that alternative
specification. We also limited our definition of Citibank officers and directors in several additional robustness
checks. We experimented with excluding lower level officers and directors, or those whose status was the
result of a merger with Peoples Trust; in both cases, results were very similar.
20
   In robustness tests, we also weighted each member of the network’s influence by their importance in the
network, measured in various alternative ways, such as Eigenvector Network Centrality, Number of Network
Connections, Network Betweenness Centrality, the Poors Indicator, the IRS Tax Indicator, and the Who’s
Who Indicator. In all cases, weighted results were very similar to our unweighted results reported below. We
also experimented with weighting each network connection by the number of affiliated firms of each person
with whom one is connected. Finally, we tried incorporating twice-removed network connections (one step
further removed than once-removed). The results were very similar to those reported here, and there were no
significant influences from twice-removed connections.
                                                       27
in the Directory. Concerned that very large shareholdings might distort our analysis, we

tried truncating the number of shares in the tobit regressions at the 95th percentile; tobit

results using truncated measures of numbers of shares are similar to those reported here.

       Some shareholders managed their voting through a financial institution. Citibank

branches in New York were particularly common as addresses to which shareholder proxies

were sent. From 1925 to 1929, the number of shareholders whose proxies were sent to

Citibank branches in the New York area grew from 109 to 369, while the number of shares

associated with those shareholders more than quadrupled. For the New York area as a

whole, the rate of growth in the number of shareholders was similar, but the growth in the

number of shares merely doubled. It is possible that contact with New York branches may

have encouraged Citibank shareholding.



6.2 Logit Results for All Shareholders in 1925, 1927, and 1929

       Online Appendix Table A1 provides summary statistics for all the variables used in

the regressions reported in subsequent tables. Logit results for all shareholders present in

the proxy list for January 1925 are reported in Table 5. Variables that capture income, and

whether the individual is employed in the financial sector – which provide a baseline

parsimonious specification (excluding network influences) – are reported in Column (4).

Those variables are highly statistically and economically significant. If an executive works

in the financial sector, that increases the probability of owning Citibank shares in 1925 by

1.95percent. Thus financial executives are nearly three times as likely to own Citibank

shares as other executives (the unconditional mean proportion of New York executives
                                               28
owning shares is 0.94 percent). After controlling for other influences, the marginal effect

falls to 0.91 percent in column (8), which is still nearly equal to the unconditional mean.

Being wealthy enough to be on the reported IRS list raises the probability by 1.21 percent

in column (4) and by 0.80 percent in column (8). The amount of tax recorded is also highly

significant, but the magnitude of the effect is small. If an individual pays a standard

deviation more ($15,915) tax than the mean of $1,467, the marginal effect implies a 0.03

percentage point increase in the probability of being a shareholder in column (4), and third

that effect in column (8). The fact that the IRS payment coefficient declines in magnitude

as other measures of individuals’ characteristics are added to the model confirms the view

that these other measures capture aspects correlated with income or wealth.

       One of the variables (the Poors Indicator) capturing individual status (reflecting

income, wealth, sophistication, or knowledge) is robustly statistically and economically

significant. The Poors Indicator marginal effect implies that being listed in Poor’s raises

the probability of being a shareholder by 0.28 percentage point in column (5), and by a bit

less in columns (6)-(8). These effects are large relative to the unconditional mean of nearly

1 percent. The No. of Affiliated Firms is highly significant statistically in column (5), but

not in the presence of other network controls, and the effect is small in magnitude, ceteris

paribus. At the mean, a standard deviation increase in the number of firm affiliations raises

the probability of being a shareholder by 0.05 percentage point in column (5) and 0.02

percentage point in the other columns. The No. of Network Connections is also an important

predictor of share ownership in 1925; a standard deviation increase raises the probability of



                                              29
owning Citibank shares by 0.16 percent. Other individual characteristic variables are not

economically or statistically significant.

        Contact with Citibank officers and directors influences share purchase decisions by

1925, and those influences are economically and statistically significant.21 Moreover, we

find that indirect network influences are large and statistically significant, not only direct

ones. Table 11 reports various approaches to gauging the importance of network influences,

using the estimated coefficients from the final columns of regressions reported in Tables 5-

9 and the estimated coefficients from each column in Table 10. For purposes of

comparison, Table 11 also gauges the importance for increasing the probability of being a

Citibank shareholder of being included in the IRS tax data.

        The entry in the first column and first row of Table 11 calculates that, in 1925,

replacing a direct network connection that is a non-Citibank officer/director with a Citibank

officer/director raises the probability of being a Citibank shareholder by 0.51 percent,

which is more than half of the unconditional mean of 0.94 percent. We gauge the

importance of the effect of once-removed (indirect) network connections in two ways in

Table 11. First, we consider replacing one indirect connection that is not a Citibank

officer/director with one that is. This raises the probability of being a shareholder by 0.05

percent in 1925. Note, however, that the number of indirect connections is much larger than



21
  When considering the influence of financial professionals, like Citibank officers and directors, within the
network, it is important to bear in mind that, on average, finance professionals are more influential than
others. Working in the financial industry is correlated 0.55 with the number of network connections, 0.36 with
eigenvector centrality, and 0.31 with betweenness centrality. Financial executives also have higher than
average once-removed business connections with other financial executives. This led us to consider whether
to also construct a network analysis confined to a sample of financial professionals. We did so and found
similar results to those reported here (see Online Appendix Tables A17-A27).
                                                     30
the number of direct connections. While the number of direct connections averages about

7.4, the number of indirect connections averages about 110.7. One way to compare the

magnitudes of the direct and indirect effects is to consider replacing non-Citibank

officer/director indirect connections with a 1/7.4 proportion of Citibank officer/director

indirect connections. The third column of numbers in Table 11 reports that marginal effect,

which is 0.4 percent (which is roughly comparable to the direct effect).

       An individual’s importance in the network is gauged by three variables: No. of

Network Connections, Eigenvector Network Centrality, and Network Betweenness

Centrality. The first of these displays a robust positive and significant coefficient, while the

latter two are negative and not significant statistically in the final column of Table 5.

       The Pseudo-R2 and AIC statistics show that adding network influence effects (the

first two variables in the table) improves the overall fit of the model, even after controlling

for other influences (the Pseudo-R2 rises from 0.137 in column (6) to 0.142 in column (8).

       The results for Tables 6 and 7, which report identical models to those for Table 5,

but for the years 1927 and 1929, are broadly similar to Table 5, with some exceptions: the

two network centrality measures are more statistically significant in Tables 6 and 7 than

they were in Table.5, and the High Position Indicator is marginally significant for 1927.

Interestingly, the Pseudo R2 of the models in column (8) of the tables declines from 1927 to

1929 (it is 0.142 in 1925 and 0.142 in 1927, and falls to 0.108 in 1929). The incremental

effect of our network influences (the change in Pseudo R2 from column 6 to column 8) is

similar across the three years.



                                               31
       One interpretation of the decline in Pseudo R2 in 1929 is that a general broadening

of shareholding is occurring during the market boom of 1928. During the run-up in price, it

may be that new influences on behavior that we do not observe (conversations with people

outside the network, or media reports) become more important in explaining new

shareholding over time. Our analysis of the influences on new shareholders, reported in

Tables 8-9, is consistent with that interpretation.



6.3 Logit Results for New Shareholders in 1927 and 1929

       Tables 8 and 9 report logit regressions analyzing entry by new shareholders – those

who enter between January 1925 and January 1927, or between January 27 and January

1929. Because we observe prior periods (1925 when analyzing 1927, and 1927 when

analyzing 1929) we can include network influences coming from % Shareholder

Connections and the % Once-Removed Shareholder Connections, in addition to the

network influences coming from proximity to Citibank officers and directors. The

significance of those influences suggests that factors other than the transmission of insider

information – that is, imitation of other outsiders’ behavior, rather than just learning

privileged information from insiders – was relevant in explaining network influence.

       Coefficient magnitudes and significance for new shareholders in 1927, reported in

Table 8, are similar to those in Table 6 (for all shareholders in 1927). Additionally, we find

that % Shareholder Connections enters positively and significantly in the specifications.

The indirect effect, measured by % Once-Removed Shareholder Connections, is not as



                                               32
robustly significant (it is significant at only the ten percent level in 1927 in column (11) of

Table 8).

       The importance of % Shareholder Connections is measured in Table 11. For the

1925-1927 period, replacing a non-Citibank shareholder as a direct connection with a

Citibank shareholder raises the probability of becoming a Citibank shareholder between

1925 and 1927 by 0.15 percent, which is a quarter of the mean probability of becoming a

Citibank shareholder during that period (0.59 percent). This is comparable in magnitude to

the effect of replacing a non-Citibank shareholder with a Citibank officer/director (which

raises the probability of becoming a shareholder by 0.25 percent in the period 1925-1927,

as shown in the first column and second row of numbers in Table 11).

       The results for the period 1927-1929, in Table 9 and 11, are similar, but the

Officer/Director Connections marginal effect is larger (0.32 percent, as reported in Table

11), and the Shareholder Connections effect is smaller (0.15 percent).

       Not only is the Pseudo-R2 of the 1929 models for new shareholders lower than for

new shareholders in 1927, the explanatory power of the once-removed network influences

of officers and directors, and of shareholders, are diminished relative to prior years,

although other network marginal effects remain similar for 1925-1927 and 1927-1929. The

incremental improvement in Pseudo-R2 (the increase from column 6 to column 11 of Table

9) is only 0.002, in comparison to the much greater 0.021 difference visible in Table 8. In

other words, the models, and network influences in particular, do not tell us as much about

becoming a new shareholder in 1929 as they did in 1927. This is consistent with the view



                                               33
that other influences that may be more relevant during a price bubble (conversations with

people outside the network, or media reports) became relatively important after 1927.




6.4 Tobit Results

       In Online Appendix Tables A28-A32 we report tobit regressions comparable to the

logits reported in Tables 5-9. In Table 10, we summarize the tobits by reporting the final

columns from Online Appendix Tables A28-A32. Tobit specifications allow for differences

in the number of shares held when making comparisons across individuals. Our tobit

findings for individual characteristic variables are similar to our logit findings, but the High

Position Indicator is more significant in the tobits. For 1927 and 1929, columns (2) and (3)

of Table 10 look similar to the final columns of Tables 6 and 7, except that Eigenvector

Network Centrality and Network Betweenness Centrality, which had been significant and

negative in Tables 6 and 7, do not display consistently significant effects in columns (2)

and (3).

       In the tobit regressions, Eigenvector Network Centrality becomes much larger and

more statistically significant for the 1927-1929 period than for the 1925-1927 period, and

the difference is highly statistically significant (unlike in the logits). One way to interpret

this is that highly influential people were much less likely to become new shareholders after

1927. When one considers that the presidents of the largest New York banks, including

Citibank, were openly discussing what they regarded as unsustainably high valuations of

their banks’ stock prices by the middle of 1927, and that they agreed to delist their stocks
                                               34
from the New York Stock Exchange in January 1928 to try to remedy that situation, this is

not surprising. This is reminiscent of the pattern described by Temin and Voth (2004)

regarding the actions of Hoare’s Bank during the South Sea Bubble. Hoare’s Bank (a very

informed market participant) sold its positions and profited from getting out before the

bubble burst.

          The patterns of marginal effects for network influences in the tobit regressions

(reported in the bottom half of Table 11) are roughly comparable to those in the logits,

although their scaling is different (as these measure numbers of shares rather than

probability of being a shareholder).

          We find that, as in the logit analyses of new shareholders, the statistical significance

and the size of the marginal effects of the once-removed network influences of officers and

directors are much smaller for the 1927-1929 period than for the 1925-1927 period,

however the same is not true for once-removed shareholder effects. Unlike the logits, the

marginal effect of once-removed shareholder influences remains similar to the earlier

period. As in the logits, the incremental importance of adding network influence for Pseudo

R2 declines in the 1927-1929 period (as shown in Online Appendix Tables A31 and A32).
22
     We think these findings corroborate the view that during the price bubble other

influences on executives (conversations with people outside the network, or media reports)

became increasingly influential on the behavior of buyers, in general.




22
   This pattern also holds when we exclude corporate holdings, as shown in the Online Appendix Tables A7-
A16, but the magnitude of the decline in the importance of network linkages is less in that sample, and the
statistical significance of networks effects is similar.
                                                     35
       In the Online Appendix, we report additional logit and tobit regressions, which

either confine the sample to individual holdings (Online Appendix Tables A7-A16), or

which exclude from the sample firms that were not connected to other firms in the New

York City network of business executives (Online Appendix Tables A33-A42). As Online

Appendix Figure A2 shows, firms can be divided into two groups: connected firms those

that were part of the “main network,” which tended to employ executives employed by

other firms as officers and board members, and disconnected firms that did not (the “donut”

of disconnected firms shown in the full network panel of Online Appendix Figure A2). The

results for these sample variations are broadly comparable to those reported here. As Online

Appendix Table A43 shows, marginal effects related to network influences tend to be larger

for the restricted (main network) sample.



6.5 Exits

       There are too few exits in our sample for us to analyze exits reliably using

regression analysis. Even using our broad definition of stockholders, which includes

corporate holdings, the number of stockholders in our sample in January 1925 who exited

by January 1927 was 29 out of 402, and the comparable number for exits from 1927 to

1929 was 164 out of 626. For the latter period we experimented with running logits and

tobits similar in structure to those reported in Tables 8 and 10. Given the small sample, we

found no significant effects for most variables, but we did find that % of Officer/Director

Connections is robustly negatively and significantly associated with the propensity to exit,

which is consistent with the opposite effect of that same variable in predicting new
                                             36
shareholding. Interestingly, the IRS Tax Indicator is a negative predictor of exits (similar to

its opposite effect for predicting purchases), but the IRS Tax Indicator * Tax Payment is a

positive predictor. The latter effect indicates that very wealthy people were among those

exiting between January 1927 and January 1929.



6.6 Placebo Test of Citibank Officer and Director Network Influences

        Our findings regarding the network influence of Citibank officers and directors is

subject to an alternative interpretation. It could be that network contact with any prominent

New York banker, not just with a Citibank officer and director, encourages someone to

purchase New York banks’ stock, including that of Citibank. If that were true, then it would

imply a somewhat different conception of the effect of network connections on fostering

familiarity, one that sees familiarity as a sectoral attribute, rather than firm-specific.23

        To investigate this alternative view, we perform a placebo test. We include a

variable indicating that a person is an officer or directors of another large New York bank,

as of 1929 and test whether contact with this type of individual, as distinct from Citibank

officers and directors, influences people to purchase Citibank stock. (Because we are

unable to identify holders of other New York banks’ stock, we are unable to include a

similar variable to test for their network influence on the purchase of Citibank shares.) We




23
  We also considered the possibility that network contact with anyone working at a securities dealer might
make someone more likely to buy stock in general, including Citibank stock. In results not reported here, we
investigated whether contact with dealer employees affected Citibank stock purchases and found that it was
always insignificant.
                                                     37
summarize these findings for the logit regressions in Table 12 and report the full results in

Online Appendix Tables A44-53.24

         We find that the coefficients on all the network influence variables related to

Citibank officers and directors, or Citibank shareholders, are unchanged. This is true of the

logit and tobit regressions in all the sample years. Interestingly, the % of Large Bank

Connections variables do enter significantly in most specifications. The % of Once-

Removed Large Bank Connections variable enters positively in columns (1)-(4) of Table

12, which supports the hypothesis of a general sectoral familiarity effect. However, the

direct effect, measured by the % of Large Bank Connections variable, enters negatively and

significantly in columns (1)-(4) of Table 12. Both direct and indirect (once-removed) Large

Bank Connections become insignificant in column (5), which captures the effects for new

shareholders in the 1977-1929 period. Replacing a direct (indirect) network connection that

is a non-Citibank officer/director with a Citibank officer/director raises by the probability

of being a Citibank shareholder by 0.49 (0.34) percent in 1925, roughly equal in magnitude

to the entry in the first column and first row (entry in the third column and first row) of

Table 11. Replacing a direct (indirect) network connection to an individual who is not an

officer/director of a large NYC bank other than Citibank with an officer/director of a large

NYC bank other than Citibank reduces (raises) the probability of becoming a Citibank

shareholder by a smaller magnitude of -0.2 (0.27) percent. We interpret these findings as


24
  Additionally, as another test to distinguish between sectoral and firm-specific conceptions of familiarity, we
performed an analysis to see whether Citibank officers and directors’ influence was also evident on other
people in the financial sector. We did so by limiting the network to those in the financial sector and testing to
see if Citibank officer and director network influences were still present. We found that they were, which
further confirms our firm-specific familiarity interpretation (see Online Appendix Tables A17-A27).
                                                       38
indicating that direct connections to a non-Citibank New York bank officer or director

made someone less likely to buy Citibank stock because it made them more likely to be

interested in Citibank’s competitors. However, the fact that the sign is positive for once-

removed influences suggests that once-removed influences, including perhaps those related

to Citibank officers and directors’ influence, may reflect a sectoral familiarity effect. The

insignificance of both effects for explaining new shareholders in the 1927-1929 is

consistent with other results that point to the declining explanatory value of our model, and

of network influences in particular, for explaining who became a stockholder during that

period.



7. Conclusion

Citibank’s list of shareholders grew rapidly in the 1920s, which reflected its active issuance

of new shares, and the fact that a large proportion of existing Citibank shareholders elected

not to take full advantage of their option to purchase new offerings, which were offered to

existing shareholders on a pro-rata basis.

          Citibank shares sold at a high price per share throughout the 1920s, and this limited

prospective stockholders to wealthy individuals and corporations. Home bias and

familiarity bias also limited share purchases, as indicated by an analysis of differences

across counties in their aggregate shareholdings, including distance from New York City,

and various demographic characteristics.

          We believe ours is the first analysis of individual stockholding choice that combines

a list of candidate stockholders (New York City business executives), a list of a company’s
                                                39
stockholders, and data about the attributes of the business executives. We analyze the

effects of Citibank branch presence on stockholding outside of New York, and find that

both within and outside the U.S. shareholding was positively associated with Citibank

presence, and negatively associated with distance and various demographic influences.

       Our analysis of shareholdings by business executives working in New York City

reveals that for local, relatively wealthy individuals, the probability of being a Citibank

shareholder was roughly 1% in January 1925 and 2% in January 1929. We collect data on

individual characteristics of New York City business executives during our sample period

and construct a map of the New York City corporate network of officers and directors,

which we use to gauge the influences on share purchase decisions. We construct models to

predict which executives became Citibank stockholders by 1925, 1927, and 1929.

       We find that financial sector executives were much more likely to become Citibank

shareholders than others. Proxies for income, wealth, and influence are also associated with

significantly probabilities of buying Citibank shares. However, that pattern reverses

somewhat during the price boom in Citibank shares, as the most influential executives

(measured by their position in the local business network) became less likely to become

shareholders. Furthermore, after January 1927, individual characteristics became weaker

predictors of shareholder status, indicating that other influences not captured by our model

became relatively more important in explaining the rising number of shareholders.

       Members of the business network were influenced to become shareholders by others

with whom they had contact. Sharing a corporate affiliation with a Citibank officer or

director increased the probability of becoming a Citibank shareholder, as did sharing an
                                              40
indirect, once-removed affiliate connection. Sharing a corporate affiliation with a prior (and

still holding) Citibank shareholder also increased the probability of becoming a shareholder

in 1927 and 1929. That evidence shows that network influence was not merely the result of

the transmission of inside information, but also reflected other kinds of learning and

imitation of outside investors with whom executives had contact. We interpret our findings

about the effects of stockholders who were not Citibank officers and directors on other

executives’ purchase decisions as evidence about familiarity bias. Business contacts with

existing Citibank stockholders helped to increase familiarity with Citibank shares.

        By 1929, we find that network influences on new shareholding had lessened. By

1929, only direct connections with Citibank officers and directors or prior shareholders

continued to matter robustly for explaining new shareholding.

        New York bankers that were officers and directors of competing banks also

influenced people in the network. Direct connections to these people reduced the propensity

to buy Citibank stock, while once-removed connections to them tended to increase it. This

evidence suggests that familiarity with competing institutions’ stocks may have reduced the

probability of buying Citibank shares, and that once-removed information may influence

familiarity more at the sectoral than firm-specific level.

        Our findings have several implications for the literature on familiarity bias. Our

national and international findings are suggestive of the effects of the physical presence of a

firm on local willingness to buy its shares. We also confirm in our county-level regressions

that physical distance is a barrier to familiarity.



                                                41
       In our individual-level regressions, we find that knowledge of a specific industry

(finance, in our case) is an important contributor to familiarity. It is noteworthy that this is

true even within a sample of relatively sophisticated business executives. Our findings

about influence within the network also show how interactions among business executives

within a network can reduce barriers by making individuals more familiar with a

company’s stock. Finally, the evidence about changes in the importance of network

influences over time indicates that familiarity barriers are not constant. During the stock

price boom of the late 1920s, the increasing public visibility of Citibank shares seems to

have made investors increasingly familiar with Citibank stock, lessening the role of

network connections to overcome barriers from unfamiliarity.




                                               42
                                        References

Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and Matthew O. Jackson (2013).
“The Diffusion of Microfinance,” Science 341.

Baskin, Jonathan Barron, and Paul J. Miranti, Jr. (1997). A History of Corporate Finance,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bekaert, Geert, K. Hoyem, W. Hu, and Enrichetta Ravina (2016). “Who Is Internationally
Diversified: Evidence from 401(k) Plans of 296 Firms,” Columbia Business School.

Berle, Adolf A., Jr., and Gardiner C. Means (1932). The Modern Corporation and Private
Property, New York: Macmillan.

Busbee, Brian J., and Gregory S. Miller (2012). “Investor Relations, Firm Visibility, and
Investor Following,” Accounting Review 87, 867-897.

Calomiris, Charles W. (1995). "The Costs of Rejecting Universal Banking: American
Finance in the German Mirror, 1870-1914," in The Coordination of Economic Activity
Within and Between Firms, N. Lamoreaux and D. Raff, eds., 257-312, University of
Chicago Press.

Calomiris, Charles W. (2002). “Banking and Financial Intermediation,” in Technological
Innovation and Economic Performance, Benn Steil, David G. Victor, and Richard R.
Nelson, eds., 285-313, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Calomiris Charles W., and Elliot S. M. Oh (2019). “Using Citibank Rights Offering Prices
to Gauge the 1929 Stock Market Bubble,” Working paper.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Daniel M.G. Raff (1995). "The Evolution of Market Structure,
Information, and Spreads in American Investment Banking," in Anglo-American Finance:
Financial Markets and Institutions in 20th-Century North America and the U.K., R. Sylla
and M. Bordo, eds., Business One Irwin, 1995, 103-160.

Carosso, Vincent P. (1970). Investment Banking in America: A History, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

Carosso, Vincent P. (1979). More than a Century of Investment Banking: the Kidder,
Peabody & Co. Story, New York: McGraw Hill.


                                             43
Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, C. Malloy (2008). “The Small World of Investing: Board
Connections and Mutual Fund Returns,” Journal of Political Economy 116, 951–979.

Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy (2010). “Sell-Size School Ties,” Journal of Finance
65, 1409-1437.

Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz (1999). “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity
Preference in Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2073.

Craft, Timothy M. (2006). “Home Bias Makes Sense for U.S. Pension Plans,” Journal of
Portfolio Management Spring, 26-32.

Dahlquist, Magnus, Lee Pikowitz, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson (2002).
“Corporate Governance, Investor Protection, and the Home Bias,” Tuck-JFQA
Contemporary Corporate Governance Issues II Conference.

Edwards, George W. (1938). The Evolution of Finance Capitalism, New York: Longmans
Green & Co.

Forum (1925), “Bank Stocks as Investments,” Forum, July, p. 6.

French, Kenneth, and James Poterba (1991). “Investor Diversification and International
Equity Markets,” American Economic Review 81, 222-226.

Friend, Irwin, G. Wright Hoffman, Willis J. Winn, Morris Hamburg, and Stanley Schor
(1958). The Over-the-Counter Securities Markets, New York: McGraw Hill.

Friend, Irwin, James R. Longstreet, Morris Mendelson, Ervin Miller, and Arleigh P. Hess,
Jr. (1967). Investment Banking and the New Issues Market, New York: World Publishing.

Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Luc Laeven (2012). “The Flight Home Effect: Evidence from
the Syndicated Loan Market during Financial Crises,” Journal of Financial Economics 104,
23-43.

Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Yishay Yafeh (2012). “Do Cultural Differences Between
Contracting Parties Matter: Evidence from Syndicated Bank Loans,” Management Science
58, 365-383.

Gorton, Gary, and Ellis Tallman (2015). “How Did Pre-Fed Banking Panics End?”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, October 30.



                                            44
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Hai Huang (2009). “Investor Competence,
Trading Frequency, and Home Bias,” Management Science 55, 1094-1106.

Haines, Michael R., and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
(2010). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-
2002 [Computer file]. ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for
Political and Social Research [distributor], 2010-05-21. doi:10.3886/ICPSR02896

Haven, T. Kenneth (1940). Investment Banking under the Securities and Exchange
Commission, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.

Hong, Harrison, and Leonard Kostovetsky (2012). “Red and Blue Investing: Values and
Finance,” Journal of Financial Economics 103, 1-19.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein (2004). “Social Interaction and
Stock-Market Participation,” Journal of Finance 59, 137-163.

Huberman, Gur (2001). “Familiarity Breeds Investment,” Review of Financial Studies 14,
659-680.

Kane, Edward J., and Berry K. Wilson (1998). “A Contracting-Theory Interpretation of the
Origins of Federal Deposit Insurance,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 30, 573-595.

Kang, Jun-Koo, and Rene M. Stulz (1997). “Why Is There a Home Bias? An Analysis of
Foreign Portfolio Equity Ownership in Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics 46, 3-28.

Karlsson, Anders, and Lars Norden (2007). “Home Sweet Home: Home Bias and
International Diversification among Individual Investors,” Journal of Banking and Finance
31, 317-333.

Kaustia, Markku, and Samuli Knupfer (2012). “Peer Performance and Stock Market
Entry,” Journal of Financial Economics 104, 321-338.

Keloharju, Matti, Samuli Knupfer and Juhani Linnainmaa (2012). “Do Investors Buy What
They Know? Product Market Choices and Investment Decisions,” Review of Financial
Studies 25, 2921-2958.

Liang, Jia-Wen, Mei-Feng Lin, Chen-Lung Chin (2012). “Does Foreign Institutional
Ownership Motivate Firms in an Emerging Market to Increase Voluntary Disclosure?
Evidence from Taiwan,” Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 39, 55-76.


                                            45
Loeser, John C. (1940). The Over-the-Counter Securities Market: What It Is and How It
Operates, New York: National Quotation Bureau.

Marcin, Daniel (2014). “Essays on the Revenue Act of 1924,” PhD Dissertation, University
of Michigan.

Mason, Joseph R. (1996). “The Determinants and Effects of Reconstruction Finance
Corporation assistance to Banks during the Great Depression,” Doctoral Dissertation,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.

Mason, Joseph R. (2001a). “Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Financial
Intermediaries and Commercial and Industrial Enterprises in the United States, 1932-37,”
in Stijn Claessens, et al., eds., Resolution of Financial Distress: an International Perspective
on the Design of Bankruptcy Laws, The World Bank Group, 167-204.

Mason, Joseph R. (2001b). “Do Lender of Last Resort Policies Matter? The effects of
Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Banks during the Great Depression,”
Journal of Financial Services Research 20, 77-95.

Mason, Joseph R. (2003). “The Political Economy of Reconstruction Finance Corporation
Assistance during the Great Depression,” Explorations in Economic History 40, 101-21.

Means, Gardiner C. (1930). “The Diffusion of Stockownership in the United States,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 44, 561-600.

Merton, Robert C. (1987). “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with
Incomplete Information,” Journal of Finance 42 (3), 483-510.

Nicholas, Thomas (2007). “Stock Market Swings and the Value of Innovation, 1908-1929,”
in N. Lamoreaux and K. Sokoloff, eds., Financing Innovation in the United States, 1870 to
the Present, 217-245, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Okawa, Yohei, and Eric van Wincoop (2012). “Gravity in International Finance,” Journal
of International Economics 87, 205-215.

O’Sullivan, Mary (2007). “The Expansion of the U.S. Stock Market, 1885-1939: Historical
Facts and Theoretical Fashions,” Enterprise and Society 8, 489-542.

Philips, Christopher B., Francis M. Kinniry, Jr., and Yan Zilbering (2010). “Are Investors
Truly Embracing International Diversification,” The Vanguard Group.


                                              46
Philips, Christopher B., Francis M. Kinniry, Jr., and Scott J. Donaldson (2012). “The Role
of Home Bias in Global Asset Allocation Decisions,” The Vanguard Group.

Speidell, Lawrence S., and Hongyu Xing (2004). “One World – The Case for Global
Portfolios,” Journal of Investing Spring, 5-13.

Steven Manson, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, and Steven Ruggles. IPUMS
National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 13.0 [Database]. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota. 2018. http://doi.org/10.18128/D050.V13.0

Strong, Norman, and Xinzhong Xu (2003). “Understanding the Equity Home Bias:
Evidence from Survey Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 307-312.

Stulz, Rene M. (2005). “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of Finance 60,
1595-1638.

Temin, Peter, and Hans-Joachim Voth (2004). “Riding the South Sea Bubble,” American
Economic Review 94, 1654-1668.

Tesar, Linda L., and Ingrid Werner (1995). “Home Bias and High Turnover,” Journal of
International Money and Finance 14, 467-492.

Warshow, H.T. (1924). “The Distribution of Corporate Ownership in the United States,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 39, 15-38.

Wimmer, Andreas and Brian Min (2006). “From Empire to Nation-State: Explaining War
in the Modern World, 1816-2001,” American Sociological Review 71 (6), 867-897.




                                            47
                                                Figure 1
                                         Citibank’s Share Price

                                   Citibank Share Price from 1924−1930

        2800
        2700
        2600
        2500
        2400
        2300
        2200
        2100
        2000
        1900
        1800
        1700
Price




        1600
        1500
        1400                                                  Stock Split ●


        1300
        1200
        1100
        1000
        900
        800
        700
        600
        500
        400
        300

               1924                  1926                    1928                  1930
                                                      Date
        Source: Commercial & Financial Chronicle weekly quotations.
        Note: A five-for-one stock split occurred on January 12, 1929. The figure adjusts by
        multiplying share prices by five from January 12, 1929.
                                                             Figure 2
                                                   Citibank Assets and Paid in Capital

                                     Growth in Citibank Assets                                                    Growth in Citibank Capitalization




                          2000



                                                                                                            90




                          1500
                                                                           Capitalization in Millions USD
 Assets in Millions USD




                                                                                                            60



                          1000




                                                                                                            30

                           500




                             0                                                                               0


                                 1906 1920 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929                                         1906 1920 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929
                                                  Year                                                                            Year
Source: Citibank Annual Reports.
Note: All figures are for December of each year except for asset values in 1906 (June) and
1920 (February).
                                                        Figure 3
                                              Number of Citibank Shareholders


                                                                                          68491


                                                                                62868

                          60000
 Number of Shareholders




                          40000




                          20000                                 18403

                                                  13267


                                    6669



                             0

                                  Jan. 1925    Jan. 1927     Jan. 1929      Jan. 1930   Jan. 1931
                                                               Year
Source: Reports of Votes at Citibank Annual Meetings (Jan. 1925, Jan. 1927, and Jan.
1929). Moody’s Manual of Investments (Dec. 31, 1929 and Dec. 31, 1930).
                                    Figure 4
                      Shareholding Size Distribution




                               1925



                                                         No. of Shares
                                                            1 : 5.7%
                                                            2−5 : 31.4%
                                                            6−10 : 24.4%
                                                            Above 10 : 38.6%




                               1929



                                                         No. of Shares
                                                            1 : 11.6%
                                                            2−5 : 25.6%
                                                            6−10 : 17.5%
                                                            Above 10 : 45.4%




Source: Reports of Votes at Citibank Annual Meetings (Jan. 1925 and Jan. 1929).
                                                           Figure 5
                                         The Changing Size Distribution of Shareholders

                                    1925                                              1927                                             1929




                       3500                                              3500                                             3500




                       3000                                              3000                                             3000




                       2500                                              2500                                             2500
 No. of Shareholders




                                                   No. of Shareholders




                                                                                                    No. of Shareholders
                       2000                                              2000                                             2000




                       1500                                              1500                                             1500




                       1000                                              1000                                             1000




                        500                                               500                                              500




                          0                                                 0                                                0
                                      1
                                    2−5
                                  6−10
                                 11−20
                                 21−40
                                 41−80
                                81−160
                               161−320
                               321−500
                              above 500




                                                                                        1
                                                                                      2−5
                                                                                    6−10
                                                                                   11−20
                                                                                   21−40
                                                                                   41−80
                                                                                  81−160
                                                                                 161−320
                                                                                 321−500
                                                                                above 500




                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                       2−5
                                                                                                                                     6−10
                                                                                                                                    11−20
                                                                                                                                    21−40
                                                                                                                                    41−80
                                                                                                                                   81−160
                                                                                                                                  161−320
                                                                                                                                  321−500
                                                                                                                                 above 500




                               Size of Holdings                                  Size of Holdings                                 Size of Holdings
Source: Reports of Votes at Citibank Annual Meetings (Jan. 1925, Jan. 1927, and
Jan. 1929).
                                         Table 1: Data Sources

Dataset                Source                                    Description
Citibank Shareholder   Report of Vote at Annual Meeting for      The dataset represents a comprehensive
Data                   Jan. 1925, 1927, 1929 (Citibank           database of voting Citibank shareholders
                       Archive material)                         and contains their names, addresses, and
                                                                 the number of shares owned.


Poors Data             Poor’s Register of Directors for 1928     The dataset represents a comprehensive
                                                                 list of nationally influential businessmen
                                                                 in America.
Who’s Who Data         Who’s Who in America for 1928             The dataset represents a comprehensive
                                                                 list of nationally prominent individuals
                                                                 across all fields in America.


IRS Income Tax Data    IRS Income Tax data for 1924 returns      The dataset represents a comprehensive
                       published in the New York Times           list of wealthy individuals in the New
                                                                 York City metropolitan region.


Citibank Officers &    Citibank Annual Reports for Dec.          The dataset contains a list of Citibank
Directors Data         1924, 1926, 1928                          officers and directors.

Individual Corporate   Directory of Directors in the City of     The dataset represents a comprehensive
Network Data           New York for 1929-1930                    list of businessmen in the New York City
                                                                 metropolitan region. To be included, an
                                                                 individual must serve as a director in at
                                                                 least one firm based in New York City.


ICPSR Data             County-level Federal Censuses for         The dataset contains demographic and
                       1920 and 1930                             economic information at the county-level
                                                                 collected from the 1920 and 1930 Federal
                                                                 Censuses.
Dealer Data            Security Dealers of North America,        The dataset contains the names, addresses,
                       1929 Edition                              and business descriptions of all securities
                                                                 dealers in North America.
Citibank Branch Data   Citibank Annual Reports for Dec.          The dataset contains a list of all Citibank
                       1924, 1926, 1928                          branches (domestic and international) for
                                                                 each year.
                                          Table 2: Variable Definitions

Name                   Definition                                                                        Sources
No. of Shares          No. of shares voted by the individual at each Citibank annual meeting.            Citibank
                                                                                                         Shareholder
                                                                                                         Data
Shareholder            A binary variable indicating whether the individual voted in each Citibank        Citibank
Indicator              annual meeting.                                                                   Shareholder
                                                                                                         Data
IRS Tax Indicator      A binary variable indicating whether the individual is included in the IRS        IRS Income
                       Income Tax data published by the New York Times.                                  Taxes
IRS Tax Indicator *    IRS Tax indicator interacted with the actual income tax payment.                  IRS Income
Tax Payment                                                                                              Taxes
Financial Industry     A binary variable indicating whether the individual is works in at least one      Directory of
Indicator              financial services firm.                                                          Directors
No. of Affiliated      No. of firms the individual serves as an officer and/or director in.              Directory of
Firms                                                                                                    Directors
Poors Indicator        A binary variable indicating whether the individual is included in the Poor’s     Poors’
                       Register.                                                                         Directory
Who’s Who              A binary variable indicating whether the individual is included in the Who’s      Who’s Who
Indicator              Who in America.                                                                   in America
High Position          A binary variable indicating whether the individual serves as both an officer     Directory of
Indicator              and director in at least one firm.                                                Directors
Large Bank Indicator   A binary variable indicating whether the individual is an officer/director in a   Directory of
                       large NYC bank (Bank of Manhattan, Chase National Bank, Chatham-                  Directors
                       Phenix National Bank & Trust Co., Chemical National Bank, Corn
                       Exchange Bank, First National Bank of the City of New York, National
                       Bank of Commerce, and National Park Bank).
Eigenvector Network    Network variable that measures how well-connected the individual is to            Calculated
Centrality             other influential individuals within the network.                                 by Authors
Network                Network variable that measures how ‘in-between’ the individual is among           Calculated
Betweenness            other individuals in the network.                                                 by Authors
Centrality
% of                   No. of network connections to Citibank officers/directors (who have served        Calculated
Officer/Director       for at least two years) divided by the total no. of network connections.          by Authors
Connections

% of Once-Removed      No. of once-removed network connections to Citibank officers/ directors           Calculated
Officer/Director       (who have served for at least two years) divided by the total no. of once-        by Authors
Connections            removed network connections.
% of Shareholder       No. of network connections to Citibank shareholders (who have not served          Calculated
Connections            as a Citibank officer/director and have held shares for at least two years)       by Authors
                       divided by the total no. of network connections.
% of Once-Removed      No. of once-removed network connections to Citibank shareholders (who             Calculated
Shareholder            have not served as a Citibank officer/director and have held shares for at        by Authors
Connections            least two years) divided by the total no. of once-removed network
                       connections.
% of Finance          No. of network connections to individuals who work in at least one financial      Calculated
Connections           services firm excluding Citibank (and have not held shares for the past two       by Authors
                      years) divided by the total no. of network connections. For the 1925 version
                      of this variable, we change the numerator to no. of network connections to
                      individuals who work in at least one financial services firm excluding
                      Citibank (and do not currently own shares) because we do not know who
                      owned shares before.
% of Once-Removed     No. of once-removed network connections to individuals who work in at             Calculated
Finance Connections   least one financial services firm excluding Citibank (and have not held           by Authors
                      shares for the past two years) divided by the total no. of once-removed
                      network connections. For the 1925 version of this variable, we change the
                      numerator to no. of once-removed network connections to individuals who
                      work in at least one financial services firm excluding Citibank (and do not
                      currently own shares) because we do not know who owned shares before.
% of Large Bank       No. of network connections to large NYC bank officers/directors (who have         Calculated
Connections           not held shares for the past two years) divided by the total no. of network       by Authors
                      connections. For the 1925 version of this variable, we change the numerator
                      to no. of network connections to large NYC bank officers/directors who do
                      not currently hold shares because we do not know who owned shares before.
                      Large NYC banks are defined as Bank of Manhattan, Chase National Bank,
                      Chatham-Phenix National Bank & Trust Co., Chemical National Bank, Corn
                      Exchange Bank, First National Bank of the City of New York, National
                      Bank of Commerce, and National Park Bank.
% of Once-Removed     No. of once-removed network connections to large NYC bank                         Calculated
Large Bank            officers/directors (who have not held shares for the past two years) divided      by Authors
Connections           by the total no. of once-removed network connections. For the 1925 version
                      of this variable, we change the numerator to no. of once-removed network
                      connections to large NYC bank officers/directors who do not currently hold
                      shares because we do not know who owned shares before. Large NYC banks
                      are defined as Bank of Manhattan, Chase National Bank, Chatham-Phenix
                      National Bank & Trust Co., Chemical National Bank, Corn Exchange Bank,
                      First National Bank of the City of New York, National Bank of Commerce,
                      and National Park Bank.
No. of Network        No. of direct network connections to other officers/directors that serve in the   Calculated
Connections           same firm.                                                                        by Authors
No. of Once-          No. of indirect network connections to other officers/directors that serve in     Calculated
Removed Network       the same firm.                                                                    by Authors
Connections
CitiBranch            For the county (country) level analysis, it indicates whether there is a          Citibank
                      Citibank branch in the county (country).                                          Annual
                                                                                                        Reports
Distance from NYC     The mile distance between the Citibank headquarter building and the               Calculated
                      geographic county center.                                                         by Authors
Population            Total county population from the 1930 Federal Census.                             ICPSR data

%WhitePop             Total county white population divided by the total county population, both        ICPSR data
                      from the 1930 Federal Census.
%NativeWhitePop        Total county native white population divided by the total county population,       ICPSR data
                       both from the 1930 Federal Census.
%RuralPop              Total county rural population divided by the total county population, both         ICPSR data
                       from the 1930 Federal Census.
%Farmland              Total acres in farms divided by the total acres of the county, both from the       ICPSR data
                       1930 Federal Census.
Pop/SqMile             Total county population divided by the total square miles of the county, both      ICPSR data
                       from the 1930 Federal Census.
Megacity               A binary variable indicating whether the county contains one of the 20 most        ICPSR data
                       populous cities from the 1930 Federal Census.
#ManufWorkers          Average number of manufacturing wage earners over twelve months in the             ICPSR data
                       county, from the 1930 Federal Census.
%Pop>45                Total county population over the age 45 divided by the total county                ICPSR data
                       population, both from the 1930 Federal Census.
Radios/Families        Total no. of families with radios divided by the total no. of families in the      ICPSR data
                       county, both from the 1930 Federal Census.
%IlliteratePop         Total county illiterate population divided by the total county population,         ICPSR data
                       both from the 1930 Federal Census.
%16-17InSchool         Total county population aged 16-17 in school divided by the total county           ICPSR data
                       population aged 16-17, both from the 1930 Federal Census.
(HomeVal >             No. of county homes with home values exceeding $10,000 divided by the              ICPSR data
10K)/Pop               total county population, both from the 1930 Federal Census.
FarmValue              (Land value of farms + Value of farm buildings + Value of farm dwellings +         ICPSR data
                                                      #$.$& &'()* (+,$(-./0
                       Value of farm equipment) ×           %23('45$,
                                                                            , all from the 1930 Federal
                       Census.
#Dealers/Pop           Number of securities dealers in the county divided by total county                 ICPSR data
                       population. Securities dealers information and total county population each        & Dealer
                       from the Security Dealers of North America and the 1930 Federal Census.            data
%Unemp                 Total county unemployed population divided by total county population,             ICPSR data
                       both from the 1930 Federal Census.
PopGrowth              Percent change in total county population between the 1920 and 1930                ICPSR data
                       Federal Censuses.
No. of Citi Branches   Number of Citibank branches in the country.                                        Citibank
                                                                                                          Annual
                                                                                                          Reports
                      Table 3: County-level Regressions (% of Shareholders in County)

                                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                      1925           1925            1929           1929         1929-25         1929-25
                                             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗∗
CitiBranch                         0.7157          0.2194         0.5228          0.0420         0.0956          0.0130
                                    (0.1266)       (0.0293)       (0.1012)        (0.0069)       (0.0072)       (0.0008)
                                                            ∗∗∗                            ∗∗∗
Distance from NYC                                  -0.0322                        -0.0155                        -0.0031
                                                   (-0.0043)                      (-0.0025)                     (-0.0002)
Population                                         0.0417∗∗∗                      0.0436∗∗∗                      0.0096∗
                                                   (0.0056)                       (0.0072)                      (0.0006)
                                                                                            ∗
%WhitePop                                           0.0172                         0.0163                        -0.0045
                                                   (0.0023)                       (0.0027)                      (-0.0003)
                                                                                            ∗
%NativeWhitePop                                     -0.0137                       -0.0147                        -0.0059
                                                   (-0.0018)                      (-0.0024)                     (-0.0004)
                                                            ∗∗∗                            ∗∗∗
%RuralPop                                          -0.0473                        -0.0216                       -0.0118∗∗∗
                                                   (-0.0063)                      (-0.0035)                     (-0.0007)
                                                            ∗∗∗                            ∗∗∗
%Farmland                                          -0.0191                        -0.0097                        -0.0014
                                                   (-0.0026)                      (-0.0016)                     (-0.0001)
Pop/SqMile                                         0.0097∗∗∗                      0.0142∗∗∗                      -0.0026
                                                   (0.0013)                       (0.0023)                      (-0.0002)
                                                                                           ∗∗∗
Megacity                                            0.0105                        0.1428                         0.0063
                                                   (0.0014)                       (0.0235)                      (0.0004)
                                                            ∗∗∗                             ∗∗
#ManufWorkers                                      -0.0247                        -0.0108                        0.0031
                                                   (-0.0033)                      (-0.0018)                     (0.0002)
                                                            ∗∗∗                            ∗∗∗
%Pop>45                                            0.0223                         0.0191                        0.0130∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0030)                       (0.0031)                      (0.0008)
Radios/Families                                    0.0273∗∗∗                       0.0094∗                       0.0029
                                                   (0.0036)                       (0.0016)                      (0.0002)
%IlliteratePop                                      0.0113                         0.0043                        -0.0045
                                                   (0.0015)                       (0.0007)                      (-0.0003)
                                                            ∗∗∗                             ∗∗
%16-17InSchool                                     -0.0167                        -0.0070                        -0.0001
                                                   (-0.0022)                      (-0.0012)                     (-0.0000)
                                                            ∗∗∗                            ∗∗∗
(HomeVal>10K)/Pop                                  0.0256                         0.0233                        0.0079∗∗∗
                                                   (0.0034)                       (0.0038)                      (0.0005)
FarmValue                                           0.0043                         0.0037                        0.0052
                                                   (0.0006)                       (0.0006)                      (0.0003)
#Dealers/Pop                                       0.0099∗∗                       0.0060∗∗∗                      -0.0001
                                                   (0.0013)                       (0.0010)                      (-0.0000)
%Unemp                                              0.0042                         -0.0000                       0.0021
                                                   (0.0006)                       (-0.0000)                     (0.0001)
                                                             ∗∗                             ∗∗
PopGrowth                                          -0.0834                        -0.0396                        0.0018
                                                   (-0.0111)                      (-0.0065)                     (0.0001)
Observations                       3059.0000       2534.0000      3059.0000       2534.0000      3059.0000      2534.0000
Average % of Shareholders            1.9235         2.3078         1.4046          1.6831         -0.5189        -0.6247
Note:    *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is the % of
shareholders in the county multiplied by 100. All regressors are defined in Table 2. For 1929-1925, the dependent variable
and CitiBranch variable is calculated as the difference between the values in 1929 and 1925. Marginal effects at the mean
are reported in parentheses. For indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one. For continuous
variables, this captures the effect of a standard deviation increase calculated at the mean. Average % of shareholders is
also multiplied by 100.
                         Table 4: Country-level Regressions (% of Shareholders)

                                          (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                      1925          1925           1929          1929         1929-25      1929-25
CitiBranch                         0.3990∗∗∗     0.2469∗∗∗       0.3888∗∗∗    0.2367∗∗∗       0.1437        0.0540
                                    (0.0479)      (0.0334)       (0.1202)      (0.0788)       (0.0355)     (0.0132)
                                                           ∗∗∗                          ∗∗∗
No. of Citi Branches                             0.0228                       0.0283                      0.0799∗∗∗
                                                  (0.0031)                     (0.0094)                    (0.0196)
Observations                              73          73            73             73           73            73
Average % of Shareholders            3.2865        3.2865         5.3297        5.3297        2.0432        2.0432
Note:   *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is the % of
shareholders in the country multiplied by 100. All regressors are defined in Table 2. CitiBranch is an indicator
that is 1 if the country has a Citibank branch and 0 otherwise. For 1929-1925, the dependent variable and all
independent variables are calculated as the difference between the values in 1929 and 1925. Marginal effects at the
mean are reported in parentheses. For indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one. For
continuous variables, this captures the effect of a standard deviation increase calculated at the mean. Average % of
shareholders is also multiplied by 100.
                                                           Table 5: Logit for All 1925 Shareholders

                                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                                    ∗∗∗                          ∗∗∗                                                    ∗∗∗
% of Officer/Director Connections                             0.128                      0.115                                                  0.102         0.093∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0012)                   (0.0010)                                               (0.0006)      (0.0005)
% of Once-Removed Officer/Director Connections                              0.127∗∗∗     0.118∗∗∗                                                             0.072∗∗
                                                                            (0.0012)     (0.0011)                                                             (0.0004)
Financial Industry Indicator                                                                           1.704∗∗∗      1.444∗∗∗      1.135∗∗∗     1.115∗∗∗      1.093∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0195)      (0.0142)      (0.0098)     (0.0095)      (0.0091)
                                                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
IRS Tax Indicator                                                                                      1.267         1.101         1.015        0.999         0.988∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0121)      (0.0094)      (0.0085)     (0.0082)      (0.0080)
                                                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗            ∗
IRS Tax Indicator * Tax Payment                                                                        0.053         0.035          0.024        0.025         0.025∗
                                                                                                       (0.0003)      (0.0002)      (0.0001)     (0.0001)      (0.0001)
                                                                                                                             ∗∗∗
No. of Affiliated Firms                                                                                              0.088          0.037        0.035         0.034
                                                                                                                     (0.0005)      (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.0002)
Poors Indicator                                                                                                      0.462∗∗∗      0.415∗∗∗     0.398∗∗∗      0.388∗∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.0028)      (0.0025)     (0.0024)      (0.0023)
                                                                                                                              ∗∗
Who’s Who Indicator                                                                                                  0.408          0.062        0.046         0.041
                                                                                                                     (0.0027)      (0.0004)     (0.0003)      (0.0002)
High Position Indicator                                                                                               -0.190        -0.169       -0.160        -0.150
                                                                                                                     (-0.0011)     (-0.0010)    (-0.0009)     (-0.0009)
No. of Network Connections                                                                                                         0.274∗∗∗     0.291∗∗∗      0.289∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (0.0015)     (0.0016)      (0.0016)
Eigenvector Network Centrality                                                                                                      -0.060      -0.081∗        -0.078
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0003)    (-0.0004)     (-0.0004)
Network Betweenness Centrality                                                                                                     -0.048∗      -0.046∗        -0.044
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0003)    (-0.0003)     (-0.0002)
Observations                                                    42986        42986        42986         42986         42986         42986        42986         42986
No. of Shareholders                                              404          404          404           404           404           404          404           404
No. of Individuals with Officer/Director Connections            1094          1094         1094         1094           1094          1094         1094          1094
Pseudo R2                                                       0.008        0.006        0.013         0.117         0.129         0.137        0.141         0.142
AIC                                                           4541.770     4550.459     4521.478       4048.293      3999.569      3968.315     3954.582      3953.427
Note:   *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the individual holds shares
and zero otherwise. All regressors are defined in Table 2. The number of shares includes shares owned by firms rather than individuals. Corporate holdings are
equally distributed among the officers and directors of the shareholding firm. A firm lacking information on the number of officers and directors is assumed to
have five officers and directors. Sample includes all voting shareholders excluding Citibank officers and directors. Marginal effects at the mean are reported
in parentheses. For indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one. For continuous variables, this captures the effect of a standard
deviation increase calculated at the mean.
                                                           Table 6: Logit for All 1927 Shareholders

                                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                                    ∗∗∗                          ∗∗∗                                                    ∗∗∗
% of Officer/Director Connections                             0.127                      0.096                                                  0.098         0.081∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0018)                   (0.0013)                                               (0.0009)      (0.0007)
% of Once-Removed Officer/Director Connections                              0.139∗∗∗     0.113∗∗∗                                                             0.080∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.0020)     (0.0016)                                                             (0.0007)
Financial Industry Indicator                                                                           1.564∗∗∗      1.296∗∗∗      0.958∗∗∗     0.947∗∗∗      0.928∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0270)      (0.0190)      (0.0123)     (0.0119)      (0.0115)
                                                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
IRS Tax Indicator                                                                                      1.318         1.150         1.067        1.058         1.046∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0207)      (0.0161)      (0.0145)     (0.0141)      (0.0138)
                                                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗            ∗
IRS Tax Indicator * Tax Payment                                                                        0.052         0.035          0.024        0.024         0.024∗
                                                                                                       (0.0005)      (0.0003)      (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.0002)
                                                                                                                             ∗∗∗
No. of Affiliated Firms                                                                                              0.085          0.028        0.026         0.025
                                                                                                                     (0.0007)      (0.0003)     (0.0002)      (0.0002)
Poors Indicator                                                                                                      0.577∗∗∗      0.534∗∗∗     0.519∗∗∗      0.510∗∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.0058)      (0.0054)     (0.0051)      (0.0050)
                                                                                                                              ∗∗
Who’s Who Indicator                                                                                                  0.330          0.007        -0.025        -0.027
                                                                                                                     (0.0034)      (0.0001)     (-0.0002)     (-0.0002)
High Position Indicator                                                                                              -0.231∗∗      -0.198∗∗     -0.181∗       -0.172∗
                                                                                                                     (-0.0022)     (-0.0019)    (-0.0017)     (-0.0016)
No. of Network Connections                                                                                                         0.318∗∗∗     0.334∗∗∗      0.330∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (0.0028)     (0.0029)      (0.0029)
Eigenvector Network Centrality                                                                                                     -0.084∗∗     -0.103∗∗      -0.099∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0008)    (-0.0009)     (-0.0009)
Network Betweenness Centrality                                                                                                     -0.063∗∗     -0.061∗∗      -0.060∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0006)    (-0.0005)     (-0.0005)
Observations                                                    42963        42963        42963         42963         42963         42963        42963         42963
No. of Shareholders                                              623          623          623           623           623           623          623           623
No. of Individuals with Officer/Director Connections            1071          1071         1071         1071           1071          1071         1071          1071
Pseudo R2                                                       0.008        0.008        0.013         0.114         0.128         0.136        0.140         0.142
AIC                                                           6464.393     6462.668     6434.716       5775.261      5694.458      5646.709     5621.931      5615.328
Note:   *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the individual holds shares
and zero otherwise. All regressors are defined in Table 2. The number of shares includes shares owned by firms rather than individuals. Corporate holdings are
equally distributed among the officers and directors of the shareholding firm. A firm lacking information on the number of officers and directors is assumed to
have five officers and directors. Sample includes all voting shareholders excluding Citibank officers and directors. Marginal effects at the mean are reported
in parentheses. For indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one. For continuous variables, this captures the effect of a standard
deviation increase calculated at the mean.
                                                           Table 7: Logit for All 1929 Shareholders

                                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)
                                                                    ∗∗∗                          ∗∗∗                                                   ∗∗∗
% of Officer/Director Connections                             0.148                      0.118                                                 0.113         0.100∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0025)                   (0.0020)                                              (0.0014)      (0.0012)
% of Once-Removed Officer/Director Connections                              0.157∗∗∗     0.128∗∗∗                                                            0.077∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.0027)     (0.0022)                                                            (0.0009)
Financial Industry Indicator                                                                           1.229∗∗∗      1.020∗∗∗      0.717∗∗∗    0.697∗∗∗      0.673∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0252)      (0.0186)      (0.0116)    (0.0111)      (0.0105)
                                                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
IRS Tax Indicator                                                                                      1.334         1.201         1.137       1.119         1.107∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0290)      (0.0239)      (0.0221)    (0.0213)      (0.0208)
                                                                                                               ∗∗
IRS Tax Indicator * Tax Payment                                                                        0.026          0.011         -0.005      -0.004        -0.003
                                                                                                       (0.0003)      (0.0001)      (-0.0001)   (-0.0000)     (-0.0000)
No. of Affiliated Firms                                                                                              0.077∗∗∗       0.025       0.023         0.022
                                                                                                                     (0.0010)      (0.0003)    (0.0003)      (0.0003)
Poors Indicator                                                                                                      0.504∗∗∗      0.470∗∗∗    0.459∗∗∗      0.449∗∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.0070)      (0.0065)    (0.0062)      (0.0060)
Who’s Who Indicator                                                                                                   0.169         -0.098      -0.112        -0.118
                                                                                                                     (0.0023)      (-0.0012)   (-0.0013)     (-0.0014)
High Position Indicator                                                                                               -0.102        -0.071      -0.049        -0.039
                                                                                                                     (-0.0013)     (-0.0009)   (-0.0006)     (-0.0005)
No. of Network Connections                                                                                                         0.294∗∗∗    0.312∗∗∗      0.304∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (0.0037)    (0.0038)      (0.0037)
Eigenvector Network Centrality                                                                                                     -0.088∗∗    -0.116∗∗∗     -0.109∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0011)   (-0.0014)     (-0.0013)
Network Betweenness Centrality                                                                                                     -0.049∗∗    -0.045∗       -0.043∗
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0006)   (-0.0006)     (-0.0005)
Observations                                                    42960        42960        42960         42960         42960         42960       42960         42960
No. of Shareholders                                              768          768          768           768           768           768         768           768
No. of Individuals with Officer/Director Connections            1427          1427         1427         1427           1427          1427        1427          1427
Pseudo R2                                                       0.010        0.008        0.015         0.086         0.095         0.101       0.107         0.108
AIC                                                           7627.517     7642.987     7591.911       7050.960      6985.800      6946.556    6904.185      6899.104
Note:   *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the individual holds shares
and zero otherwise. All regressors are defined in Table 2. The number of shares includes shares owned by firms rather than individuals. Corporate holdings are
equally distributed among the officers and directors of the shareholding firm. A firm lacking information on the number of officers and directors is assumed to
have five officers and directors. Sample includes all voting shareholders excluding Citibank officers and directors. Marginal effects at the mean are reported
in parentheses. For indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one. For continuous variables, this captures the effect of a standard
deviation increase calculated at the mean.
                                                                              Table 8: Logit for New 1927 Shareholders

                                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)          (11)
                                                                    ∗∗∗                          ∗∗∗                                                     ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗                         ∗∗∗
% of Officer/Director Connections                             0.073                      0.071                                                   0.089         0.071                       0.072         0.071∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0004)                   (0.0004)                                                (0.0003)      (0.0003)                    (0.0003)      (0.0003)
% of Once-Removed Officer/Director Connections                0.116∗∗∗                   0.112∗∗∗                                                              0.098∗∗∗                    0.096∗∗∗      0.094∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0007)                   (0.0006)                                                              (0.0004)                    (0.0003)      (0.0003)
% of Shareholder Connections                                               0.208∗∗∗      0.206∗∗∗                                                                            0.191∗∗∗      0.203∗∗∗      0.191∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.0011)      (0.0011)                                                                            (0.0007)      (0.0007)      (0.0007)
                                                                                   ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗                                                                                  ∗∗
% of Once-Removed Shareholder Connections                                  0.133         0.129                                                                               0.087                        0.080∗
                                                                           (0.0007)      (0.0007)                                                                            (0.0003)                    (0.0003)
                                                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Financial Industry Indicator                                                                           1.217         0.975         0.614         0.609         0.588         0.535         0.528         0.506∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0082)      (0.0055)      (0.0030)      (0.0029)      (0.0028)      (0.0024)      (0.0023)      (0.0022)
                                                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
IRS Tax Indicator                                                                                      1.390         1.242         1.166         1.162         1.144         1.103         1.102         1.085∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0102)      (0.0080)      (0.0073)      (0.0071)      (0.0069)      (0.0063)      (0.0062)      (0.0060)
                                                                                                                ∗
IRS Tax Indicator * Tax Payment                                                                         0.031         0.024         0.015         0.016         0.016         0.011         0.012         0.012
                                                                                                       (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)
No. of Affiliated Firms                                                                                               0.048∗        0.003         -0.000        -0.003        -0.002        -0.006        -0.008
                                                                                                                     (0.0002)      (0.0000)      (-0.0000)     (-0.0000)     (-0.0000)     (-0.0000)     (-0.0000)
Poors Indicator                                                                                                      0.724∗∗∗      0.684∗∗∗      0.670∗∗∗      0.659∗∗∗      0.633∗∗∗      0.629∗∗∗      0.612∗∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.0033)      (0.0031)      (0.0030)      (0.0029)      (0.0027)      (0.0026)      (0.0025)
Who’s Who Indicator                                                                                                   0.041         -0.208        -0.257        -0.253        -0.249        -0.285        -0.291
                                                                                                                     (0.0002)      (-0.0007)     (-0.0009)     (-0.0009)     (-0.0008)     (-0.0009)     (-0.0009)
High Position Indicator                                                                                              -0.368∗∗      -0.314∗∗      -0.289∗       -0.281∗        -0.245        -0.231        -0.214
                                                                                                                     (-0.0016)     (-0.0014)     (-0.0012)     (-0.0012)     (-0.0010)     (-0.0009)     (-0.0008)
No. of Network Connections                                                                                                         0.370∗∗∗      0.385∗∗∗      0.381∗∗∗      0.366∗∗∗      0.384∗∗∗      0.380∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (0.0014)      (0.0015)      (0.0014)      (0.0013)      (0.0014)      (0.0014)
                                                                                                                                            ∗             ∗∗            ∗             ∗             ∗∗
Eigenvector Network Centrality                                                                                                     -0.119        -0.138        -0.134        -0.137        -0.157        -0.153∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0005)     (-0.0005)     (-0.0005)     (-0.0005)     (-0.0006)     (-0.0005)
                                                                                                                                            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Network Betweenness Centrality                                                                                                     -0.116        -0.114        -0.111        -0.101        -0.099        -0.096∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0005)     (-0.0004)     (-0.0004)     (-0.0004)     (-0.0004)     (-0.0003)
Observations                                                   42562         42562        42562         42562         42562         42562         42562         42562         42562         42562         42562
No. of Shareholders                                              251          251          251            251          251           251           251           251           251           251           251
No. of Individuals with Officer/Director Connections             988          988          988            988          988           988           988           988           988           988           988
No. of Individuals with Shareholder Connections                 3820         3820         3820          3820           3820          3820          3820          3820          3820          3820          3820
Pseudo R2                                                       0.012        0.030        0.041         0.076         0.088         0.094         0.098         0.101         0.109         0.114         0.115
AIC                                                           3045.991     2990.726      2962.298      2851.553      2823.582      2810.777      2799.498      2793.719      2768.389      2754.325      2753.427
Note:   *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the individual holds shares and zero otherwise. All regressors are
defined in Table 2. The number of shares includes shares owned by firms rather than individuals. Corporate holdings are equally distributed among the officers and directors of the shareholding firm. A
firm lacking information on the number of officers and directors is assumed to have five officers and directors. Sample includes new voting shareholders (those that have become shareholders in the past
two years) excluding Citibank officers and directors. Marginal effects at the mean are reported in parentheses. For indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one. For
continuous variables, this captures the effect of a standard deviation increase calculated at the mean.
                                                                              Table 9: Logit for New 1929 Shareholders

                                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)          (11)
                                                                    ∗∗∗                          ∗∗∗                                                     ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗                         ∗∗∗
% of Officer/Director Connections                             0.070                      0.068                                                   0.078         0.073                       0.073         0.072∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0005)                   (0.0005)                                                (0.0005)      (0.0004)                    (0.0004)      (0.0004)
% of Once-Removed Officer/Director Connections                0.098∗∗∗                   0.067∗∗                                                                0.041                       0.029         0.019
                                                              (0.0007)                   (0.0005)                                                              (0.0002)                    (0.0002)      (0.0001)
% of Shareholder Connections                                               0.121∗∗∗      0.114∗∗∗                                                                            0.093∗∗       0.100∗∗∗      0.090∗∗
                                                                           (0.0009)      (0.0008)                                                                            (0.0005)      (0.0006)      (0.0005)
                                                                                   ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
% of Once-Removed Shareholder Connections                                  0.122         0.110                                                                                0.064                       0.053
                                                                           (0.0009)      (0.0008)                                                                            (0.0004)                    (0.0003)
Financial Industry Indicator                                                                           0.753∗∗∗      0.634∗∗∗      0.381∗∗       0.366∗∗       0.354∗∗       0.344∗∗       0.338∗∗       0.327∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0060)      (0.0048)      (0.0026)      (0.0025)      (0.0024)      (0.0023)      (0.0022)      (0.0021)
                                                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
IRS Tax Indicator                                                                                      1.219         1.139         1.085         1.071         1.065         1.052         1.047         1.038∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.0121)      (0.0107)      (0.0099)      (0.0096)      (0.0095)      (0.0093)      (0.0092)      (0.0091)
IRS Tax Indicator * Tax Payment                                                                         0.009         0.006         -0.000        0.001         0.001         0.000         0.001         0.001
                                                                                                       (0.0001)      (0.0000)      (-0.0000)     (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)
No. of Affiliated Firms                                                                                              0.060∗∗        0.035         0.034         0.034         0.032         0.032         0.031
                                                                                                                     (0.0004)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)
Poors Indicator                                                                                                      0.413∗∗∗      0.389∗∗∗      0.384∗∗∗      0.378∗∗∗      0.365∗∗∗      0.371∗∗∗      0.361∗∗∗
                                                                                                                     (0.0027)      (0.0025)      (0.0024)      (0.0024)      (0.0023)      (0.0023)      (0.0023)
Who’s Who Indicator                                                                                                   -0.277        -0.355        -0.369        -0.374        -0.386        -0.391        -0.396
                                                                                                                     (-0.0014)     (-0.0018)     (-0.0018)     (-0.0018)     (-0.0019)     (-0.0019)     (-0.0019)
High Position Indicator                                                                                               0.011         0.045         0.061         0.067         0.074         0.080         0.088
                                                                                                                     (0.0001)      (0.0003)      (0.0003)      (0.0004)      (0.0004)      (0.0005)      (0.0005)
No. of Network Connections                                                                                                         0.307∗∗∗      0.321∗∗∗      0.316∗∗∗      0.292∗∗∗      0.312∗∗∗      0.306∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (0.0018)      (0.0019)      (0.0018)      (0.0017)      (0.0018)      (0.0018)
                                                                                                                                            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗           ∗∗
Eigenvector Network Centrality                                                                                                     -0.187        -0.211        -0.207        -0.191        -0.217        -0.213∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0011)     (-0.0012)     (-0.0012)     (-0.0011)     (-0.0013)     (-0.0012)
Network Betweenness Centrality                                                                                                      -0.047        -0.044        -0.042        -0.037        -0.036        -0.034
                                                                                                                                   (-0.0003)     (-0.0003)     (-0.0002)     (-0.0002)     (-0.0002)     (-0.0002)
Observations                                                   42308         42308        42308         42308         42308         42308         42308         42308         42308         42308         42308
No. of Shareholders                                              309          309          309            309          309           309           309           309           309           309           309
No. of Individuals with Officer/Director Connections            1253         1253         1253          1253           1253          1253          1253          1253          1253          1253          1253
No. of Individuals with Shareholder Connections                 4134         4134         4134          4134           4134          4134          4134          4134          4134          4134          4134
Pseudo R2                                                       0.006        0.008        0.012         0.040         0.045         0.048         0.050         0.050         0.050         0.052         0.052
AIC                                                           3641.169     3631.123      3621.340      3516.006      3506.674      3503.719      3497.015      3498.316      3499.503      3494.807      3495.739
Note:   *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the individual holds shares and zero otherwise. All regressors are
defined in Table 2. The number of shares includes shares owned by firms rather than individuals. Corporate holdings are equally distributed among the officers and directors of the shareholding firm. A
firm lacking information on the number of officers and directors is assumed to have five officers and directors. Sample includes new voting shareholders (those that have become shareholders in the past
two years) excluding Citibank officers and directors. Marginal effects at the mean are reported in parentheses. For indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one. For
continuous variables, this captures the effect of a standard deviation increase calculated at the mean.
                                                    Table 10: Tobit Regressions

                                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                                      1925           1927           1929         1925-27         1927-29
                                                                          ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
% of Officer/Director Connections                                  9.186           9.045          16.697         5.225          5.576∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0478)        (0.0756)        (0.1952)      (0.0179)       (0.0308)
                                                                             ∗∗          ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗            ∗∗
% of Once-Removed Officer/Director Connections                      6.852          7.825          11.258          5.058           1.011
                                                                   (0.0356)        (0.0654)        (0.1316)      (0.0173)       (0.0056)
% of Shareholder Connections                                                                                     10.861∗∗∗      6.989∗∗∗
                                                                                                                 (0.0371)       (0.0386)
% of Once-Removed Shareholder Connections                                                                          4.091         6.255∗∗
                                                                                                                 (0.0140)       (0.0346)
                                                                             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗
Financial Industry Indicator                                       88.777          73.815         87.882         23.145          16.036
                                                                   (0.7278)        (0.8854)        (1.3279)      (0.0952)       (0.0977)
                                                                             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
IRS Tax Indicator                                                  89.603          97.498         162.616        58.384         65.374∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.7474)        (1.3414)        (3.1434)      (0.3298)       (0.5552)
                                                                             ∗              ∗
IRS Tax Indicator * Tax Payment                                      3.012          2.879           0.775          1.132          -0.019
                                                                   (0.0157)        (0.0241)        (0.0091)      (0.0039)       (-0.0001)
No. of Affiliated Firms                                              3.741           2.760          3.974          0.157          3.361
                                                                   (0.0195)        (0.0231)        (0.0465)      (0.0005)       (0.0186)
                                                                             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
Poors Indicator                                                    31.463          41.821         57.006         33.018         20.852∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.1793)        (0.3940)        (0.7350)      (0.1329)       (0.1244)
Who’s Who Indicator                                                  0.600           1.426          -5.250        -7.776         -25.789
                                                                   (0.0031)        (0.0120)       (-0.0602)      (-0.0246)      (-0.1170)
                                                                                            ∗∗
High Position Indicator                                             -14.278        -18.987         -11.725        -12.435         0.781
                                                                   (-0.0791)       (-0.1723)      (-0.1413)      (-0.0465)      (0.0043)
No. of Network Connections                                         15.553∗∗        18.738∗∗∗      25.902∗∗∗      17.979∗∗∗      22.368∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0809)        (0.1565)        (0.3028)      (0.0615)       (0.1237)
Eigenvector Network Centrality                                       2.076           0.440          -1.211        -6.919        -15.886∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.0108)        (0.0037)       (-0.0142)      (-0.0236)      (-0.0879)
                                                                                                                          ∗
Network Betweenness Centrality                                       0.267          -0.494          2.021         -4.460          -2.051
                                                                   (0.0014)        (-0.0041)       (0.0236)      (-0.0152)      (-0.0113)
Observations                                                         42986          42963           42960         42562           42308
No. of Shareholders                                                   404            623             768            251            309
Average No. of Shares Owned                                          0.516           0.806          1.453          0.207          0.262
No. of Individuals with Officer/Director Connections                  1094           1071           1427            988           1253
No. of Individuals with Shareholder Connections                                                                  3815.000       4112.000
           2
Pseudo R                                                             0.075           0.071          0.051          0.065          0.029
AIC                                                                8181.796        12172.072      15656.115      5140.796       6521.849
Note: *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is the number of shares an individual
owns. All regressors are defined in Table 2. The number of shares includes shares owned by firms rather than individuals. Corporate
holdings are equally distributed among the officers and directors of the shareholding firm. A firm lacking information on the number of
officers and directors is assumed to have five officers and directors. Marginal effects at the mean are reported in parentheses. Columns
(1)-(3) show the tobit regressions for all voting shareholders excluding Citibank officers and directors in 1925, 1927, and 1929. Columns
(4)-(5) show the tobit regressions for new voting shareholders (those that have become shareholders in the past two years) excluding
Citibank officers and directors during 1925-27 and 1927-29. For indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one.
For continuous variables, this captures the effect of a standard deviation increase calculated at the mean.
                                                        Table 11: Importance of Citibank Network Connections

                        Marginal effect from replacing non-Citibank connection with Citibank connection                                                             % of
                                                    (calculated at the mean)                                                          Marginal Effect
                                                                                                                                                                Shareholders
                                                                                                                                    from being on tax
                                      Officer & Director                                        Shareholder                                                     (Logit) / No.
                                                                                                                                    list (at the mean)
                                                                                                                                                                Shares owned
                                                                                                                                            (7)
                               Replace one                  Replace by               Replace one                 Replace by                                      (Tobit) (8)
                                                              Equal                                                Equal
                                                            Proportion                                           Proportion
                         Direct (1)        Once-              Once-             Direct (4)       Once-             Once-
                                          Removed            Removed                            Removed           Removed
                                            (2)                (3)                                (5)               (6)
 Logit 1925              0.0051 ***       0.0005 **          0.0040 **                                                                   0.0080 ***                  0.0094
         1925-27         0.0025 ***      0.0005 ***         0.0032 ***         0.0020 ***       0.0002 *         0.0011 *                0.0060 ***                  0.0059
         1927-29         0.0032***        0.0001             0.0008            0.0015 **        0.0002            0.0011                 0.0091***                   0.0073
 Tobit 1925              0.4804 ***       0.0483 **          0.3540 **                                                                   0.7474 ***                  0.5158
         1925-27         0.1726 ***       0.0235 **          0.1651 **         0.1112 ***       0.0078            0.0517                 0.3298 ***                  0.2068
         1927-29         0.2394 ***       0.0062             0.0429            0.1113 ***       0.0199 **         0.1287 **              0.5552 ***                  0.2619


Note: Marginal effects are derived from the coefficients reported in the last columns of Tables 5-9, and in all columns of Table 10. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. For logits, (1) measures the increase in the probability of being a Citibank shareholder in 1925, or becoming one either during 1925-1927 or
1927-1929, if one of your direct network connections (those serving as an officer or director in the same firm that you also serve in) changes from being a non-Citibank officer or
director to being a Citibank officer or director. (2) is the same as (1) but uses a once-removed board connection. (3) is the same as (2) but uses (110.66/7.41) of the once-removed
board connections. (4)-(6) are analogous to (1)-(3), but replace the officer/director with a Citibank shareholder who has held shares for at least two years and is not an officer or
director of Citibank. (7) calculates the increase in probability of being a Citibank shareholder from being listed on the IRS taxpayer list. (8) reports unconditional means of the
percentage of voting shareholders and numbers of shares. For Tobits, marginal effects are expressed in increased numbers of shares.
                        Table 12: Logit Regressions (Including Other Large Bank Connections)

                                                                       (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
                                                                      1925          1927           1929        1925-27       1927-29
                                                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
% of Officer/Director Connections                                   0.090         0.077          0.097         0.069         0.071∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.0005)      (0.0007)       (0.0012)      (0.0002)      (0.0004)
                                                                             ∗          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
% of Once-Removed Officer/Director Connections                       0.064        0.075          0.072         0.090          0.022
                                                                    (0.0003)      (0.0006)       (0.0009)      (0.0003)      (0.0001)
                                                                                                                       ∗∗∗
% of Shareholder Connections                                                                                   0.189         0.091∗∗
                                                                                                               (0.0007)      (0.0005)
                                                                                                                        ∗
% of Once-Removed Shareholder Connections                                                                       0.074         0.057
                                                                                                               (0.0003)      (0.0003)
% of Large Bank Connections                                        -0.133∗∗∗      -0.141∗∗∗      -0.095∗∗∗     -0.120∗        -0.036
                                                                   (-0.0007)      (-0.0012)      (-0.0012)     (-0.0004)     (-0.0002)
                                                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
% of Once-Removed Large Bank Connections                            0.148         0.158          0.106         0.140          -0.025
                                                                    (0.0008)      (0.0014)       (0.0013)      (0.0005)      (-0.0001)
                                                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Financial Industry Indicator                                        1.063         0.898          0.659         0.485         0.339∗∗
                                                                    (0.0086)      (0.0108)       (0.0102)      (0.0020)      (0.0022)
                                                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
IRS Tax Indicator                                                   0.971         1.027          1.094         1.065         1.045∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.0077)      (0.0132)       (0.0203)      (0.0058)      (0.0092)
IRS Tax Indicator * Tax Payment                                      0.023∗        0.023∗         -0.005        0.010         0.000
                                                                    (0.0001)      (0.0002)       (-0.0001)     (0.0000)      (0.0000)
No. of Affiliated Firms                                               0.031         0.021         0.019         -0.013        0.031
                                                                    (0.0002)      (0.0002)       (0.0002)      (-0.0000)     (0.0002)
                                                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Poors Indicator                                                     0.378         0.497          0.440         0.600         0.367∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.0022)      (0.0048)       (0.0059)      (0.0024)      (0.0023)
Who’s Who Indicator                                                   0.034        -0.040         -0.126        -0.298        -0.392
                                                                    (0.0002)      (-0.0003)      (-0.0014)     (-0.0009)     (-0.0019)
High Position Indicator                                              -0.132        -0.150         -0.023        -0.190        0.082
                                                                   (-0.0007)      (-0.0014)      (-0.0003)     (-0.0007)     (0.0005)
                                                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
No. of Network Connections                                          0.305         0.344          0.311         0.392         0.315∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.0016)      (0.0030)       (0.0038)      (0.0014)      (0.0018)
                                                                                            ∗             ∗∗            ∗
Eigenvector Network Centrality                                       -0.063        -0.079        -0.094        -0.136        -0.209∗∗
                                                                   (-0.0003)      (-0.0007)      (-0.0011)     (-0.0005)     (-0.0012)
                                                                             ∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗
Network Betweenness Centrality                                       -0.054       -0.069         -0.050        -0.103         -0.040
                                                                   (-0.0003)      (-0.0006)      (-0.0006)     (-0.0004)     (-0.0002)
Observations                                                         42986         42963          42960         42562         42308
No. of Shareholders                                                    404           623           768           251           309
No. of Individuals with Officer/Director Connections                  1094          1071           1427          988           1253
No. of Individuals with Shareholder Connections                                                                  3815          4112
           2
Pseudo R                                                              0.145         0.146         0.110         0.118         0.052
AIC                                                                 3940.461      5590.011       6888.232      2748.216      3498.796
Note:   *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Dependent variable is an indicator that equals one
if the individual holds shares and zero otherwise. All regressors are defined in Table 2. The number of shares includes shares owned
by firms rather than individuals. Corporate holdings are equally distributed among the officers and directors of the shareholding firm.
A firm lacking information on the number of officers and directors is assumed to have five officers and directors. Marginal effects at
the mean are reported in parentheses. Columns (1)-(3) show the logit regressions for all voting shareholders excluding Citibank
officers and directors in 1925, 1927, and 1929. Columns (4)-(5) show the logit regressions for new voting shareholders (those that
have become shareholders in the past two years) excluding Citibank officers and directors during 1925-1927 and 1927-1929. For
indicator variables, this captures the effect of a change from zero to one. For continuous variables, this captures the effect of a
standard deviation increase calculated at the mean.
